:::: {#calibre_link-0 .calibre}
::: full
![title page](images/000035.jpg){#calibre_link-167 .calibre1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-1 .calibre}
::: copyright
First U.S. Edition

All texts and materials by J.R.R. Tolkien © The Tolkien Estate Limited
2017

Preface, Notes and all other materials © C.R. Tolkien 2017

Illustrations, including cover, © Alan Lee 2017

Cover layout design © HarperCollins*Publishers* Ltd 2017

All rights reserved

For information about permission to reproduce selections from this book,
write to
[trade.permissions@hmhco.com](mailto:trade.permissions@hmhco.com){.calibre3}
or to Permissions, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company, 3 Park
Avenue, 19th Floor, New York, New York 10016.

[www.hmhco.com](http://www.hmhco.com/popular-reading){.calibre3}

![](images/000000.jpg){.calibre4}^®^ and "Tolkien,"^®^ "Beren"^®^ and
"Lúthien,"^®^ are registered trademarks of The Tolkien Estate Limited

First published by HarperCollins*Publishers* 2017

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available.

[ISBN]{.small-caps} 978-1-328-79182-5

e[ISBN]{.small-caps} 978-1-328-78486-5\
v1.0517
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-2 .calibre}
*For Baillie*
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-3 .calibre}
::: {#calibre_link-168 .calibre7}
# Contents {#contents .chaptertitle}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[*Cover*](cover.html){.calibre3}

[*Title Page*](#calibre_link-0){.calibre3}

[*Copyright*](#calibre_link-1){.calibre3}

[*Dedication*](#calibre_link-2){.calibre3}

[*List of Plates*](#calibre_link-4){.calibre3}

[*Preface*](#calibre_link-5){.calibre3}

[*Notes on the Elder Days*](#calibre_link-6){.calibre3}

[BEREN AND LÚTHIEN](#calibre_link-7){.calibre3}

[*The Tale of Tinúviel*](#calibre_link-8){.calibre3}

[A Passage from the 'Sketch of the
Mythology'](#calibre_link-9){.calibre3}

[A Passage Extracted from *The Lay of
Leithian*](#calibre_link-10){.calibre3}

[The *Quenta Noldorinwa*](#calibre_link-11){.calibre3}

[A Passage Extracted from the *Quenta*](#calibre_link-12){.calibre3}

[A Second Extract from *The Lay of
Leithian*](#calibre_link-13){.calibre3}

[A Further Extract from the *Quenta*](#calibre_link-14){.calibre3}

[The Narrative in *The Lay of Leithian* to Its
Termination](#calibre_link-15){.calibre3}

[The *Quenta Silmarillion*](#calibre_link-16){.calibre3}

[The Return of Beren and Lúthien According to the *Quenta
Noldorinwa*](#calibre_link-17){.calibre3}

[Extract from the *Lost Tale* of the
Nauglafring](#calibre_link-18){.calibre3}

[The Morning and Evening Star](#calibre_link-19){.calibre3}

[*Appendix: Revisions to* The Lay of
Leithian](#calibre_link-20){.calibre3}

[*Footnotes*](#calibre_link-21){.calibre3}

[*List of Names*](#calibre_link-22){.calibre3}

[*Glossary*](#calibre_link-23){.calibre3}

[*Read More from J.R.R. Tolkien*](#calibre_link-24){.calibre3}

[*About the Author and Editor*](#calibre_link-25){.calibre3}
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-4 .calibre}
## PLATES {#plates .chapter-number}

['yet now did he see Tinúviel dancing in the
twilight'](#calibre_link-26){.calibre3}

['but Tevildo caught sight of her where she was
perched'](#calibre_link-27){.calibre3}

['no leaves they had, but ravens dark / sat thick as leaves on bough and
bark'](#calibre_link-28){.calibre3}

['Now ringed about with wolves they stand, / and fear their
doom.'](#calibre_link-29){.calibre3}

['Then the brothers rode off, but shot back at Huan
treacherously'](#calibre_link-30){.calibre3}

['On the bridge of woe / in mantle wrapped at dead of night / she sat
and sang'](#calibre_link-31){.calibre3}

['now down there swooped / Thorondor the King of Eagles,
stooped'](#calibre_link-32){.calibre3}

['fluttering before his eyes, she wound / a mazy-wingéd
dance'](#calibre_link-33){.calibre3}

["Surely that is a Silmaril that shines now in the
West?"](#calibre_link-34){.calibre3}
:::

::::::: {#calibre_link-5 .calibre}
## PREFACE {#preface .chapter-number}

After the publication of *The Silmarillion* in 1977 I spent several
years investigating the earlier history of the work, and writing a book
which I called *The History of The Silmarillion.* Later this became the
(somewhat shortened) basis of the earlier volumes of *The History of
Middle-earth.*

In 1981 I wrote at length to Rayner Unwin, the chairman of Allen and
Unwin, giving him an account of what I had been, and was still, doing.
At that time, as I informed him, the book was 1,968 pages long and
sixteen and a half inches across, and obviously not for publication. I
said to him: 'If and/or when you see this book, you will perceive
immediately why I have said that it is in no conceivable way
publishable. The textual and other discussions are far too detailed and
minute; the size of it is (and will become progressively more so)
prohibitive. It is done partly for my own satisfaction in getting things
right, and because I wanted to know how the whole conception did in
reality evolve from the earliest origins . . .

'If there is a future for such enquiries, I want to make as sure as I
can that any later research into JRRT's "literary history" is not turned
into a nonsense by mistaking the actual course of its evolution. The
chaos and intrinsic difficulty of many of the papers (the layer upon
layer of changes in a single manuscript page, the vital clues on
scattered scraps found anywhere in the archive, the texts written on the
backs of other works, the disordering and separation of manuscripts, the
near or total illegibility in places, is simply inexaggerable . . .

'In theory, I could produce a lot of books out of the *History*, and
there are many possibilities and combinations of possibilities. For
example, I could do "Beren", with the original Lost
Tale^[\*](#calibre_link-35){#calibre_link-79 .calibre3}^, *The Lay of
Leithian*, and an essay on the development of the legend. My preference,
if it came to anything so positive, would probably be for the treating
of one legend as a developing entity, rather than to give all the Lost
Tales at one go; but the difficulties of exposition in detail would in
such a case be great, because one would have to explain so often what
was happening elsewhere, in other unpublished writings.'

I said that I would enjoy writing a book called 'Beren' on the lines I
suggested: but 'the problem would be its organisation, so that the
matter was comprehensible without the editor becoming overpowering.'

When I wrote this I meant what I said about publication: I had no
thought of its possibility, other than my idea of selecting a single
legend 'as a developing entity'. I seem now to have done precisely
that---though with no thought of what I had said in my letter to Rayner
Unwin thirty-five years ago: I had altogether forgotten it, until I came
on it by chance when this book was all but completed.

There is however a substantial difference between it and my original
idea, which is a difference of context. Since then, a large part of the
immense store of manuscripts pertaining to the First Age, or Elder Days,
has been published, in close and detailed editions: chiefly in volumes
of *The History of Middle-earth.* The idea of a book devoted to the
evolving story of 'Beren' that I ventured to mention to Rayner Unwin as
a possible publication would have brought to light much hitherto unknown
and unavailable writing. But this book does not offer a single page of
original and unpublished work. What then is the need, now, for such a
book?

I will attempt to provide an (inevitably complex) answer, or several
answers. In the first place, an aspect of those editions was the
presentation of the texts in a way that adequately displayed my father's
apparently eccentric mode of composition (often in fact imposed by
external pressures), and so to discover the sequence of stages in the
development of a narrative, and to justify my interpretation of the
evidence.

At the same time, the First Age in *The History of Middle-earth* was in
those books conceived as a *history* in two senses. It was indeed a
history---a chronicle of lives and events in Middle-earth; but it was
also a history of the changing literary conceptions in the passing
years; and therefore the story of Beren and Lúthien is spread over many
years and several books. Moreover, since that story became entangled
with the slowly evolving 'Silmarillion', and ultimately an essential
part of it, its developments are recorded in successive manuscripts
primarily concerned with the whole history of the Elder Days.

To follow the story of Beren and Lúthien, as a single and well-defined
narrative, in *The History of Middle-earth* is therefore not easy.

In an often quoted letter of 1951 my father called it 'the chief of the
stories of the *Silmarillion*', and he said of Beren that he is 'the
outlawed mortal who succeeds (with the help of Lúthien, a mere maiden
even if an elf of royalty) where all the armies and warriors have
failed: he penetrates the stronghold of the Enemy and wrests one of the
Silmarilli from the Iron Crown. Thus he wins the hand of Lúthien and the
first marriage of mortal and immortal is achieved.

'As such the story is (I think a beautiful and powerful)
heroic-fairy-romance, receivable in itself with only a very general
vague knowledge of the background. But it is also a fundamental link in
the cycle, deprived of its full significance out of its place therein.'

In the second place, my purpose in this book is twofold. On the one hand
I have tried to separate the story of Beren and Tinúviel (Lúthien) so
that it stands alone, so far as that can be done (in my opinion) without
distortion. On the other hand, I have wished to show how this
fundamental story evolved over the years. In my foreword to the first
volume of *The Book* *of* *Lost Tales* I said of the changes in the
stories:

::: extract
In the history of the history of Middle-earth the development was seldom
by outright rejection---far more often it was by subtle transformation
in stages, so that the growth of the legends (the process, for instance,
by which the Nargothrond story made contact with that of Beren and
Lúthien, a contact not even hinted at in the *Lost Tales*, though both
elements were present) can seem like the growth of legends among
peoples, the product of many minds and generations.
:::

It is an essential feature of this book that these developments in the
legend of Beren and Lúthien are shown in my father's own words, for the
method that I have employed is the extraction of passages from much
longer manuscripts in prose or verse written over many years.

In this way, also, there are brought to light passages of close
description or dramatic immediacy that are lost in the summary,
condensed manner characteristic of so much *Silmarillion* narrative
writing; there are even to be discovered elements in the story that were
later altogether lost. Thus, for example, the cross-examination of Beren
and Felagund and their companions, disguised as Orcs, by Thû the
Necromancer (the first appearance of Sauron), or the entry into the
story of the appalling Tevildo, Prince of Cats, who clearly deserves to
be remembered, short as was his literary life.

Lastly, I will cite another of my prefaces, that to *The Children of*
*Húrin* (2007):

::: extract
It is undeniable that there are a great many readers of *The Lord of the
Rings* for whom the legends of the Elder Days are altogether unknown,
unless by their repute as strange and inaccessible in mode and manner.
:::

It is also undeniable that the volumes of *The History* *of
Middle-earth* in question may well present a deterrent aspect. This is
because my father's mode of composition was intrinsically difficult: and
a primary purpose of the *History* was to try to disentangle it: thereby
(it may seem) exhibiting the tales of the Elder Days as a creation of
unceasing fluidity.

I believe that he might have said, in explanation of some rejected
element in a tale: I came to see that it was not like that; or, I
realised that that was not the right name. The fluidity should not be
exaggerated: there were nonetheless great, essential, permanences. But
it was certainly my hope, in composing this book, that it would show how
the creation of an ancient legend of Middle-earth, changing and growing
over many years, reflected the search of the author for a presentation
of the myth nearer to his desire.

In my letter to Rayner Unwin of 1981 I observed that in the event of my
restricting myself to a single legend from among the legends that make
up the *Lost Tales* 'the difficulties of exposition in detail would in
such a case be great, because one would have to explain so often what
was happening elsewhere, in other unpublished writings'. This has proved
an accurate prediction in the case of *Beren and Lúthien*. A solution of
some sort must be achieved, for Beren and Lúthien did not live, love,
and die, with their friends and foes, on an empty stage, alone and with
no past. I have therefore followed my own solution in *The Children of
Húrin.* In my preface to that book I wrote:

::: extract
It seems unquestionable, from my father's own words, that if he could
achieve final and finished narratives on the scale he desired, he saw
three 'Great Tales' of the Elder Days (Beren and Lúthien, the Children
of Húrin, and the Fall of Gondolin) as works sufficiently complete in
themselves as not to demand knowledge of the great body of legend known
as *The Silmarillion.* On the other hand . . . the tale of the Children
of Húrin is integral to the history of Elves and Men in the Elder Days,
and there are necessarily a good many references to events and
circumstances in that larger story.
:::

I therefore gave 'a very brief sketch of Beleriand and its peoples near
the end of the Elder Days', and I included 'a list of all names
occurring in the texts with very concise indications concerning each.'
In this book I have adopted from *The Children of Húrin* that brief
sketch, adapting and shortening it, and I have likewise provided a list
of all names occurring in the texts, in this case with explanatory
indications of a very varied nature. None of this ancillary matter is
essential, but is intended merely as an assistance if desired.

A further problem which I should mention arose from the very frequent
changes of names. To follow with exactness and consistency the
succession of names in texts of different dates would not serve the
purpose of this book. I have therefore observed no rule in this respect,
but distinguished old and new in some cases but not in others, for
various reasons. In a great many cases my father would alter a name in a
manuscript at some later, or even much later, time, but not
consistently: for example, *Elfin* to *Elven*. In such cases I have made
*Elven* the sole form, or *Beleriand* for earlier *Broseliand*; but in
others I have retained both, as in *Tinwelint/Thingol*,
*Artanor/Doriath.*

The purpose of this book, then, is altogether different from that of the
volumes of *The History of Middle-earth* from which it is derived. It is
emphatically not intended as an adjunct to those books. It is an attempt
to extract one narrative element from a vast work of extraordinary
richness and complexity; but that narrative, the story of Beren and
Lúthien, was itself continually evolving, and developing new
associations as it became more embedded in the wider history. The
decision of what to include and what to exclude of that ancient world
'at large' could only be a matter of personal and often questionable
judgement: in such an attempt there can be no attainable 'correct way'.
In general, however, I have erred on the side of clarity, and resisted
the urge to explain, for fear of undermining the primary purpose and
method of the book.

In my ninety-third year this is (presumptively) my last book in the long
series of editions of my father's writings, very largely previously
unpublished, and is of a somewhat curious nature. This tale is chosen
*in memoriam* because of its deeply-rooted presence in his own life, and
his intense thought on the union of Lúthien, whom he called 'the
greatest of the Eldar', and of Beren the mortal man, of their fates, and
of their second lives.

It goes back a long way in my life, for it is my earliest actual
recollection of some element in a story that was being told to me---not
simply a remembered image of the scene of the storytelling. My father
told it to me, or parts of it, speaking it without any writing, in the
early 1930s.

The element in the story that I recall, in my mind's eye, is that of the
eyes of the wolves as they appeared one by one in the darkness of the
dungeon of Thû.

In a letter to me on the subject of my mother, written in the year after
her death, which was also the year before his own, he wrote of his
overwhelming sense of bereavement, and of his wish to have *Lúthien*
inscribed beneath her name on the grave. He returned in that letter, as
in that cited on [p. 29](#calibre_link-36){.calibre3} of this book, to
the origin of the tale of Beren and Lúthien in a small woodland glade
filled with hemlock flowers near Roos in Yorkshire, where she danced;
and he said: 'But the story has gone crooked, and I am left, and *I*
cannot plead before the inexorable Mandos.'

::: centered-image
![](images/000001.jpg){.calibre9}
:::
:::::::

::::::: {#calibre_link-6 .calibre}
## ![](images/000002.jpg){.calibre10} {#section .chapter-number1}

## NOTES ON THE ELDER DAYS {#notes-on-the-elder-days .chapter-number2}

The depth in time to which this story reaches back was memorably
conveyed in a passage in *The Lord of the Rings.* At the great council
in Rivendell Elrond spoke of the Last Alliance of Elves and Men and the
defeat of Sauron at the end of the Second Age, more than three thousand
years before:

::: extract
Thereupon Elrond paused a while and sighed. 'I remember well the
splendour of their banners,' he said. 'It recalled to me the glory of
the Elder Days and the hosts of Beleriand, so many great princes and
captains were assembled. And yet not so many, nor so fair, as when
Thangorodrim was broken, and the Elves deemed that evil was ended for
ever, and it was not so.'

'You remember?' said Frodo, speaking his thought aloud in his
astonishment. 'But I thought,' he stammered as Elrond turned towards
him, 'I thought that the fall of Gil-galad was a long age ago.'

'So it was indeed,' answered Elrond gravely. 'But my memory reaches back
even to the Elder Days. Eärendil was my sire, who was born in Gondolin
before its fall; and my mother was Elwing, daughter of Dior, son of
Lúthien of Doriath. I have seen three ages in the West of the world, and
many defeats, and many fruitless victories.'
:::

### *Of Morgoth* {#of-morgoth .chapter-subtitle}

Morgoth, the Black Enemy, as he came to be called, was in his origin, as
he declared to Húrin brought captive before him, 'Melkor, first and
mightiest of the Valar, who was before the world.' Now become
permanently incarnate, in form a gigantic and majestic, but terrible,
King in the north-west of Middle-earth, he was physically present in his
huge fortress of Angband, the Hells of Iron: the black reek that issued
from the summits of Thangorodrim, the mountains that he piled above
Angband, could be seen far off staining the northern sky. It is said in
the *Annals of Beleriand* that 'the gates of Morgoth were but one
hundred and fifty leagues from the bridge of Menegroth; far and yet all
too near.' These words refer to the bridge leading to the dwellings of
the Elvish king Thingol; they were called Menegroth,
[]{#calibre_link-103 .calibre3}the Thousand Caves.

But being incarnate Morgoth was afraid. My father wrote of him:

'As he grew in malice, and sent forth from himself the evil that he
conceived in lies and creatures of wickedness, his power passed into
them and was dispersed, and he himself []{#calibre_link-160
.calibre3}became ever more earth-bound, unwilling to issue from his dark
strongholds.' Thus when Fingolfin, High King of the Noldorin Elves rode
alone to Angband to challenge Morgoth to combat, he cried at the gate:
Come forth, thou coward king, to fight with thine own hand! Den-dweller,
wielder of thralls, liar and lurker, foe of Gods and Elves, come! For I
would see thy craven face. Then (it is told) Morgoth came. For he could
not refuse such a challenge before the face of his captains. He fought
with the great hammer Grond, which at each blow made a great pit, and he
beat Fingolfin to the ground; but as he died he pinned the great foot of
Morgoth to the earth, and the black blood gushed forth and filled the
pits of Grond. Morgoth went ever halt thereafter. So also, when Beren
and Lúthien made their way into the deepest hall in Angband where
Morgoth sat, Lúthien cast a spell on him; and suddenly he fell, as a
hill sliding in avalanche, and hurled like thunder from his throne lay
prone upon the floors of hell.

### *Of Beleriand* {#of-beleriand .chapter-subtitle}

When Treebeard strode through the forest of Fangorn carrying Merry and
Pippin each in the crook of his arm he sang to them of ancient forests
in the great country of Beleriand, which was destroyed in the tumults of
the Great Battle at the end of the Elder Days. The Great Sea poured in
and drowned all the lands west of the Blue Mountains, called Ered Luin
and Ered Lindon; so that the map accompanying *The Silmarillion* ends in
the east with that mountain-chain, whereas the map accompanying *The
Lord of the Rings* ends in the west, also with the Blue Mountains. The
coastal lands beyond them on their western sides were all that remained
in the Third Age of that country, called Ossiriand, Land of Seven
Rivers, in which Treebeard once walked:

::: extract
*I wandered in Summer in the elm-woods of Ossiriand.*

*Ah! the light and the music in the Summer by the Seven Rivers of
Ossir!*

*And I thought that was best.*
:::

It was over the passes of the Blue Mountains that Men entered Beleriand;
in those mountains were the cities of the Dwarves, Nogrod and Belegost;
and it was in Ossiriand that Beren and Lúthien dwelt after they were
permitted by Mandos to return to Middle-earth ([p.
235](#calibre_link-37){.calibre3}).

Treebeard walked also among the pine-trees of Dorthonion ('Land of
Pines'):

::: extract
*To the pine-trees upon the highland of Dorthonion I climbed in the
Winter.*

*Ah! the wind and the whiteness and the black branches of Winter upon
Orod-na-Thôn!*

*My voice went up and sang in the sky.*
:::

That country came afterwards to be called Taur-nu-Fuin, 'the Forest
under Night', when Morgoth turned into 'a region of dread and dark
enchantment, of wandering and despair' (see [p.
107](#calibre_link-38){.calibre3}).

### *Of the Elves* {#of-the-elves .chapter-subtitle}

The Elves appeared on earth far off in a distant land (Palisor) beside a
lake named Cuiviénen, the Water of Awakening; and thence they were
summoned by the Valar to leave Middle-earth, and passing over the Great
Sea to come to the 'Blessed Realm' of Aman in the west of the world, the
land of the Gods. Those who accepted the summons were led on a great
march across Middle-earth by the Vala Oromë, the Hunter, and they are
called the Eldar, the Elves of the Great Journey, the High Elves,
distinct from those who, refusing the summons, chose Middle-earth for
their land and their destiny.

But not all the Eldar, though they had crossed the Blue Mountains,
departed over the sea; and those who remained in Beleriand are named the
Sindar, the Grey Elves. Their high king was Thingol (which means
'Grey-cloak'), who ruled from Menegroth, the Thousand Caves in Doriath
(Artanor). And not all the Eldar who crossed the Great Sea remained in
the land of the Valar; for one of their great kindreds, the Noldor (the
'Loremasters'), returned to Middle-earth, and they are called the
Exiles.

The prime mover in their rebellion against the Valar was Fëanor, maker
of the Silmarils; he was the eldest son of Finwë, who had led the host
of the Noldor from Cuiviénen, but was now dead. In my father's words:

::: extract
The Jewels were coveted by Morgoth the Enemy, who stole them and, after
destroying the Trees, took them to Middle-earth, and guarded them in his
great fortress of []{#calibre_link-99 .calibre3}Thangorodrim. Against
the will of the Valar Fëanor forsook the Blessed Realm and went in exile
to Middle-earth, leading with him a great part of his people, for in his
pride he purposed to recover the Jewels from Morgoth by force.

Thereafter followed the hopeless war of the Eldar and the Edain \[the
Men of the Three Houses of the Elf-friends\] against Thangorodrim, in
which they were at last utterly defeated.
:::

Before their departure from Valinor there took place the dreadful event
that marred the history of the Noldor in Middle-earth. Fëanor demanded
of those Teleri, the third host of the Eldar on the Great Journey, who
dwelt now on the coast of Aman, that they give up to the Noldor their
fleet of ships, their great pride, for without ships the crossing to
Middle-earth by such a host would not be possible. This the Teleri
refused utterly.

Then Fëanor and his people attacked the Teleri in their city of
Alqualondë, the Haven of the Swans, and took the fleet by force. In that
battle, which was known as The Kinslaying, many of the Teleri were
slain. This is referred to in *The Tale of Tinúviel* ([p.
42](#calibre_link-39){.calibre3}): 'the evil deeds of the Gnomes at the
Haven of the Swans', and see [p. 130](#calibre_link-40){.calibre3},
lines 514--19.

Fëanor was slain in battle soon after the return of the Noldor to
Middle-earth, and his seven sons held wide lands in the east of
Beleriand, between Dorthonion (Taur-na-fuin) and the Blue Mountains.

The second son of Finwë was Fingolfin (the half-brother of Fëanor), who
was held the overlord of all the Noldor; and he with his son Fingon
ruled Hithlum, which lay to the north and west of the great chain of
Ered Wethrin, the Mountains of Shadow. Fingolfin died in single combat
with Morgoth. The second son of Fingolfin, the brother of Fingon, was
Turgon, the founder and ruler of the hidden city of Gondolin.

The third son of Finwë, the brother of Fingolfin and half-brother of
Fëanor, was in earlier texts Finrod, later Finarfin (see [p.
104](#calibre_link-41){.calibre3}). The eldest son of Finrod/Finarfin
was in earlier texts Felagund, but later Finrod; he, inspired by the
magnificence and beauty of Menegroth in Doriath, founded the underground
fortress-city of Nargothrond, for which he was named Felagund, 'Lord of
Caves': thus earlier Felagund = later Finrod Felagund.

The doors of Nargothrond opened onto the gorge of the river Narog in
West Beleriand; but Felagund's realm extended far and wide, east to the
river Sirion and west to the river Nenning that reached the sea at the
haven of Eglarest. But Felagund was slain in the dungeons of Thû the
Necromancer, later Sauron; and Orodreth, the second son of Finarfin,
took the crown of Nargothrond, as told in this book ([pp.
109](#calibre_link-42){.calibre3}, [120](#calibre_link-43){.calibre3}).

The other sons of Finarfin, Angrod and Egnor, vassals of their brother
Finrod Felagund, dwelt on Dorthonion, looking northwards over the vast
plain of Ard-galen. Galadriel, the sister of Finrod Felagund, dwelt long
in Doriath with Melian the Queen. Melian (in early texts Gwendeling and
other forms) was a Maia, a spirit of great power who took human form and
dwelt in the forests of Beleriand with King Thingol: she was the mother
of Lúthien and the foremother of Elrond.

In the sixtieth year after the return of the Noldor, ending many years
of peace, a great host of Orcs came down from Angband, but was utterly
defeated and destroyed by the Noldor. This was called *Dagor Aglareb*,
the Glorious Battle; but the Elvish lords took warning from it, and set
the Siege of Angband, which lasted for almost four hundred years.

The Siege of Angband ended with a terrible suddenness (though long
prepared) on a night of midwinter. Morgoth released rivers of fire that
ran down from Thangorodrim, and the great grassy plain of Ard-galen that
lay to the north of Dorthonion was transformed into a parched and arid
waste, known thereafter by a changed name, *Anfauglith*, the Gasping
Dust.

This catastrophic assault was called *Dagor Bragollach*, the Battle of
Sudden Flame ([p. 106](#calibre_link-44){.calibre3}). Glaurung Father of
Dragons emerged from Angband now for the first time in his full might;
vast armies of Orcs poured southwards; the Elvish lords of Dorthonion
were slain, and a great part of the warriors of Bëor's people ([pp.
105--6](#calibre_link-45){.calibre3}). King Fingolfin and his son Fingon
were driven back with the warriors of Hithlum to the fortress of Eithel
Sirion (Sirion's Well), where the great river rose in the east face of
the Mountains of Shadow. The torrents of fire were stopped by the
Mountains of Shadow, and Hithlum and Dor-lómin remained unconquered.

It was in the year after the *Bragollach* that Fingolfin, in a fury of
despair, rode to Angband and challenged Morgoth.

\*
:::::::

::: {#calibre_link-7 .calibre}
## BEREN AND LÚTHIEN {#beren-and-lúthien .chapter-number1}

## ![](images/000003.jpg){.calibre12} {#section-1 .chapter-number2}
:::

:::::::::::: {#calibre_link-46 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-36 .calibre3}IN A LETTER of my father's written on the
16th of July 1964 he said:

::: extract
The germ of my attempt to write legends of my own to fit my private
languages was the tragic tale of the hapless Kullervo in the Finnish
*Kalevala.* It remains a major matter in the legends of the First Age
(which I hope to publish as *The Silmarillion*), though as 'The Children
of Húrin' it is entirely changed except in the tragic ending. The second
point was the writing, 'out of my head', of 'The Fall of Gondolin', the
story of Idril and Earendel, during sick-leave from the army in 1917;
and by the original version of the 'Tale of Lúthien Tinúviel and Beren'
later in the same year. That was founded on a small wood with a great
undergrowth of 'hemlock' (no doubt many other related plants were also
there) near Roos in Holderness, where I was for a while on the Humber
Garrison.
:::

My father and mother were married in March 1916, when he was twenty-four
and she was twenty-seven. They lived at first in the village of Great
Haywood in Staffordshire; but he embarked for France and the Battle of
the Somme early in June of that year. Taken ill, he was sent back to
England at the beginning of November 1916; and in the spring of 1917 he
was posted to Yorkshire.

This primary version of *The Tale of Tinúviel*, as he called it, written
in 1917, does not exist---or more precisely, exists only in the ghostly
form of a manuscript in pencil that he all but entirely erased for most
of its length; over this he wrote the text that is for us the earliest
version. *The Tale of Tinúviel* was one of the constituent stories of my
father's major early work of his 'mythology', *The Book of Lost Tales*,
an exceedingly complex work which I edited in the first two volumes of
*The History of Middle-earth*, 1983--4. But since the present book is
expressly devoted to the evolution of the legend of Beren and Lúthien I
will here very largely pass by the strange setting and audience of the
*Lost Tales*, for *The Tale of Tinúviel* is in itself almost entirely
independent of that setting.

Central to *The Book of Lost Tales* was the story of an English mariner
of the 'Anglo-Saxon' period named Eriol or Ælfwine who, sailing far
westwards over the ocean, came at last to Tol Eressëa, the Lonely Isle,
where dwelt Elves who had departed from 'the Great Lands', afterwards
'Middle-Earth' (a term not used in the *Lost Tales*). During his sojourn
in Tol Eressëa he learned from them the true and ancient history of the
Creation, of the Gods, of the Elves, and of England. This history is
'The Lost Tales of Elfinesse'.

The work is extant in a number of battered little 'exercise books' in
ink and pencil, often formidably difficult to read, though after many
hours of peering at the manuscript with a lens I was able, many years
ago, to elucidate all the texts with only occasional unsolved words.
*The Tale of Tinúviel* is one of the stories that was told to Eriol by
the Elves in the Lonely Isle, in this case by a maiden named Vëannë:
there were many children present at these story-tellings. Sharply
observant of detail (a striking feature), it is told in an extremely
individual style, with some archaisms of word and construction,
altogether unlike my father's later styles, intense, poetic, at times
deeply 'elvish-mysterious'. There is also an undercurrent of sardonic
humour in the expression here and there (in the terrible confrontation
with the demonic wolf Karkaras as she fled with Beren from Melko's hall
Tinúviel enquires 'Wherefore this surliness, Karkaras?').

Rather than awaiting the conclusion of the *Tale* I think it may be
helpful to draw attention here to certain aspects of this earliest
version of the legend, and to give brief explanations of some names
important in the narrative (which are also to be found in the List of
Names at the end of the book).

*The Tale of Tinúviel* in its rewritten form, which is the earliest form
for us, was by no means the earliest of the *Lost Tales*, and light is
shed on it by features in other *Tales*. To speak only of narrative
structure, some of them, such as the tale of Túrin, are not very far
removed from the version in the published *Silmarillion*; some, notably
the Fall of Gondolin, the first to be written, is present in the
published work only in a severely compressed form; and some, most
remarkably the present Tale, are strikingly different in certain
aspects.

[]{#calibre_link-96 .calibre3}A fundamental change in the evolution of
the legend of Beren and Tinúviel (Lúthien) was the entry into it later
of the story of Felagund of Nargothrond and the sons of Fëanor; but
equally significant, in a different aspect, was the alteration in the
identity of Beren. In the later versions of the legend it was an
altogether essential element that Beren was a mortal man, whereas
Lúthien was an immortal Elf; but this was not present in the *Lost
Tale*: Beren, also, was an Elf. (It is seen, however, from my father's
notes to other Tales, that he was originally a Man; and it is clear that
this was true also in the erased manuscript of *The Tale of Tinúviel.*)
Beren the Elf was of the Elvish people named the Noldoli (later Noldor),
which in the *Lost Tales* (and later) is translated 'Gnomes': Beren was
a Gnome. This translation later became a problem for my father. He was
using another word *Gnome*, wholly distinct in origin and meaning from
those Gnomes who nowadays are small figures specially associated with
gardens. This other *Gnome* was . . . from a Greek word
[gnōmē]{.underline} 'thought, intelligence'; it barely survives in
modern English, with the meaning 'aphorism, maxim', together with the
adjective *gnomic*.

::: {#calibre_link-26 .centered-image1}
![](images/000026.jpg){.calibre13}
:::

In a draft for Appendix F of *The Lord of the Rings* he wrote:

::: extract
I have sometimes (not in this book) used 'Gnomes' for *Noldor* and
'Gnomish' for *Noldorin.* This I did, for to some 'Gnome' will still
suggest knowledge. Now the High-elven name of this people, Noldor,
signifies Those who Know; for of the three kindreds of the Eldar from
their beginning the Noldor were ever distinguished, both by their
knowledge of the things that are and were in this world, and by their
desire to know more. Yet they in no way resembled the Gnomes either of
learned theory or popular fancy; and I have now abandoned this rendering
as too misleading.
:::

(In passing, I would mention that he said also \[in a letter of 1954\]
that he greatly regretted having used the word 'Elves', which has become
'overloaded with regrettable tones' that are 'too much to overcome'.)

The hostility shown to Beren, as an Elf, is explained thus in the old
Tale ([p. 42](#calibre_link-39){.calibre3}): 'all the Elves of the
woodland thought of the Gnomes of Dor-lómin as treacherous creatures,
cruel and faithless'.

It may well seem somewhat puzzling that the word 'fairy, fairies' is
frequently used of Elves. Thus, of the white moths that flew in the
woods 'Tinúviel being a fairy minded them not' ([p.
41](#calibre_link-47){.calibre3}); she names herself 'Princess of
Fairies' ([p. 64](#calibre_link-48){.calibre3}); it is said of her ([p.
72](#calibre_link-49){.calibre3}) that she 'put forth her skill and
fairy-magic'. In the first place, the word *fairies* in the *Lost Tales*
is synonymous with *Elves*; and in those tales there are several
references to the relative physical stature of Men and Elves. In those
early days my father's conceptions on such matters were somewhat
fluctuating, but it is clear that he conceived a changing relation as
the ages passed. Thus he wrote:

::: extract
Men were almost of a stature at first with Elves, the fairies being far
greater and Men smaller than now.
:::

But the evolution of Elves was greatly influenced by the coming of Men:

::: extract
Ever as Men wax more numerous and powerful so the fairies fade and grow
small and tenuous, filmy and transparent, but Men larger and more dense
and gross. At last Men, or almost Men, can no longer see the fairies.
:::

There is thus no need to suppose, on account of the word, that my father
thought of the 'Fairies' of this tale as filmy and transparent; and of
course years later, when the Elves of the Third Age had entered the
history of Middle-earth, there was nothing 'fairylike', in the modern
sense, about them.

The word *fay* is more obscure. In *The Tale of Tinúviel* it is used
frequently of Melian (the mother of Lúthien), who came from Valinor (and
is called \[[p. 40](#calibre_link-50){.calibre3}\] 'a daughter of the
Gods'), but also of Tevildo, who was said to be 'an evil fay in
beastlike shape' ([p. 69](#calibre_link-51){.calibre3}). Elsewhere in
the *Tales* there are references to 'the wisdom of fays and of Eldar',
to 'Orcs and dragons and evil fays', and to 'a fay of the woods and
dells'. Most notable perhaps is the following passage from the *Tale of
the Coming of the Valar*:

::: extract
About them fared a great host who are the sprites \[spirits\] of trees
and woods, of dale and forest and mountain-side, or those that sing amid
the grass at morning and chant among the standing corn at eve. These are
the Nermir and the Tavari, Nandini and Orossi \[fays (?) of the meads,
of the woods, of the valleys, of the mountains\], fays, pixies,
leprawns, and what else are they not called, for their number is very
great; yet must they not be confused with the Eldar \[Elves\], for they
were born before the world, and are older than its oldest, and are not
of it.
:::

Another puzzling feature, appearing not only in *The Tale of Tinúviel*,
of which I have found no explanation, nor any more general observation,
concerns the power that the Valar possess over the affairs of Men and
Elves, and indeed over their minds and hearts, in the far distant Great
Lands (Middle-earth). To give examples: on [p.
78](#calibre_link-52){.calibre3} 'the Valar brought \[Huan\] to a glade'
where Beren and Lúthien were lying on the ground in their flight from
Angband; and she said to her father ([p.
82](#calibre_link-53){.calibre3}): 'The Valar alone saved \[Beren\] from
a bitter death'. Or again, in the account of Lúthien's flight from
Doriath ([p. 57](#calibre_link-54){.calibre3}), 'she entered not that
dark region, and regaining heart pressed on' was later changed to 'she
entered not that dark region, and the Valar set a new hope in her heart,
so that she pressed on once more.'

As regards the names that appear in the Tale, I will note here that
*Artanor* corresponds to later *Doriath* and was also called *The Land
Beyond*; to the north lay the barrier of the *Iron Mountains*, also
called the *Bitter Hills*, over which Beren came: afterwards they became
*Ered Wethrin, the Mountains of Shadow.* Beyond the mountains lay
*Hisilómë* (*Hithlum*) []{#calibre_link-109 .calibre3}the Land of
Shadow, also called *Dor-lómin*. *Palisor* ([p.
37](#calibre_link-55){.calibre3}) is the land where the Elves awoke.

The Valar are often referred to as the Gods, and are called also the
*Ainur* (singular *Ainu*). *Melko* (later *Melkor*) is the great evil
Vala, called *Morgoth*, the Black Foe, after his theft of the Silmarils.
*Mandos* is the name both of the Vala and the place of his abode. He is
the keeper of the Houses of the Dead.

Manwë is the lord of the Valar; Varda, maker of the stars, is the spouse
of Manwë and dwells with him on the summit of Taniquetil, the highest
mountain of Arda. The Two Trees are the great trees whose flowers gave
light to Valinor, destroyed by Morgoth and the monstrous spider
Ungoliant.

Lastly, this is a convenient place to say something of the Silmarils,
fundamental to the legend of Beren and Lúthien: they were the work of
Fëanor, greatest of the Noldor: 'the mightiest in skill of word and of
hand'; his name means 'Spirit of Fire'. I will quote here a passage from
the later (1930) 'Silmarillion' text entitled *Quenta Noldorinwa,* on
which see [p. 103](#calibre_link-56){.calibre3}.

::: extract
In those far days Fëanor began on a time a long and marvellous labour,
and all his power and all his subtle magic he called upon, for he
purposed to make a thing more fair than any of the Eldar yet had made,
that should last beyond the end of all. Three jewels he made, and named
them Silmarils. A living fire burned within them that was blended of the
light of the Two Trees; of their own radiance they shone even in the
dark; no mortal flesh impure could touch them, but was
[]{#calibre_link-55 .calibre3}withered and was scorched. These jewels
the Elves prized beyond all the works of their hands, and Manwë hallowed
them, and Varda said: 'The fate of the Elves is locked herein, and the
fate of many things beside.' The heart of Fëanor was wound about the
things he himself had made.
:::

A terrible and deeply destructive oath was sworn by Fëanor and his seven
sons in assertion of their sole and inviolable right to the Silmarils,
which were stolen by Morgoth.

Vëannë's tale was expressly addressed to Eriol (Ælfwine), who had never
heard of Tinúviel, but as she tells it there is no formal opening: she
begins with an account of Tinwelint and Gwendeling (afterwards known as
Thingol and Melian). I will however turn again to the *Quenta
Noldorinwa* for this essential element in the legend. In the *Tale* the
formidable Tinwelint (Thingol) is a central figure: the king of the
Elves who dwelt in the deep woodlands of Artanor, ruling from his vast
cavern in the heart of the forest. But the queen was also a personage of
great significance, although seldom seen, and I give here the account of
her given in the *Quenta Noldorinwa.*

In this it is told that on the Great Journey of the Elves from far off
Palisor, the place of their awakening, with the ultimate goal of
reaching Valinor in the far West beyond the great Ocean

::: extract
\[many Elves\] were lost upon the long dark roads, and they wandered in
the woods and mountains of the world, and never came to Valinor, nor saw
the light of the Two Trees. Therefore they are called Ilkorindi, the
Elves that dwelt never in Kôr, the city of the Eldar \[Elves\] in the
land of the Gods. The Dark-elves are they, and many are their scattered
tribes, and many are their tongues.

Of the Dark-elves the chief in renown was Thingol. For this reason he
came never to Valinor. Melian was a fay. In the gardens of \[the Vala\]
Lórien she dwelt, and among all his fair folk none were there that
surpassed her beauty, nor none more wise, nor none more skilled in
magical and enchanting song. It is told that the Gods would leave their
business and the birds of Valinor their mirth, that Valmar's bells were
silent, and the fountains ceased to flow, when at the mingling of the
light Melian sang in the gardens of the God of Dreams. Nightingales went
always with her, and their song she taught them. But she loved deep
shadow, and strayed on long journeys into the Outer Lands
\[Middle-earth\], and there filled the silence of the dawning world with
her voice and the voices of her birds.

The nightingales of Melian Thingol heard and was enchanted and left his
folk. Melian he found beneath the trees and was cast into a dream and a
great slumber, so that his people sought him in vain.
:::

In Vëannë's account, when Tinwelint awoke from his mythically long sleep
'he thought no more of his people (and indeed it had been vain, for long
now had those reached Valinor)', but desired only to see the lady of the
twilight. She was not far off, for she had watched over him as he slept.
'But more of their story I know not, O Eriol, save that in the end she
became his wife, for Tinwelint and Gwendeling very long indeed were king
and queen of the Lost Elves of Artanor or the Land Beyond, or so it is
said here.'

Vëannë said further that the dwelling of Tinwelint 'was hidden from the
vision and knowledge of Melko by the magics of Gwendeling the fay, and
she wove spells about the paths thereto that none but the Eldar
\[Elves\] might tread them easily, and so was the king secured from all
dangers save it be treachery alone. Now his halls were builded in a deep
cavern of great size, and they were nonetheless a kingly and a fair
abode. This cavern was in the heart of the mighty forest of Artanor that
is the mightiest of forests, and a stream ran before its doors, but none
could enter that portal save across the stream, and a bridge spanned it
narrow and well guarded.' Then Vëannë exclaimed: 'Lo, now I will tell
you of things that happened in the halls of Tinwelint'; and this seems
to be the point at which the tale proper can be said to begin.

::: centered-image
![](images/000004.jpg){.calibre14}
:::
::::::::::::

::::: {#calibre_link-8 .calibre}
## []{#calibre_link-50 .calibre15}![](images/000005.jpg){.calibre16} {#section-2 .chapter-number1}

## *THE TALE OF TINÚVIEL* {#the-tale-of-tinúviel .chapter-number2}

Two children had Tinwelint then, Dairon and Tinúviel, and Tinúviel was a
maiden, and the most beautiful of all the maidens of the hidden Elves,
and indeed few have been so fair, for her mother was a fay, a daughter
of the Gods; but Dairon was then a boy strong and merry, and above all
things he delighted to play upon a pipe of reeds or other woodland
instruments, and he is named now among the three most magic players of
the Elves, and the others are Tinfang Warble and Ivárë who plays beside
the sea. But Tinúviel's joy was rather in the dance, and no names are
set with hers for the beauty and subtlety of her twinkling feet.

Now it was the delight of Dairon and Tinúviel to fare away from the
cavernous palace of Tinwelint their father and together spend long time
amid the trees. There often would Dairon sit upon a tussock or a
tree-root and make music while Tinúviel danced thereto, and when she
danced to the playing of Dairon more lissom was she than Gwendeling,
more []{#calibre_link-47 .calibre3}magical than Tinfang Warble neath the
moon, nor may any see such lilting save be it only in the rose gardens
of Valinor where Nessa dances on the lawns of never-fading green.

Even at night when the moon shone pale still would they play and dance,
and they were not afraid as I should be, for the rule of Tinwelint and
of Gwendeling held evil from the woods and Melko troubled them not as
yet, and Men were hemmed beyond the hills.

Now the place that they loved the most was a shady spot, and elms grew
there, and beech too, but these were not very tall, and some chestnut
trees there were with white flowers, but the ground was moist and a
great misty growth of hemlocks rose beneath the trees. On a time of June
they were playing there, and the white umbels of the hemlocks were like
a cloud about the boles of the trees, and there Tinúviel danced until
the evening faded late, and there were many white moths abroad. Tinúviel
being a fairy minded them not as many of the children of Men do,
although she loved not beetles, and spiders will none of the Eldar touch
because of Ungweliantë---but now the white moths flittered about her
head and Dairon trilled an eerie tune, when suddenly that strange thing
befell.

Never have I heard how Beren came thither over the hills; yet was he
braver than most, as thou shalt hear, and 'twas the love of wandering
maybe alone that had sped him through the terrors of the Iron Mountains
until he reached the Lands Beyond.

Now Beren was a Gnome, son of Egnor the forester who hunted in the
darker places in the north of Hisilómë. Dread and suspicion was between
the Eldar and those of their []{#calibre_link-39 .calibre3}kindred that
had tasted the slavery of Melko, and in this did the evil deeds of the
Gnomes at the Haven of the Swans revenge itself. Now the lies of Melko
ran among Beren's folk so that they believed evil things of the secret
Elves, yet now did he see Tinúviel dancing in the twilight, and Tinúviel
was in a silver-pearly dress, and her bare white feet were twinkling
among the hemlock-stems. Then Beren cared not whether she were Vala or
Elf or child of Men and crept near to see; and he leant against a young
elm that grew upon a mound so that he might look down into the little
glade where she was dancing, for the enchantment made him faint. So
slender was she and so fair that at length he stood heedlessly in the
open the better to gaze upon her, and at that moment the full moon came
brightly through the boughs and Dairon caught sight of Beren's face.
Straightway did he perceive that he was none of their folk, and all the
Elves of the woodland thought of the Gnomes of Dor-lómin as treacherous
creatures, cruel and faithless, wherefore Dairon dropped his instrument
and crying 'Flee, flee, O Tinúviel, an enemy walks this wood' he was
gone swiftly through the trees. Then Tinúviel in her amaze followed not
straightway, for she understood not his words at once, and knowing she
could not run or leap so hardily as her brother she slipped suddenly
down among the white hemlocks and hid herself beneath a very tall flower
with many spreading leaves; and here she looked in her white raiment
like a spatter of moonlight shimmering through the leaves upon the
floor.

Then Beren was sad, for he was lonely and was grieved at their fright,
and he looked for Tinúviel everywhere about, thinking her not fled. Thus
suddenly did he lay his hand upon her slender arm beneath the leaves,
and with a cry she started away from him and flitted as fast as she
could in the wan light, darting and wavering in the moonbeams as only
the Eldar can, in and about the tree-trunks and the hemlock-stalks. The
tender touch of her arm made Beren yet more eager than before to find
her, and he followed swiftly and yet not swiftly enough, for in the end
she escaped him, and reached the dwellings of her father in fear; nor
did she dance alone in the woods for many a day after.

This was a great sorrow to Beren, who would not leave those places,
hoping to see that fair elven maiden dance yet again, and he wandered in
the wood growing wild and lonely for many a day and searching for
Tinúviel. By dawn and dusk he sought her, but ever more hopefully when
the moon shone bright. At last one night he caught a sparkle afar off,
and lo, there she was dancing alone on a little treeless knoll and
Dairon was not there. Often and often she came there after and danced
and sang to herself, and sometimes Dairon would be nigh, and then Beren
watched from the wood's edge afar, and sometimes he was away and Beren
crept then closer. Indeed for long Tinúviel knew of his coming and
feigned otherwise, and for long her fear had departed by reason of the
wistful hunger of his face lit by the moonlight; and she saw that he was
kind and in love with her beautiful dancing.

Then Beren took to following Tinúviel secretly through the woods even to
the entrance of the cave and the bridge's head, and when she was gone in
he would cry across the stream, softly saying 'Tinúviel', for he had
caught the name from Dairon's lips; and although he knew it not Tinúviel
often hearkened from within the shadows of the cavernous doors and
laughed softly or smiled. At length one day as she danced alone he
stepped out more boldly and said to her: 'Tinúviel, teach me to dance.'
'Who art thou?' said she. 'Beren. I am from across the Bitter Hills.'
'Then if thou wouldst dance, follow me,' said the maiden, and she danced
before Beren away, and away into the woods, nimbly and yet not so fast
that he could not follow, and ever and anon she would look back and
laugh at him stumbling after, saying 'Dance, Beren, dance! as they dance
beyond the Bitter Hills!' In this way they came by winding paths to the
abode of Tinwelint, and Tinúviel beckoned Beren beyond the stream, and
he followed her wondering down into the cave and the deep halls of her
home.

When however Beren found himself before the king he was abashed, and of
the stateliness of Queen Gwendeling he was in great awe, and behold when
the king said: 'Who art thou that stumbleth into my halls unbidden?' he
had nought to say. Tinúviel answered therefore for him, saying: 'This,
my father, is Beren, a wanderer from beyond the hills, and he would
learn to dance as the elves of Artanor can dance,' and she laughed, but
the king frowned when he heard whence Beren came, and he said: 'Put away
thy light words, my child, and say has this wild Elf of the shadows
sought to do thee any harm?'

'Nay, father,' said she, 'and I think there is not evil in his heart at
all, and be thou not harsh with him, unless thou []{#calibre_link-112
.calibre3}desirest to see thy daughter Tinúviel weep, for more wonder
has he at my dancing than any that I have known.' Therefore said
Tinwelint now: 'O Beren son of the Noldoli, what does thou desire of the
Elves of the wood ere thou returnest whence thou camest?'

So great was the amazed joy of Beren's heart when Tinúviel spake thus
for him to her father that his courage rose within him, and his
adventurous spirit that had brought him out of Hisilómë and over the
Mountains of Iron awoke again, and looking boldly upon Tinwelint he
said: 'Why, O king, I desire thy daughter Tinúviel, for she is the
fairest and most sweet of all maidens I have seen or dreamed of.'

Then was there a silence in the hall, save that Dairon laughed, and all
who heard were astounded, but Tinúviel cast down her eyes, and the king
glancing at the wild and rugged aspect of Beren burst also into
laughter, whereat Beren flushed for shame, and Tinúviel's heart was sore
for him. 'Why! wed my Tinúviel fairest of the maidens of the world, and
become a prince of the woodland Elves---'tis but a little boon for a
stranger to ask,' quoth Tinwelint. 'Haply I may with right ask somewhat
in return. Nothing great shall it be, a token only of thy esteem. Bring
me a Silmaril from the Crown of Melko, and that day Tinúviel weds thee,
an she will.'

Then all in that place knew that the king treated the matter as an
uncouth jest, having pity on the Gnome, and they smiled, for the fame of
the Silmarils of Fëanor was now great throughout the world, and the
Noldoli had told tales of them, and many that had escaped from Angamandi
had seen them now blazing lustrous in the iron crown of Melko. Never did
this crown leave his head, and he treasured those jewels as his eyes,
and no one in the world, or fay or elf or man, could hope ever to set
finger even on them and live. This indeed did Beren know, and he guessed
the meaning of their mocking smiles, and aflame with anger he cried;
'Nay, but 'tis too small a gift to the father of so sweet a bride.
Strange nonetheless seem to me the customs of the woodland Elves, like
to the rude laws of the folk of Men, that thou shouldst name the gift
unoffered, yet lo! I Beren, a huntsman of the Noldoli, will fulfil thy
small desire,' and with that he burst from the hall while all stood
astonished; but Tinúviel wept suddenly. ''Twas ill done, O my father,'
she cried, 'to send one to his death with thy sorry jesting---for now
methinks he will attempt the deed, being maddened by thy scorn, and
Melko will slay him, and none will look ever again with such love upon
my dancing.'

Then said the king: ''Twill not be the first of Gnomes that Melko has
slain and for less reason. It is well for him that he lies not bound
here in grievous spells for his trespass in my halls and for his
insolent speech'; yet Gwendeling said nought, neither did she chide
Tinúviel or question her sudden weeping for this unknown wanderer.

Beren however going from before the face of Tinwelint was carried by his
wrath far through the woods, until he drew nigh to the lower hills and
treeless lands that warned of the approach of the bleak Iron Mountains.
Only then did he feel his weariness and stay his march, and thereafter
did his greater travails begin. Nights of deep despondency were his and
he saw no hope whatever in his quest, and indeed there
[]{#calibre_link-161 .calibre3}was little, and soon, as he followed the
Iron Mountains till he drew nigh to the terrible regions of Melko's
abode, the greatest fears assailed him. Many poisonous snakes were in
those places and wolves roamed about, and more fearsome still were the
wandering bands of the goblins and the Orcs---foul broodlings of Melko
who fared abroad doing his evil work, snaring and capturing beasts, and
Men, and Elves, and dragging them to their lord.

Many times was Beren near to capture by the Orcs, and once he escaped
the jaws of a great wolf only after a combat wherein he was armed but
with an ashen club, and other perils and adventures did he know each day
of his wandering to Angamandi. Hunger and thirst too tortured him often,
and often he would have turned back had not that been well nigh as
perilous as going on; but the voice of Tinúviel pleading with Tinwelint
echoed in his heart, and at night time it seemed to him that his heart
heard her sometimes weeping softly for him far away in the woodlands of
her home: and this was indeed true.

One day he was driven by great hunger to search amid a deserted camping
of some Orcs for scraps of food, but some of these returned unawares and
took him prisoner, and they tormented him but did not slay him, for
their captain seeing his strength, worn though he was with hardships,
thought that Melko might perchance be pleasured if he was brought before
him and might set him to some heavy thrall-work in his mines or in his
smithies. So came it that Beren was dragged before Melko, and he bore a
stout heart within him nonetheless, for it was a belief among his
father's kindred that the power of []{#calibre_link-151 .calibre3}Melko
would not abide for ever, but the Valar would hearken at last to the
tears of the Noldoli, and would arise and bind Melko and open Valinor
once more to the weary Elves, and great joy should come back upon Earth.

Melko however looking upon him was wroth, asking how a Gnome, a thrall
by birth of his, had dared to fare away into the woods unbidden, but
Beren answered that he was no runagate but came of a kindred of Gnomes
that dwelt in Aryador and mingled much there among the folk of Men. Then
was Melko yet more angry, for he sought ever to destroy the friendship
and intercourse of Elves and Men, and said that evidently here was a
plotter of deep treacheries against Melko's lordship, and one worthy of
the tortures of the Balrogs; but Beren seeing his peril answered: 'Think
not, O most mighty Ainu Melko, Lord of the World, that this can be true,
for if it were then should I not be here unaided and alone. No
friendship has Beren son of Egnor for the kindred of Men; nay indeed,
wearying utterly of the lands infested by that folk he has wandered out
of Aryador. Many a great tale has my father made to me aforetime of thy
splendour and glory, wherefore, albeit I am no renegade thrall, I do
desire nothing so much as to serve thee in what small manner I may,' and
Beren said therewith that he was a great trapper of small animals and a
snarer of birds, and had become lost in the hills in these pursuits
until after much wandering he had come into strange lands, and even had
not the Orcs seized him he would indeed have had no other rede of safety
but to approach the majesty of Ainu Melko and beg him to grant him some
humble office---as a winner of meats for his table perchance.

[]{#calibre_link-110 .calibre3}Now the Valar must have inspired that
speech, or perchance it was a spell of cunning words cast on him in
compassion by Gwendeling, for indeed it saved his life, and Melko
marking his hardy frame believed him, and was willing to accept him as a
thrall of his kitchens. Flattery savoured ever sweet in the nostrils of
that Ainu, and for all his unfathomed wisdom many a lie of those whom he
despised deceived him, were they clothed sweetly in words of praise;
therefore now he gave orders for Beren to be made a thrall of Tevildo
Prince of Cats. Now Tevildo was a mighty cat---the mightiest of
all---and possessed of an evil sprite, as some say, and he was in
Melko's constant following; and that cat had all cats subject to him,
and he and his subjects were the chasers and getters of meat for Melko's
table and for his frequent feasts. Wherefore is it that there is hatred
still between the Elves and all cats even now when Melko rules no more,
and his beasts are become of little account.

When therefore Beren was led away to the halls of Tevildo, and these
were not utterly distant from the place of Melko's throne, he was much
afraid, for he had not looked for such a turn in things, and those halls
were ill-lighted and were full of growling and of monstrous purrings in
the dark.

All about shone cats' eyes glowing like green lamps or red or yellow
where Tevildo's thanes sat waving and lashing their beautiful tails, but
Tevildo himself sat at their head and he was a mighty cat and coal-black
and evil to look upon. His eyes were long and very narrow and slanted,
and gleamed both red and green, but his great grey whiskers were as
stout and as sharp as needles. His purr was like the roll of drums and
his growl like thunder, but when he yelled in wrath it turned the blood
cold, and indeed small beasts and birds were frozen as to stone, or
dropped lifeless often at the very sound. Now Tevildo seeing Beren
narrowed his eyes until they seemed to shut, and said: 'I smell dog',
and he took dislike to Beren from that moment. Now Beren had been a
lover of hounds in his own wild home.

'Why,' said Tevildo, 'do ye dare to bring such a creature before me,
unless perchance it is to make meat of him?' But those who led Beren
said: 'Nay, 'twas the word of Melko that this unhappy Elf wear out his
life as a catcher of beasts and birds in Tevildo's employ.' Then indeed
did Tevildo screech in scorn and said: 'Then in sooth was my lord asleep
or his thoughts were settled elsewhere, for what use think ye is a child
of the Eldar to aid the Prince of Cats and his thanes in the catching of
birds or of beasts---as well had ye brought some clumsy-footed Man, for
none are there either of Elves or Men that can vie with us in our
pursuit.' Nonetheless he set Beren to a test, and he bade him go catch
three mice, 'for my hall is infested with them,' said he. This indeed
was not true, as might be imagined, yet a certain few there were---a
very wild, evil, and magic kind that dared to dwell there in dark holes,
but they were larger than rats and very fierce, and Tevildo harboured
them for his own private sport and suffered not their numbers to
dwindle.

Three days did Beren hunt them, but having nothing wherewith to devise a
trap (and indeed he did not lie to Melko saying that he had cunning in
such contrivances) he hunted in vain getting nothing better than a
bitten finger for []{#calibre_link-154 .calibre3}all his labour. Then
was Tevildo scornful and in great anger, but Beren got no harm of him or
his thanes at that time because of Melko's bidding other than a few
scratches. Evil however were his days thereafter in the dwellings of
Tevildo. They made him a scullion, and his days passed miserably in the
washing of floors and vessels, in the scrubbing of tables and the hewing
of wood and the drawing of water. Often too he would be set to the
turning of spits whereon birds and fat mice were daintily roasted for
the cats, yet seldom did he get food or sleep himself, and he became
haggard and unkempt, and wished often that never straying out of
Hisilómë he had not even caught sight of the vision of Tinúviel.

Now that fair maiden wept for a very great while after Beren's departure
and danced no more about the woods, and Dairon grew angry and could not
understand her, but she had grown to love the face of Beren peeping
through the branches and the crackle of his feet as they followed her
through the wood; and his voice that called wistfully 'Tinúviel,
Tinúviel' across the stream before her father's doors she longed to hear
again, and she would not now dance when Beren was fled to the evil halls
of Melko and maybe had already perished. So bitter did this thought
become at last that that most tender maiden went to her mother, for to
her father she dared not go nor even suffer him to see her weep.

'O Gwendeling, my mother,' said she, 'tell me of thy magic, if thou
canst, how doth Beren fare. Is all yet well with him?' 'Nay,' said
Gwendeling. 'He lives indeed, but in an evil captivity, and hope is dead
in his heart, for behold, he is a slave in the power of Tevildo Prince
of Cats.'

[]{#calibre_link-113 .calibre3}'Then,' said Tinúviel, 'I must go and
succour him, for none else do I know that will.'

Now Gwendeling laughed not, for in many matters she was wise, and
forewise, yet it was a thing unthought in a mad dream that any Elf,
still less a maiden, the daughter of the king, should fare untended to
the halls of Melko, even in those earlier days before the Battle of
Tears when Melko's power had not grown great and he veiled his designs
and spread his net of lies. Wherefore did Gwendeling softly bid her not
to speak such folly; but Tinúviel said: 'Then must thou plead with my
father for aid, that he send warriors to Angamandi and demand the
freedom of Beren from Ainu Melko.'

This indeed did Gwendeling do, of love for her daughter, and so wroth
was Tinwelint that Tinúviel wished that never had her desire been made
known; and Tinwelint bade her nor speak nor think of Beren more, and
swore he would slay him an he trod those halls again. Now then Tinúviel
pondered much what she might do, and going to Dairon she begged him to
aid her, or indeed to fare away with her to Angamandi an he would; but
Dairon thought with little love of Beren, and he said: 'Wherefore should
I go into the direst peril that there is in the world for the sake of a
wandering Gnome of the woods? Indeed I have no love for him, for he has
destroyed our play together, our music and our dancing.' But Dairon
moreover told the king of what Tinúviel had desired of him---and this he
did not of ill intent but fearing lest Tinúviel fare away to her death
in the madness of her heart.

Now when Tinwelint heard this he called Tinúviel and said: 'Wherefore, O
maiden of mine, does thou not put this folly away from thee, and seek to
do my bidding?' But Tinúviel would not answer, and the king bade her
promise him that neither would she think more on Beren, nor would she
seek in her folly to follow after him to the evil lands whether alone or
tempting any of his folk with her. But Tinúviel said that the first she
would not promise and the second only in part, for she would not tempt
any of the folk of the woodlands to go with her.

Then was her father mightily angry, and beneath his anger not a little
amazed and afraid, for he loved Tinúviel; but this was the plan he
devised, for he might not shut his daughter for ever in the caverns
where only a dim and flickering light ever came. Now above the portals
of his cavernous hall was a steep slope falling to the river, and there
grew mighty beeches; and one there was that was named Hirilorn, the
Queen of Trees, for she was very mighty, and so deeply cloven was her
bole that it seemed as if three shafts sprang from the ground together
and they were of like size, round and straight, and their grey rind was
smooth as silk, unbroken by branch or twig for a very great height above
men's heads.

Now Tinwelint let build high up in that strange tree, as high as men
could fashion their longest ladders to reach, a little house of wood,
and it was above the first branches and was sweetly veiled in leaves.
Now that house had three corners and three windows in each wall, and at
each corner was one of the shafts of Hirilorn. There then did Tinwelint
bid Tinúviel dwell until she would consent to be wise, and when she
fared up the ladders of tall pine these were taken from beneath and no
way had she to get down again. All that she required was brought to her,
and folk would scale the ladders and give her food or whatever else she
wished for, and then descending again take away the ladders, and the
king promised death to any who left one leaning against the tree or who
should try by stealth to place one there at night. A guard therefore was
set nigh the tree's foot, and yet came Dairon often thither in sorrow at
what he had brought to pass, for he was lonely without Tinúviel; but
Tinúviel had at first much pleasure in her house among the leaves, and
would gaze out of her little window while Dairon made his sweetest
melodies beneath.

But one night a dream of the Valar came to Tinúviel and she dreamt of
Beren, and her heart said: 'Let me be gone to seek him whom all others
have forgot'; and waking, the moon was shining through the trees, and
she pondered very deeply how she might escape. Now Tinúviel daughter of
Gwendeling was not ignorant of magics or of spells, as may well be
believed, and after much thought she devised a plan. The next day she
asked those who came to her to bring, if they would, some of the
clearest water of the stream below, 'but this,' she said, 'must be drawn
at midnight in a silver bowl, and brought to my hand with no word
spoken,' and after that she desired wine to be brought, 'but this,' she
said, 'must be borne hither in a flagon of gold at noon, and he who
brings it must sing as he comes,' and they did as they were bid, but
Tinwelint was not told.

Then said Tinúviel, 'Go now to my mother and say to her that her
daughter desires a spinning wheel to pass her weary hours,' but Dairon
secretly she begged fashion her a tiny []{#calibre_link-95
.calibre3}loom, and he did this even in the little house of Tinúviel in
the tree. 'But wherewith will you spin and wherewith weave?' said he;
and Tinúviel answered: 'With spells and magics,' but Dairon knew not her
design, nor said more to the king or to Gwendeling.

Now Tinúviel took the wine and water when she was alone, and singing a
very magic song the while, she mingled them together, and as they lay in
the bowl of gold she sang a song of growth, and as they lay in the bowl
of silver she sang another song, and the names of all the tallest and
longest things upon Earth were set in that song; the beards of the
Indravangs, the tail of Karkaras, the body of Glorund, the bole of
Hirilorn, and the sword of Nan she named, nor did she forget the chain
Angainu that Aulë and Tulkas made or the neck of Gilim the giant, and
last and longest of all she spake of the hair of Uinen the lady of the
sea that is spread through all the waters. Then did she lave her head
with the mingled water and wine, and as she did so she sang a third
song, a song of uttermost sleep, and the hair of Tinúviel which was dark
and finer than the most delicate threads of twilight began suddenly to
grow very fast indeed, and after twelve hours had passed it nigh filled
the little room, and then Tinúviel was very pleased and she lay down to
rest; and when she awoke the room was full as with a black mist and she
was deep hidden under it, and lo! her hair was trailing out of the
windows and blowing about the tree boles in the morning. Then with
difficulty she found her little shears and cut the threads of that
growth nigh to her head, and after that her hair grew only as it was
wont before.

Then was the labour of Tinúviel begun, and though she laboured with the
deftness of an Elf long was the spinning and longer weaving still, and
did any come and hail her from below she bid them be gone, saying: 'I am
abed, and desire only to sleep,' and Dairon was much amazed, and called
often up to her, but she did not answer.

Now of that cloudy hair Tinúviel wove a robe of misty black soaked with
drowsiness more magical far than even that one that her mother had worn
and danced in long ago, and therewith she covered her garments of
shimmering white, and magic slumbers filled the air about her; but of
what remained she twisted a mighty strand, and this she fastened to the
bole of the tree within her house, and then was her labour ended, and
she looked out of her window westward to the river. Already the sunlight
was fading in the trees, and as dusk filled the woods she began a song
very soft and low, and as she sang she cast out her long hair from the
window so that its slumbrous mist touched the heads and faces of the
guards below, and they listening to her voice fell suddenly into a
fathomless sleep. Then did Tinúviel clad in her garments of darkness
slip down that rope of hair light as a squirrel, and away she danced to
the bridge, and before the bridgewards could cry out she was among them
dancing; and as the hem of her black robe touched them they fell asleep,
and Tinúviel fled very far away as fast as her dancing feet would flit.

Now when the escape of Tinúviel reached the ears of Tinwelint great was
his mingled grief and wrath, and all his court was in uproar, and all
the woods ringing with the search, but Tinúviel was already far away
drawing nigh to the gloomy foothills where the Mountains of Night begin;
and []{#calibre_link-54 .calibre3}'tis said that Dairon following after
her became utterly lost, and came never back to Elfinesse, but turned
towards Palisor, and there plays subtle magic musics still, wistful and
lonely in the woods and forests of the south.

Yet ere long as Tinúviel went forward a sudden dread overtook her at the
thought of what she had dared to do and what lay before; then did she
turn back for a while, and she wept, wishing Dairon were with her, and
it is said that he indeed was not far off, but was wandering lost in the
great pines, the Forest of Night, where afterward Túrin slew Beleg by
mishap.

Nigh was Tinúviel now to those places, but she entered not that dark
region, and regaining heart pressed on, and by reason of the greater
magic of her being and because of the spell of wonder and of sleep that
fared about her no such dangers assailed her as did Beren before; yet
was it a long and evil and weary journey for a maiden to tread.

Now is it to be told that in those days Tevildo had but one trouble in
the world, and that was the kindred of the Dogs. Many indeed of these
were neither friends nor foes of the Cats, for they had become subject
to Melko and were as savage and cruel as any of his animals; indeed from
the most cruel and most savage he bred the race of wolves, and they were
very dear indeed to him. Was it not the great grey wolf Karkaras
Knife-fang, father of wolves, who guarded the gates of Angamandi in
those days and long had done so? Many were there however who would
neither bow to Melko nor live wholly in fear of him, but dwelt either in
the dwellings of Men and guarded them from much evil that had otherwise
befallen them, or roamed the woods of Hisilómë or passing the
mountainous places fared even at times into the region of Artanor and
the lands beyond and to the south.

Did ever any of these view Tevildo or any of his thanes or subjects,
then there was a great baying and a mighty chase, and albeit seldom was
any cat slain by reason of their skill in climbing and in hiding and
because of the protecting might of Melko, yet was great enmity between
them, and some of those hounds were held in dread among the cats. None
however did Tevildo fear, for he was as strong as any among them, and
more agile and more swift save only than Huan Captain of Dogs. So swift
was Huan that on a time he had tasted the fur of Tevildo, and though
Tevildo had paid him for that with a gash from his great claws, yet was
the pride of the Prince of Cats unappeased and he lusted to do a great
harm to Huan of the Dogs.

Great therefore was the good fortune that befell Tinúviel in meeting
with Huan in the woods, although at first she was mortally afraid and
fled. But Huan overtook her in two leaps, and speaking soft and deep the
tongue of the Lost Elves he bid her be not afraid, and 'Wherefore,' said
he, 'do I see an Elven maiden, and one most fair, wandering alone so
nigh to the abodes of the Ainu of Evil? Knowest thou not that these are
very evil places to be in, little one, even with a companion, and they
are death to the lonely?'

'That know I,' said she, 'and I am not here for the love of wayfaring,
but I seek only Beren.'

'What knowest thou then,' said Huan, 'of Beren---or indeed meanest thou
Beren son of the huntsman of the Elves, Egnor bo-Rimion, a friend of
mine since very ancient days?'

[]{#calibre_link-152 .calibre3}'Nay, I know not even whether my Beren be
thy friend, for I seek only Beren from beyond the Bitter Hills, whom I
knew in the woods near to my father's home. Now is he gone, and my
mother Gwendeling says of her wisdom that he is a thrall in the cruel
house of Tevildo Prince of Cats; and whether this be true or yet worse
be now befallen him I do not know, and I go to discover him---though
plan I have none.'

'Then will I make thee one,' said Huan, 'but do thou trust in me, for I
am Huan of the Dogs, chief foe of Tevildo. Rest thee now with me a while
within the shadows of the wood, and I will think deeply.'

Then Tinúviel did as he said, and indeed she slept long while Huan
watched, for she was very weary. But after a while awakening she said:
'Lo, I have tarried over long. Come, what is thy thought, O Huan?'

And Huan said: 'A dark and difficult matter is this, and no other rede
can I devise but this. Creep now if thou hast the heart to the abiding
place of that Prince while the sun is high, and Tevildo and the most of
his household drowze upon the terraces before his gates. There discover
in what manner thou mayst whether Beren be indeed within, as thy mother
said to thee. Now I will lie not far hence in the woods, and thou wilt
do me a pleasure and aid thy own desires if going before Tevildo, be
Beren there or be he not, thou tellest him how thou hast stumbled upon
Huan of the Dogs lying sick in the woods at this place. Do not indeed
direct him hither, for thou must guide him, if it may be, thyself. Then
wilt thou see what I contrive for thee and for Tevildo. Methinks that
bearing such tidings Tevildo []{#calibre_link-122 .calibre3}will not
entreat thee ill within his halls nor seek to hold thee there.'

In this way did Huan design both to do Tevildo a hurt, or perchance if
it might so be to slay him, and to aid Beren whom he guessed in truth to
be that Beren son of Egnor whom the hounds of Hisilómë loved. Indeed
hearing the name of Gwendeling and knowing thereby that this maiden was
a princess of the woodland fairies he was eager to aid her, and his
heart warmed to her sweetness.

Now Tinúviel taking heart stole near to the halls of Tevildo, and Huan
wondered much at her courage, following unknown to her, as far as he
might for the success of his design. At length however she passed beyond
his sight, and leaving the shelter of the trees came to a region of long
grass dotted with bushes that sloped ever upward toward a shoulder of
the hills. Now upon that rocky spur the sun shone, but over all the
hills and mountains at its back a black cloud brooded, for there was
Angamandi; and Tinúviel fared on not daring to look up at that gloom,
for fear oppressed her, and as she went the ground rose and the grass
grew more scant and rock-strewn until it came even to a cliff, sheer of
one side, and there upon a stony shelf was the castle of Tevildo. No
pathway led thereto, and the place where it stood fell towards the woods
in terrace after terrace so that none might reach its gates save by many
great leaps, and those became ever steeper as the castle drew more nigh.
Few were the windows of that house and upon the ground there were
none---indeed the very gate was in the air where in the dwellings of Men
are wont to be the windows of the upper []{#calibre_link-124
.calibre3}floor; but the roof had many wide and flat spaces open to the
sun.

Now does Tinúviel wander disconsolate upon the lowest terrace and look
in dread at the dark house upon the hill, when behold, she came at a
bend in the rock upon a lone cat lying in the sun and seemingly asleep.
As she approached he opened a yellow eye and blinked at her, and
thereupon rising and stretching he stepped up to her and said: 'Whither
away, little maid---dost not know that you trespass on the sunning
ground of his highness Tevildo and his thanes?'

Now Tinúviel was very much afraid, but she made as bold an answer as she
was able, saying: 'That know I not, my lord'---and this pleased the old
cat greatly, for he was in truth only Tevildo's doorkeeper---'but I
would indeed of your goodness be brought to Tevildo's presence
now---nay, even if he sleeps,' said she, for the doorkeeper lashed his
tail in astonished refusal.

'I have words of immediate import for his private ear. Lead me to him,
my lord,' she pleaded, and thereat the cat purred so loudly that she
dared to stroke his ugly head, and this was much larger than her own,
being greater than that of any dog that is now on Earth. Thus entreated,
Umuiyan, for such was his name, said: 'Come then with me,' and seizing
Tinúviel suddenly by her garments at the shoulder to her great terror he
tossed her upon his back and leaped upon the second terrace. There he
stopped, and as Tinúviel scrambled from his back he said: 'Well is it
for thee that this afternoon my lord Tevildo lieth upon this lowly
terrace far from his house, for a great weariness and a desire for sleep
has come upon me, so that I fear me I should not be willing to carry
thee much farther'; now Tinúviel was robed in her robe of sable mist.

So saying Umuiyan yawned mightily and stretched himself before he led
her along that terrace to an open space, where upon a wide couch of
baking stones lay the horrible form of Tevildo himself, and both his
evil eyes were shut. Going up to him the door-cat Umuiyan spoke in his
ear softly, saying: 'A maiden awaits thy pleasure, my lord, who hath
news of importance to deliver to thee, nor would she take my refusal.'
Then did Tevildo angrily lash his tail, half opening an eye---'What is
it---be swift,' said he, 'for this is no hour to come desiring audience
of Tevildo Prince of Cats.'

'Nay, lord,' said Tinúviel trembling, 'be not angry; nor do I think that
thou wilt when thou hearest, yet is the matter such that it were better
not even whispered here where the breezes blow,' and Tinúviel cast a
glance as it were of apprehension toward the woods.

'Nay, get thee gone,' said Tevildo, 'thou smellest of dog, and what news
of good came ever to a cat from a fairy that had had dealings with the
dogs?'

'Why, sir, that I smell of dogs is no matter of wonder, for I have just
escaped from one---and it is indeed of a certain very mighty dog whose
name thou knowest that I would speak.' Then up sat Tevildo and opened
his eyes, and he looked all about him, and stretched three times, and at
last bade the door-cat lead Tinúviel within; and Umuiyan caught her upon
his back as before. Now was Tinúviel in the sorest dread, for having
gained what she desired, a chance of entering Tevildo's stronghold and
maybe of discovering whether Beren were there, she had no plan more, and
knew not what would become of her---indeed had she been able she would
have fled; yet now do those cats begin to ascend the terraces towards
the castle, and one leap does Umuiyan make bearing Tinúviel upwards and
then another, and at the third he stumbled so that Tinúviel cried out in
fear, and Tevildo said: 'What ails thee, Umuiyan, thou clumsy-foot? It
is time that thou left my employ if age creeps on thee so swiftly.' But
Umuiyan said: 'Nay, lord, I know not what it is, but a mist is before my
eyes and my head is heavy,' and he staggered as one drunk, so that
Tinúviel slid from his back, and thereupon he laid him down as if in a
dead sleep; but Tevildo was wroth and seized Tinúviel and none too
gently, and himself bore her to the gates. Then with a mighty leap he
sprang within, and bidding that maiden alight he set up a yell that
echoed fearsomely in the dark ways and passages. Forthwith they hastened
to him from within, and some he bid descend to Umuiyan and bind him and
cast him from the rocks 'on the northern side where they fall most
sheer, for he is of no use more to me,' he said, 'for his age has robbed
him of his sureness of foot'; and Tinúviel quaked to hear the
ruthlessness of this beast. But even as he spoke he himself yawned and
stumbled as with a sudden drowziness, and he bid others to lead Tinúviel
away to a certain chamber within, and that was the one where Tevildo was
accustomed to sit at meat with his greatest thanes. It was full of bones
and smelt evilly; no windows were there and but one door; but a hatchway
gave from it upon the great kitchens, and a red light crept thence and
dimly lit the place.

Now so adread was Tinúviel when those catfolk left her
[]{#calibre_link-48 .calibre3}there that she stood a moment unable to
stir, but soon becoming used to the darkness she looked about and
espying the hatchway that had a wide sill she sprang thereto, for it was
not over high and she was a nimble Elf. Now gazing therethrough, for it
was ajar, she saw the wide vaulted kitchens and the great fires that
burnt there, and those that toiled always within, and the most were
cats---but behold, there by a great fire stooped Beren, and he was
grimed with labour, and Tinúviel sat and wept, but as yet dared nothing.
Indeed even as she sat the harsh voice of Tevildo sounded suddenly
within that chamber: 'Nay, where then in Melko's name has that mad Elf
fled,' and Tinúviel hearing shrank against the wall, but Tevildo caught
sight of her where she was perched and cried: 'Then the little bird
sings not any more; come down or I must fetch thee, for behold, I will
not encourage the Elves to seek audience of me in mockery.'

::: {#calibre_link-27 .centered-image1}
![](images/000027.jpg){.calibre17}
:::

Then partly in fear, and part in hope that her clear voice might carry
even to Beren, Tinúviel began suddenly to speak very loud and to tell
her tale so that the chambers rang; but 'Hush, dear maiden,' said
Tevildo, 'if the matter were secret without it is not one for bawling
within.' Then said Tinúviel: 'Speak not thus to me, O cat, mighty Lord
of Cats though thou be, for am I not Tinúviel Princess of Fairies that
have stepped out of my way to do thee a pleasure?' Now at those words,
and she had shouted them even louder than before, a great crash was
heard in the kitchens as of a number of vessels of metal and earthenware
let suddenly fall, but Tevildo snarled: 'There trippeth that fool Beren
the Elf. Melko rid me of such folk'---yet Tinúviel, guessing that Beren
had heard []{#calibre_link-123 .calibre3}and been smitten with
astonishment, put aside her fears and repented her daring no longer.
Tevildo nonetheless was very wroth at her haughty words, and had he not
been minded first to discover what good he might get from her tale, it
had fared ill with Tinúviel straightway. Indeed from that moment she was
in great peril, for Melko and all his vassals held Tinwelint and his
folk as outlaws, and great was their joy to ensnare them and cruelly
entreat them, so that much favour would Tevildo have gained had he taken
Tinúviel before his lord. Indeed, so soon as she named herself, this did
he purpose to do when his own business had been done, but of a truth his
wits were drowzed that day, and he forgot to marvel more why Tinúviel
sat perched upon the sill of the hatchway; nor did he think more of
Beren, for his mind was bent only to the tale Tinúviel bore to him.
Wherefore said he, dissembling his evil mood, 'Nay, Lady, be not angry,
but come, delay whetteth my desire---what is it that thou hast for my
ears, for they twitch already.'

But Tinúviel said: 'There is a great beast, rude and violent, and his
name is Huan'---and at that name, Tevildo's back curved, and his hair
bristled and crackled, and the light of his eyes was red---'and', she
went on, 'it seems to me a shame that such a brute be suffered to infect
the woods so nigh even to the abode of the powerful Prince of Cats, my
lord Tevildo'; but Tevildo said: 'Nor is he suffered, and cometh never
there save it be by stealth.'

'Howso that may be,' said Tinúviel, 'there he is now, yet methinks that
at last may his life be brought utterly to an end; for lo, as I was
going through the woods I saw where a great animal lay upon the ground
moaning as in sickness---and behold, it was Huan, and some evil spell or
malady has him in its grip, and still he lies helpless in a dale not a
mile westward in the woods from this hall. Now with this perhaps I would
not have troubled your ears, had not the brute when I approached to
succour him snarled upon me and essayed to bite me, and meseems that
such a creature deserves whatever come to him.'

Now all this that Tinúviel spake was a great lie in whose devising Huan
had guided her, and maidens of the Eldar are not wont to fashion lies;
yet have I never heard that any of the Eldar blamed her therein nor
Beren afterward, and neither do I, for Tevildo was an evil cat and Melko
the wickedest of all beings, and Tinúviel was in dire peril at their
hands. Tevildo however, himself a great and skilled liar, was so deeply
versed in the lies and subtleties of all the beasts and creatures that
he seldom knew whether to believe what was said to him or not, and was
wont to disbelieve all things save those he wished to believe true, and
so was he often deceived by the more honest. Now the story of Huan and
his helplessness so pleased him that he was fain to believe it true, and
determined at least to test it; yet at first he feigned indifference,
saying this was a small matter for such secrecy and might have been
spoken outside without further ado. But Tinúviel said she had not
thought that Tevildo Prince of Cats needed to learn that the ears of
Huan heard the slightest sounds a league away, and the voice of a cat
further than any sound else.

Now therefore Tevildo sought to discover from Tinúviel under pretence of
mistrusting her tale where exactly Huan might be found, but she made
only vague answers, seeing in this her only hope of escaping from the
castle, and at length Tevildo, overcome by curiosity and threatening
evil things if she should prove false, summoned two of his thanes to
him, and one was Oikeroi, a fierce and warlike cat. Then did the three
set out with Tinúviel from that place, but Tinúviel took off her magical
garment of black and folded it, so that for all its size and density it
appeared no more than the smallest kerchief (for so was she able), and
thus was she borne down the terraces upon the back of Oikeroi without
mishap, and no drowziness assailed her bearer. Now crept they through
the woods in the direction she had named, and soon does Tevildo smell
dog and bristles and lashes his great tail, but after he climbs a lofty
tree and looks down from thence into that dale that Tinúviel had shown
to them. There he does indeed see the great form of Huan lying prostrate
groaning and moaning, and he comes down in much glee and haste, and
indeed in his eagerness he forgets Tinúviel, who now in great fear for
Huan lies hidden in a bank of fern. The design of Tevildo and his two
companions was to enter that dale silently from different quarters and
so come all suddenly upon Huan unawares and slay him, or if he were too
stricken to make fight to make sport of him and torment him. This did
they now, but even as they leapt out upon him Huan sprang up into the
air with a mighty baying, and his jaws closed in the back close to the
neck of that cat Oikeroi, and Oikeroi died; but the other thane fled
howling up a great tree, and so was Tevildo left alone face to face with
Huan, and such an encounter was not much to his mind, yet was Huan upon
him too swiftly for flight, and they fought fiercely in that glade, and
the noise that Tevildo made was very hideous; but at length Huan had him
by the throat, and that cat might well have perished had not his claws
as he struck out blindly pierced Huan's eye. Then did Huan give tongue,
and Tevildo screeching fearsomely got himself loose with a great wrench
and leapt up a tall and smooth tree that stood by, even as his companion
had done. Despite his grievous hurt Huan now leaps beneath that tree
baying mightily, and Tevildo curses him and casts evil words upon him
from above.

Then said Huan: 'Lo, Tevildo, these are the words of Huan whom thou
thoughtest to catch and slay helpless as the miserable mice it is thy
wont to hunt---stay for ever up thy lonely tree and bleed to death of
thy wounds, or come down and feel again my teeth. But if neither are to
thy liking, then tell me where is Tinúviel Princess of Fairies and Beren
son of Egnor, for these are my friends. Now these shall be set as ransom
against thee---though it be valuing thee far over thy worth.'

'As for that cursed Elf, she lies whimpering in the ferns yonder, an my
ears mistake not,' said Tevildo, 'and Beren methinks is being soundly
scratched by Miaulë my cook in the kitchens of my castle for his
clumsiness there an hour ago.'

'Then let them be given to me in safety,' said Huan, 'and thou mayest
return thyself to thy halls and lick thyself unharmed.'

'Of a surety my thane who is here with me shall fetch them for thee,'
said Tevildo, but growled Huan: 'Ay, and fetch also all thy tribe and
hosts of the Orcs and the plagues of Melko. []{#calibre_link-51
.calibre3}Nay, I am no fool; rather shalt thou give Tinúviel a token and
she shall fetch Beren, or thou shalt stay here if thou likest not the
other way.' Then was Tevildo forced to cast down his golden collar---a
token no cat dare dishonour, but Huan said: 'Nay, more yet is needed,
for this will arouse all thy folk to seek thee,' and this Tevildo knew
and had hoped. So was it that in the end weariness and hunger and fear
prevailed upon that proud cat, a prince of the service of Melko, to
reveal the secret of the cats and the spell that Melko had entrusted to
him; and those were words of magic whereby the stones of his evil house
were held together, and whereby he held all beasts of the catfolk under
his sway, filling them with an evil power beyond their nature; for long
has it been said that Tevildo was an evil fay in beastlike shape. When
therefore he had told it Huan laughed till the woods rang, for he knew
that the days of the power of the cats were over.

Now sped Tinúviel with the golden collar of Tevildo back to the lowest
terrace before the gates, and standing she spake the spell in her clear
voice. Then behold, the air was filled with the voices of cats and the
house of Tevildo shook; and there came therefrom a host of indwellers
and they were shrunk to puny size and were afeared of Tinúviel, who
waving the collar of Tevildo spake before them certain of the words that
Tevildo had said in her hearing to Huan, and they cowered before her.
But she said: 'Lo, let all those of the folk of the Elves or of the
children of Men that are bound within these halls be brought forth,' and
behold, Beren was brought forth, but of other thralls there were none,
save only Gimli, an aged Gnome, bent in thraldom and grown blind, but
whose hearing was the keenest that has been in the world, as all songs
say. Gimli came leaning upon a stick and Beren aided him, but Beren was
clad in rags and haggard, and he had in his hand a great knife he had
caught up in the kitchen, fearing some new ill when the house shook and
all the voices of the cats were heard; but when he beheld Tinúviel
standing amid the host of cats that shrank from her and saw the great
collar of Tevildo, then was he amazed utterly, and knew not what to
think. But Tinúviel was very glad, and spoke saying: 'O Beren from
beyond the Bitter Hills, wilt thou now dance with me---but let it not be
here.' And she led Beren far away, and all those cats set up a howling
and wailing, so that Huan and Tevildo heard it in the woods, but none
followed or molested them, for they were afraid, and the magic of Melko
was fallen from them.

This indeed they rued afterward when Tevildo returned home followed by
his trembling comrade, for Tevildo's wrath was terrible, and he lashed
his tail and dealt blows at all who stood nigh. Now Huan of the dogs,
though it might seem a folly, when Beren and Tinúviel came to that glade
had suffered that evil Prince to return without further war, but the
great collar of gold he had set about his own neck, and at this was
Tevildo more angry than all else, for a great magic of strength and
power lay therein. Little to Huan's liking was it that Tevildo lived
still, but now no longer did he fear the cats, and that tribe has fled
before the dogs ever since, and the dogs hold them still in scorn since
the humbling of Tevildo in the woods nigh Angamandi; and Huan has not
done any greater deed. Indeed afterward Melko heard all and he cursed
Tevildo and his folk and banished them, nor have they since that day had
lord or master or any friend, and their voices wail and screech for
their hearts are very lonely and bitter and full of loss, yet there is
only darkness therein and no kindliness.

At the time however whereof the tale tells it was Tevildo's chief desire
to recapture Beren and Tinúviel and to slay Huan, that he might regain
the spell and magic he had lost, for he was in great fear of Melko, and
he dared not seek his master's aid and reveal his defeat and the
betrayal of his spell. Unwitting of this Huan feared those places, and
was in great dread lest those doings come swiftly to Melko's ear, as did
most things that came to pass in the world; wherefore now Tinúviel and
Beren wandered far away with Huan, and they became great in friendship
with him, and in that life Beren grew strong again and his thraldom fell
from him, and Tinúviel loved him.

Yet wild and rugged and very lonely were those days, for never a face of
Elf or of Man did they see, and Tinúviel grew at last to long sorely for
Gwendeling her mother and the songs of sweet magic she was used to sing
to her children as twilight fell in the woodlands by their ancient
halls. Often she half fancied she heard the flute of Dairon her brother,
in pleasant glades wherein they sojourned, and her heart grew heavy. At
length she said to Beren and to Huan: 'I must return home,' and now is
it Beren's heart that is overcast with sorrow, for he loved that life in
the woods with the dogs (for by now many others had become joined to
Huan), yet not if Tinúviel were not there.

Nonetheless said he: 'Never may I go back with thee to the land of
Artanor---nor come there ever after to seek thee, []{#calibre_link-49
.calibre3}sweet Tinúviel, save only bearing a Silmaril; nor may that
ever now be achieved, for am I not a fugitive from the very halls of
Melko, and in danger of the most evil pains do any of his servants spy
me.' Now this he said in the grief of his heart at parting with
Tinúviel, and she was torn in mind, abiding not the thought of leaving
Beren nor yet of living ever thus in exile. So sat she a great while in
sad thought and she spoke not, but Beren sat nigh and at length said:
'Tinúviel, one thing only can we do---go get a Silmaril'; and she sought
thereupon Huan, asking his aid and advice, but he was very grave and saw
nothing but folly in the matter. Yet in the end Tinúviel begged of him
the fell of Oikeroi that he slew in the affray of the glade; now Oikeroi
was a very mighty cat and Huan carried that fell with him as a trophy.

Now doth Tinúviel put forth her skill and fairy-magic, and she sews
Beren into this fell and makes him to the likeness of a great cat, and
she teaches him how to sit and sprawl, to step and bound and trot in the
semblance of a cat, till Huan's very whiskers bristled at the sight, and
thereat Beren and Tinúviel laughed. Never however could Beren learn to
screech or wail or to purr like any cat that ever walked, nor could
Tinúviel awaken a glow in the dead eyes of the catskin---'but we must
put up with that,' said she, 'and thou hast the air of a very noble cat
if thou but hold thy tongue.'

Then did they bid farewell to Huan and set out for the halls of Melko by
easy journeys, for Beren was in great discomfort and heat within the fur
of Oikeroi, and Tinúviel's heart became lighter awhile than it had been
for long, and she stroked Beren or pulled his tail, and Beren was angry
because []{#calibre_link-162 .calibre3}he could not lash it in answer as
fiercely as he wished. At length however they drew near to Angamandi, as
indeed the rumblings and deep noises, and the sound of mighty hammerings
of ten thousand smiths labouring unceasingly, declared to them. Nigh
were the sad chambers where the thrall-Noldoli laboured bitterly under
the Orcs and goblins of the hills, and here the gloom and darkness was
great so that their hearts fell, but Tinúviel arrayed her once more in
her dark garment of deep sleep. Now the gates of Angamandi were of iron
wrought hideously and set with knives and spikes, and before them lay
the greatest wolf the world has ever seen, even Karkaras Knife-fang who
had never slept; and Karkaras growled when he saw Tinúviel approach, but
of the cat he took not much heed, for he thought little of cats and they
were ever passing in and out.

'Growl not, O Karkaras,' said she, 'for I go to seek my lord Melko, and
this thane of Tevildo goeth with me as escort.' Now the dark robe veiled
all her shimmering beauty, and Karkaras was not much troubled in mind,
yet nonetheless he approached as was his wont to snuff the air of her,
and the sweet fragrance of the Eldar that garment might not hide.
Therefore straightway did Tinúviel begin a magic dance, and the black
strands of her dark veil she cast in his eyes so that his legs shook
with a drowziness and he rolled over and was asleep. But not until he
was fast in dreams of great chases in the woods of Hisilómë when he was
yet a whelp did Tinúviel cease, and then did those twain enter that
black portal, and winding down many shadowy ways they stumbled at length
into the very presence of Melko.

In that gloom Beren passed well enough as a very thane of Tevildo, and
indeed Oikeroi had aforetime been much about the halls of Melko, so that
none heeded him and he slunk under the very chair of the Ainu unseen,
but the adders and evil things there lying set him in great fear so that
he durst not move.

Now all this fell out most fortunately, for had Tevildo been with Melko
their deceit would have been discovered---and indeed of that danger they
had thought, not knowing that Tevildo sat now in his halls and knew not
what to do should his discomfiture become noised in Angamandi; but
behold, Melko espieth Tinúviel and saith: 'Who art thou that flittest
about my halls like a bat? How camest thou in, for of a surety thou dost
not belong here?'

'Nay, that I do not yet,' saith Tinúviel, 'though I may perchance
hereafter, of thy goodness, my lord Melko. Knowest thou not that I am
Tinúviel daughter of Tinwelint the outlaw, and he hath driven me from
his halls, for he is an overbearing Elf and I give not my love at his
command.'

Now in truth was Melko amazed that the daughter of Tinwelint came thus
of her free will to his dwelling, Angamandi the terrible, and suspecting
something untoward he asked what was her desire: 'for knowest thou not,'
saith he, 'that there is no love here for thy father or his folk, nor
needest thou hope for soft words and good cheer from me.'

'So hath my father said,' saith she, 'but wherefore need I believe him?
Behold, I have a skill of subtle dances, and I would dance now before
you, my lord, for then methinks I might readily be granted some humble
corner of your halls wherein to dwell until such times as you should
call for the little dancer Tinúviel to lighten your cares.'

'Nay,' saith Melko, 'such things are little to my mind; but as thou hast
come thus far to dance, dance, and after we will see,' and with that he
leered horribly, for his dark mind pondered some evil.

Then did Tinúviel begin such a dance as neither she nor any other sprite
or fay or elf danced ever before or has done since, and after a while
even Melko's gaze was held in wonder. Round the hall she fared, swift as
a swallow, noiseless as a bat, magically beautiful as only Tinúviel ever
was, and now she was at Melko's side, now before him, now behind, and
her misty draperies touched his face and waved before his eyes, and the
folk that sat about the walls or stood in that place were whelmed one by
one in sleep, falling down into deep dreams of all that their ill hearts
desired.

Beneath his chair the adders lay like stones, and the wolves before his
feet yawned and slumbered, and Melko gazed on enchanted, but he did not
sleep. Then began Tinúviel to dance a yet swifter dance before his eyes,
and even as she danced she sang in a voice very low and wonderful a song
which Gwendeling had taught her long ago, a song that the youths and
maidens sang beneath the cypresses of the gardens of Lórien when the
Tree of Gold had waned and Silpion was gleaming. The voices of
nightingales were in it, and many subtle odours seemed to fill the air
of that noisome place as she trod the floor lightly as a feather in the
wind; nor has any voice or sight of such beauty ever again been seen
there, and Ainu Melko for all his power and majesty succumbed to the
[]{#calibre_link-159 .calibre3}magic of that Elf-maid, and indeed even
the eyelids of Lórien had grown heavy had he been there to see. Then did
Melko fall forward drowzed, and sank at last in utter sleep down from
his chair upon the floor, and his iron crown rolled away.

Suddenly Tinúviel ceased. In the hall no sound was heard save of
slumbrous breath; even Beren slept beneath the very seat of Melko, but
Tinúviel shook him so that he awoke at last. Then in fear and trembling
he tore asunder his disguise and freeing himself from it leapt to his
feet. Now does he draw that knife that he had from Tevildo's kitchens
and he seizes the mighty iron crown, but Tinúviel could not move it and
scarcely might the thews of Beren avail to turn it. Great is the frenzy
of their fear as in that dark hall of sleeping evil Beren labours as
noiselessly as may be to prise out a Silmaril with his knife. Now does
he loosen the great central jewel and the sweat pours from his brow, but
even as he forces it from the crown lo! his knife snaps with a loud
crack.

Tinúviel smothers a cry thereat and Beren springs away with the one
Silmaril in his hand, and the sleepers stir and Melko groans as though
ill thoughts disturbed his dreams, and a black look comes upon his
sleeping face. Content now with that one flashing gem those twain fled
desperately from the hall, stumbling wildly down many dark passages till
from the glimmering of grey light they knew they neared the gates---and
behold! Karkaras lies across the threshold, awake once more and
watchful.

Straightway Beren thrust himself before Tinúviel although she said him
nay, and this proved in the end ill, for Tinúviel had not time to cast
her spell of slumber over the beast again, []{#calibre_link-65
.calibre3}ere seeing Beren he bared his teeth and growled angrily.
'Wherefore this surliness, Karkaras?' said Tinúviel. 'Wherefore this
Gnome who entered not and yet now issueth in haste?' quoth Knife-fang,
and with that he leapt upon Beren, who struck straight between the
wolf's eyes with his fist, catching for his throat with the other hand.

Then Karkaras seized that hand in his dreadful jaws, and it was the hand
wherein Beren clasped the blazing Silmaril, and both hand and jewel
Karkaras bit off and took into his red maw. Great was the agony of Beren
and the fear and anguish of Tinúviel, yet even as they expect to feel
the teeth of the wolf a new thing strange and terrible comes to pass.
Behold now that Silmaril blazeth with a white and hidden fire of its own
nature and is possessed of a fierce and holy magic---for did it not come
from Valinor and the blessed realms, being fashioned with spells of the
Gods and Gnomes before evil came there; and it doth not tolerate the
touch of evil flesh or of unholy hand. Now cometh it into the foul body
of Karkaras, and suddenly that beast is burnt with a terrible anguish
and the howling of his pain is ghastly to hear as it echoeth in those
rocky ways, so that all the sleeping court within awakes. Then did
Tinúviel and Beren flee like the wind from the gates, yet was Karkaras
far before them raging and in madness as a beast pursued by Balrogs; and
after when they might draw breath Tinúviel wept over the maimed arm of
Beren kissing it often, so that behold it bled not, and pain left it,
and was healed by the tender healing of her love; yet was Beren ever
after surnamed among all folk Ermabwed the One-handed, which in the
language of the Lonely Isle is Elmavoitë.

[]{#calibre_link-52 .calibre3}Now however must they bethink them of
escape---if such may be their fortune, and Tinúviel wrapped part of her
dark mantle about Beren, and so for a while flitting by dusk and dark
amid the hills they were seen by none, albeit Melko had raised all his
Orcs of terror against them; and his fury at the rape of that jewel was
greater than the Elves had ever seen it yet.

Even so it seems soon to them that the net of hunters drew ever more
tightly upon them, and though they had reached the edge of the more
familiar woods and passed the glooms of the forest of Taurfuin, still
were there many leagues of peril yet to pass between them and the
caverns of the king, and even did they reach ever there it seemed like
they would but draw the chase behind them thither and Melko's hate upon
all that woodland folk. So great indeed was the hue and cry that Huan
learnt of it far away, and he marvelled much at the daring of those
twain, and still more that ever they had escaped from Angamandi.

Now goes he with many dogs through the woods hunting Orcs and thanes of
Tevildo, and many hurts he got thus, and many of them he slew or put to
fear and flight, until one even at dusk the Valar brought him to a glade
in that northward region of Artanor that was called afterward Nan
Dumgorthin, the land of the dark idols, but that is a matter that
concerns not this tale. Howbeit it was even then a dark land and gloomy
and foreboding, and dread wandered beneath its lowering trees no less
even than in Taurfuin; and those two Elves Tinúviel and Beren were lying
therein weary and without hope, and Tinúviel wept but Beren was
fingering his knife.

Now when Huan saw them he would not suffer them to speak or to tell any
of their tale, but straightway took Tinúviel upon his mighty back and
bade Beren run as best he could beside him, 'for,' said he, 'a great
company of the Orcs are drawing swiftly hither, and wolves are their
trackers and their scouts.' Now doth Huan's pack run about them, and
they go very swiftly along quick and secret paths towards the homes of
the folk of Tinwelint far away. Thus was it that they eluded the host of
their enemies, but had nonetheless many an encounter afterward with
wandering things of evil, and Beren slew an Orc that came nigh to
dragging off Tinúviel, and that was a good deed. Seeing then that the
hunt still pressed them close, once more did Huan lead them by winding
ways, and dared not yet straightly to bring them to the land of the
woodland fairies. So cunning however was his leading that at last after
many days the chase fell far away, and no longer did they see or hear
anything of the bands of Orcs; no goblins waylaid them nor did the
howling of any evil wolves come upon the airs at night, and belike that
was because already they had stepped within the circle of Gwendeling's
magic that hid the paths from evil and kept harm from the regions of the
woodelves.

Then did Tinúviel breathe freely once more as she had not done since she
fled from her father's halls, and Beren rested in the sun far from the
glooms of Angband until the last bitterness of thraldom left him.
Because of the light falling through green leaves and the whisper of
clean winds and the song of birds once more are they wholly unafraid.

[]{#calibre_link-114 .calibre3}At last came there nevertheless a day
whereon waking out of a deep slumber Beren started up as one who leaves
a dream of happy things coming suddenly to his mind, and he said:
'Farewell, O Huan, most trusty comrade, and thou, little Tinúviel, whom
I love, fare thee well. This only I beg of thee, get thee now straight
to the safety of thy home, and may good Huan lead thee. But I---lo, I
must away into the solitude of the woods, for I have lost that Silmaril
which I had, and never dare I draw near to Angamandi more, wherefore
neither will I enter the halls of Tinwelint.' Then he wept to himself,
but Tinúviel who was nigh and had hearkened to his musing came beside
him and said; 'Nay, now is my heart changed, and if thou dwellest in the
woods, O Beren Ermabwed, then so will I, and if thou wilt wander in the
wild places there will I wander also, or with thee or after thee:---yet
never shall my father see me again save only if thou takest me to him.'
Then indeed was Beren glad of her sweet words, and fain would he have
dwelt with her as a huntsman of the wild, but his heart smote him for
all that she had suffered for him, and for her he put away his pride.
Indeed she reasoned with him, saying it would be folly to be stubborn,
and that her father would greet them with nought but joy, being glad to
see his daughter yet alive---'and maybe,' said she, 'he will have shame
that his jesting has given thy fair hand to the jaws of Karkaras.' But
Huan also she implored to return with them a space, for 'my father owes
thee a very great reward, O Huan,' saith she, 'an he loves his daughter
at all.'

So came it that those three set forward once again together, and came at
last back to the woodlands that Tinúviel knew and loved nigh to the
dwellings of her folk and to the deep halls of her home. Yet even as
they approach they find fear and tumult among that people such as had
not been for a long age, and asking some that wept before their doors
they learned that ever since the day of Tinúviel's secret flight
ill-fortune had befallen them. Lo, the king had been distraught with
grief and had relaxed his ancient wariness and cunning; indeed his
warriors had been sent hither and thither deep into the unwholesome
woods searching for that maiden, and many had been slain or lost for
ever, and war there was with Melko's servants about all their northern
and eastern borders, so that the folk feared mightily lest that Ainu
upraise his strength and come utterly to crush them and Gwendeling's
magic have not the strength to withhold the numbers of the Orcs.
'Behold,' said they, 'now is the worst of all befallen, for long has
Queen Gwendeling sat aloof and smiled not nor spoken, looking as it were
to a great distance with haggard eyes, and the web of her magic has
blown thin about the woods, and the woods are dreary, for Dairon comes
not back, neither is his music heard ever in the glades. Behold now the
crown of all our evil tidings, for know that there has broken upon us
raging from the halls of Evil a great grey wolf filled with an evil
spirit, and he fares as though lashed by some hidden madness, and none
are safe. Already has he slain many as he runs wildly snapping and
yelling through the woods, so that the very banks of the stream that
flows before the king's halls has become a lurking-place of danger.
There comes the awful wolf oftentimes to drink, looking as the evil
Prince himself with bloodshot []{#calibre_link-53 .calibre3}eyes and
tongue lolling out, and never can he slake his desire for water as
though some inward fire devours him.'

Then was Tinúviel sad at the thought of the unhappiness that had come
upon her folk, and most of all was her heart bitter at the story of
Dairon, for of this she had not heard any murmur before. Yet could she
not wish Beren had come never to the lands of Artanor, and together they
made haste to Tinwelint; and already to the Elves of the wood it seemed
that the evil was at an end now that Tinúviel was come back among them
unharmed. Indeed they scarce had hoped for that.

In great gloom do they find King Tinwelint, yet suddenly is his sorrow
melted to tears of gladness, and Gwendeling sings again for joy when
Tinúviel enters there and casting away her raiment of dark mist she
stands before them in her pearly radiance of old. For a while all is
mirth and wonder in that hall, and yet at length the king turns his eyes
to Beren and says: 'So thou hast returned too---bringing a Silmaril,
beyond doubt, in recompense for all the ill thou hast wrought my land;
or an thou hast not, I know not wherefore thou art here.'

Then Tinúviel stamped her foot and cried so that the king and all about
him wondered at her new and fearless mood: 'For shame, my
father---behold, here is Beren the brave whom thy jesting drove into
dark places and foul captivity and the Valar alone saved from a bitter
death. Methinks 'twould rather befit a king of the Eldar to reward him
than revile him.'

'Nay,' said Beren, 'the king thy father hath the right. Lord,' said he,
'I have a Silmaril in my hand even now.'

'Show me then,' said the king in amaze.

[]{#calibre_link-125 .calibre3}'That I cannot,' said Beren, 'for my hand
is not here', and he held forth his maimed arm.

Then was the king's heart turned to him by reason of his stout and
courteous demeanour, and he bade Beren and Tinúviel relate to him all
that had befallen either of them, and he was eager to hearken, for he
did not fully comprehend the meaning of Beren's words. When however he
had heard all yet more was his heart turned to Beren, and he marvelled
at the love that had awakened in the heart of Tinúviel so that she had
done greater deeds and more daring than any of the warriors of his folk.

'Never again,' said he, 'O Beren I beg of thee, leave this court nor the
side of Tinúviel, for thou art a great Elf and thy name will ever be
great among the kindreds.' Yet Beren answered him proudly, and said:
'Nay, O King, I hold to my word and thine, and I will get thee that
Silmaril or ever I dwell in peace in thy halls.' And the king entreated
him to journey no more into the dark and unknown realms, but Beren said:
'No need is there thereof, for behold that jewel is even now nigh to thy
caverns,' and he made clear to Tinwelint that that beast that ravaged
his land was none other than Karkaras, the wolfward of Melko's
gates---and this was not known to all, but Beren knew it taught by Huan,
whose cunning in the reading of track and slot was greatest among all
the hounds, and therein are none of them unskilled. Huan indeed was with
Beren now in the halls, and when those twain spoke of a chase and a
great hunt he begged to be in that deed; and it was granted gladly. Now
do those three prepare themselves to harry that beast, that all the folk
be rid of the terror of []{#calibre_link-156 .calibre3}the wolf, and
Beren keep his word, bringing a Silmaril to shine once more in
Elfinesse. King Tinwelint himself led that chase, and Beren was beside
him, and Mablung the heavyhanded, chief of the king's thanes, leaped up
and grasped a spear---a mighty weapon captured in battle with the
distant Orcs---and with those three stalked Huan mightiest of dogs, but
others they would not take according to the desire of the king, who
said: 'Four is enough for the slaying even of the Hell-wolf'---but only
those who had seen knew how fearsome was that beast, nigh as large as a
horse among Men, and so great was the ardour of his breath that it
scorched whatsoever it touched. About the hour of sunrise they set
forth, and soon after Huan espied a new slot beside the stream, not far
from the king's doors, 'and,' quoth he, 'this is the print of Karkaras.'
Thereafter they followed that stream all day, and at many places its
banks were new-trampled and torn and the water of the pools that lay
about it was fouled as though some beasts possessed of madness had
rolled and fought there not long before.

Now sinks the sun and fades beyond the western trees and darkness is
creeping down from Hisilómë so that the light of the forest dies. Even
so they come to a place where the spoor swerves from the stream or
perchance is lost in its waters and Huan may no longer follow it; and
here therefore they encamp, sleeping in turns beside the stream, and the
early night wears away.

Suddenly in Beren's watch a sound of great terror leaped up from far
away---a howling as of seventy maddened wolves---then lo! the brushwood
cracks and saplings snap as the terror draweth near, and Beren knows
that Karkaras is upon them. Scarce had he time to rouse the others, and
they were but just sprung up and half-awake, when a great form loomed in
the wavering moonlight filtering there, and it was fleeing like one mad,
and its course was bent towards the water. Thereat Huan gave tongue, and
straightway the beast swerved aside towards them, and foam was dripping
from his jaws and a red light shining from his eyes, and his face was
marred with mingled terror and with wrath. No sooner did he leave the
trees than Huan rushed upon him fearless of heart, but he with a mighty
leap sprang right over that great dog, for all his fury was kindled
suddenly against Beren whom he recognized as he stood behind, and to his
dark mind it seemed that there was the cause of all his agony. Then
Beren thrust swiftly upward with a spear into his throat, and Huan leapt
again and had him by a hind leg, and Karkaras fell like a stone, for at
that same moment the king's spear found his heart, and his evil spirit
gushed forth and sped howling faintly as it fared over the dark hills to
Mandos; but Beren lay under him crushed beneath his weight. Now they
roll back that carcase and fall to cutting it open, but Huan licks
Beren's face whence blood is flowing. Soon is the truth of Beren's words
made clear, for the vitals of the wolf are half-consumed as though an
inner fire had long been smouldering there, and suddenly the night is
filled with a wondrous lustre, shot with pale and secret colours, as
Mablung draws forth the Silmaril. Then holding it out he said: 'Behold,
O King', but Tinwelint said: 'Nay, never will I handle it save only if
Beren give it to me.' But Huan said: 'and that seems likely never to be,
unless ye tend him swiftly, for methinks he is hurt sorely'; and Mablung
and the king were ashamed.

Therefore now they raised Beren gently up and tended him and washed him,
and he breathed, but he spoke not nor opened his eyes, and when the sun
arose and they had rested a little they bore him as softly as might be
upon a bier of boughs back through the woodlands; and nigh midday they
drew near the homes of the folk again, and then were they deadly weary,
and Beren had not moved nor spoken, but groaned thrice.

There did all the people flock to meet them when their approach was
noised among them, and some bore them meat and cool drinks and salves
and healing things for their hurts, and but for the harm that Beren had
met great indeed had been their joy. Now then they covered the leafy
boughs whereon he lay with soft raiment, and they bore him away to the
halls of the king, and there was Tinúviel awaiting them in great
distress; and she fell upon Beren's breast and wept and kissed him, and
he awoke and knew her, and after Mablung gave him that Silmaril, and he
lifted it above him gazing at its beauty, ere he said slowly and with
pain: 'Behold, O King, I give thee the wondrous jewel thou didst desire,
and it is but a little thing found by the wayside, for once methinks
thou hadst one beyond thought more beautiful, and she is now mine.' Yet
even as he spake the shadows of Mandos lay upon his face, and his spirit
fled in that hour to the margin of the world, and Tinúviel's tender
kisses called him not back.

\*

[]{#calibre_link-70 .calibre3}\[Here Vëannë suddenly ceased speaking,
but she wept, and after a while she said 'Nay, that is not all the tale;
but here endeth all that I rightly know'. In the conversation that
followed one Ausir said: 'I have heard that the magic of Tinúviel's
tender kisses healed Beren, and recalled his spirit from the gates of
Mandos, and long time he dwelt among the Lost Elves . . .'\]

But another said: 'Nay, that was not so, O Ausir, and if thou wilt
listen I will tell the true and wondrous tale; for Beren died there in
Tinúviel's arms even as Vëannë has said, and Tinúviel crushed with
sorrow and finding no comfort or light in all the world followed him
swiftly down those dark ways that all must tread alone. Now her beauty
and tender loveliness touched even the cold heart of Mandos, so that he
suffered her to lead Beren forth once more into the world, nor has this
ever been done since to Man or Elf, and many songs and stories are there
of the prayer of Tinúviel before the throne of Mandos that I remember
not right well. Yet said Mandos to those twain: "Lo, O Elves, it is not
to any life of perfect joy that I dismiss you, for such may no longer be
found in all the world where sits Melko of the evil heart---and know
that ye will become mortal even as Men, and when ye fare hither again it
will be for ever, unless the Gods summon you indeed to Valinor."
Nonetheless those twain departed hand in hand, and they fared together
through the northern woods, and oftentimes were they seen dancing magic
dances down the hills, and their name became heard far and wide.'

\[Then Vëannë said:\] 'Aye, and they did more than dance, for their
deeds afterward were very great, and many tales are []{#calibre_link-57
.calibre3}there thereof that thou must hear, O Eriol Melinon, upon
another time of tale-telling. For these twain it is that stories name
i-Cuilwarthon, which is to say the dead that live again, and they became
mighty fairies in the lands about the north of Sirion. Behold now all is
ended---and doth it like thee?'

\[Then Eriol said that he had not expected to hear such an astonishing
story from one such as Vëannë, to which she answered:\]

'Nay, but I fashioned it not with words of myself; but it is dear to
me---and indeed all the children know of the deeds that it relates---and
I have learned it by heart, reading it in the great books, and I do not
comprehend all that is set therein.'

\*

::: extract
DURING THE 1920s my father was engaged in the casting of the Lost Tales
of Turambar and Tinúviel into verse. The first of these poems, *The Lay
of the Children of Húrin*, in the Old English alliterative metre, was
begun in 1918, but when far from completion he abandoned it, very
probably when he left the University of Leeds. In the summer of 1925,
the year in which he took up his appointment to the professorship of
Anglo-Saxon at Oxford, he began 'the poem of Tinúviel', called *The Lay
of Leithian.* This he translated 'Release from Bondage', but he never
explained the title.

Remarkably and uncharacteristically he inserted dates at many points.
The first of these, at line 557 (in the numbering of the poem as a
whole) is 23 August 1925; and the last, 17 September 1931, is written
against line 4085. Not far beyond this, at line 4223, the poem was
abandoned, at the point in the narrative where 'the fangs of Carcharoth
crashed together like a trap' on Beren's hand bearing the Silmaril, as
he fled from Angband. For the remainder of the poem that was never
written there are prose synopses.

In 1926 he sent many of his poems to R.W. Reynolds, who had been his
teacher at King Edward's School in Birmingham. In that year he composed
a substantial text with the title *Sketch of the mythology with especial
reference to The Children of Húrin*, and on the envelope containing this
manuscript he wrote later that this text was 'the original
Silmarillion', and that he had written it for Mr Reynolds in order to
'explain the background of the "alliterative version" of Túrin and the
Dragon.'

This *Sketch of the Mythology* was 'the original Silmarillion' because
from it there was a direct line of evolution; whereas there is no
stylistic continuity with the Lost Tales. The *Sketch* is what its name
implies: it is a synopsis, composed in a terse, present-tense manner. I
give here the passage in the text that tells in briefest form the tale
of Beren and Lúthien.
:::
:::::

::::: {#calibre_link-9 .calibre}
## ![](images/000006.jpg){.calibre18} {#section-3 .chapter-number1}

## A PASSAGE FROM THE 'SKETCH OF THE MYTHOLOGY' {#a-passage-from-the-sketch-of-the-mythology .chapter-number2}

The power of Morgoth begins to spread once more. One by one he
overthrows Men and Elves in the North. Of these a famous chieftain of
Men was Barahir, who had been a friend of Celegorm of Nargothrond.

Barahir is driven into hiding, his hiding betrayed, and Barahir slain;
his son Beren after a life outlawed flees south, crosses the Shadowy
Mountains, and after grievous hardships comes to Doriath. Of this and
his other adventures is told in *The* *Lay of Leithian*. He gains the
love of Tinúviel 'the nightingale'---his own name for Lúthien---the
daughter of Thingol. To win her Thingol, in mockery, requires a Silmaril
from the crown of Morgoth. Beren sets out to achieve this, is captured,
and set in dungeon in Angband, but conceals his real identity and is
given as a slave to Thû the hunter. Lúthien is imprisoned by Thingol,
but escapes and goes in search of Beren. With the aid of Huan lord of
dogs she rescues Beren, and gains entrance to Angband where Morgoth is
enchanted []{#calibre_link-59 .calibre3}and finally wrapped in slumber
by her dancing. They get a Silmaril and escape, but are barred at gates
of Angband by Carcaras the Wolf-ward. He bites off Beren's hand which
holds the Silmaril, and goes mad with the anguish of its burning within
him.

They escape and after many wanderings get back to Doriath. Carcaras
ravening through the woods bursts into Doriath. There follows the
Wolf-hunt of Doriath, in which Carcaras is slain, and Huan is killed in
defence of Beren. Beren is however mortally wounded and dies in
Lúthien's arms. Some songs say that Lúthien went even over the Grinding
Ice, aided by the power of her divine mother, Melian, to Mandos' halls
and won him back; others that Mandos hearing his tale released him.
Certain it is that he alone of mortals came back from Mandos and dwelt
with Lúthien and never spoke to Men again, living in the woods of
Doriath and in the Hunters' Wold, west of Nargothrond.

::: extract
It will be seen that there have been great changes in the legend, the
most immediately evident being that of Beren's captor: here we meet Thû
'the hunter'. At the end of the *Sketch* it is said of Thû that he was
the 'great chief' of Morgoth, and that he 'escaped the Last Battle and
dwells still in dark places, and perverts Men to his dreadful worship'.
In *The* *Lay of Leithian* Thû emerges as the fearful Necromancer, Lord
of Wolves, who dwelt in Tol Sirion, the island in the river Sirion with
an Elvish watchtower, which came to be Tol-in-Gaurhoth, the Isle of
Werewolves. He is, or will be, Sauron. Tevildo and his realm of cats
have disappeared.

But in the background another significant element in the legend had
emerged after *The Tale of Tinúviel* was written: this concerns the
father of Beren. Egnor the forester, the Gnome 'who hunted in the darker
places of Hisilómë' ([p. 41](#calibre_link-47){.calibre3}) has gone.
Now, in the passage from the *Sketch* just given, his father is Barahir,
'a famous chieftain of *Men*': driven into hiding by the growing hostile
power of Morgoth, his hiding was betrayed, and he was slain. 'His son
Beren after a life outlawed flees south, crosses the Shadowy Mountains,
and after grievous hardships comes to Doriath. Of this and his other
adventures is told in *The Lay of Leithian*.'
:::

::: centered-image
![](images/000007.jpg){.calibre19}
:::
:::::

:::::: {#calibre_link-10 .calibre}
## []{#calibre_link-60 .calibre15}![](images/000008.jpg){.calibre20} {#section-4 .chapter-number1}

## A PASSAGE EXTRACTED FROM *THE LAY OF LEITHIAN* {#a-passage-extracted-from-the-lay-of-leithian .chapter-number2}

::: extract
I give here the passage in the *Lay* (written in 1925; see [p.
88](#calibre_link-57){.calibre3}) that describes the treachery of
Gorlim, known as Gorlim the Unhappy, who betrayed to Morgoth the hiding
place of Barahir and his companions, and the aftermath. I should mention
here that the textual detail of the poem is very complex, but since my
(ambitious) purpose in this book is to make a readily readable text that
shows the narrative evolution of the legend at different stages, I have
neglected virtually all detail of this nature, which could only confuse
that purpose. An account of the textual history of the poem will be
found in my book *The Lays of Beleriand* (*The History of Middle-earth*,
Vol. III, 1985). I have taken the extracts from the *Lay* in the present
book word for word from the text that I prepared for *The Lays of
Beleriand.* The line-numbers are simply those of the extracts, and have
no relation to those of the whole poem.

The extract that follows is taken from Canto II of the *Lay*. It is
preceded by a description of the ferocious tyranny of
[]{#calibre_link-67 .calibre3}Morgoth over the northern lands at the
time of Beren's coming into Artanor (Doriath), and of the survival in
hiding of Barahir and Beren and ten others, hunted in vain by Morgoth
for many years, until at last 'their feet were caught in Morgoth's
snare'.
:::

:::: verse
Gorlim it was, who wearying

of toil and flight and harrying

one night by chance did turn his feet

o'er the dark fields by stealth to meet

[5]{.float}with hidden friends within a dale,

and found a homestead looming pale

against the misty stars, all dark

save one small window, whence a spark

of fitful candle strayed without.

[10]{.float}Therein he peeped, and filled with doubt

he saw, as in a dreaming deep

when longing cheats the heart in sleep,

his wife beside a dying fire

lament him lost; her thin attire

[15]{.float}and greying hair and paling cheek

of tears and loneliness did speak.

'A! fair and gentle Eilinel,

whom I had thought in darkling hell

long since emprisoned! Ere I fled

[20]{.float}I deemed I saw thee slain and dead

upon that night of sudden fear

when all I lost that I held dear':

thus thought his heavy heart amazed

outside in darkness as he gazed.

[25]{.float}But ere he dared to call her name,

or ask how she escaped and came

to this far vale beneath the hills,

he heard a cry beneath the hills!

There hooted near a hunting owl

[30]{.float}with boding voice. He heard the howl

of the wild wolves that followed him

and dogged his feet through shadows dim.

Him unrelenting, well he knew,

the hunt of Morgoth did pursue.

[35]{.float}Lest Eilinel with him they slay

without a word he turned away,

and like a wild thing winding led

his devious ways o'er stony bed

of stream, and over quaking fen,

[40]{.float}until far from the homes of men

he lay beside his fellows few

in a secret place; and darkness grew,

and waned, and still he watched unsleeping,

and saw the dismal dawn come creeping

[45]{.float}in dank heavens above gloomy trees.

A sickness held his soul for ease,

and hope, and even thraldom's chain

if he might find his wife again.

But all he thought twixt love of lord

[50]{.float}and hatred of the king abhorred

and anguish for fair Eilinel

who drooped alone, what tale shall tell?

[]{#calibre_link-136 .calibre3}Yet at the last, when many days

of brooding did his mind amaze,

[55]{.float}he found the servants of the king

and bade them to their master bring

a rebel who forgiveness sought,

if haply forgiveness might be bought

with tidings of Barahir the bold,

[60]{.float}and where his hidings and his hold

might best be found by night or day.

And thus sad Gorlim, led away

unto those dark deep-dolven halls,

before the knees of Morgoth falls,

[65]{.float}and puts his trust in that cruel heart

wherein no truth had ever part.

Quoth Morgoth: 'Eilinel the fair

thou shalt most surely find, and there

where she doth dwell and wait for thee

[70]{.float}together shall ye ever be,

and sundered shall ye sigh no more.

Thus guerdon shall he have that bore

these tidings sweet, O traitor dear!

For Eilinel she dwells not here,

[75]{.float}but in the shades of death doth roam

widowed of husband and of home---

a wraith of that which might have been,

methinks, it is that thou hast seen!

Now shalt thou through the gates of pain

[80]{.float}the land thou askest grimly gain;

[]{#calibre_link-144 .calibre3}thou shalt to the moonless mists of hell

descend and seek thy Eilinel.'

Thus Gorlim died a bitter death

and cursed himself with dying breath,

[85]{.float}and Barahir was caught and slain,

and all good deeds were made in vain.

But Morgoth's guile for ever failed,

nor wholly o'er his foes prevailed;

and some were ever that still fought

[90]{.float}unmaking that which malice wrought.

Thus Men believed that Morgoth made

the fiendish phantom that betrayed

the soul of Gorlim, and so brought

the lingering hope forlorn to nought

[95]{.float}that lived amid the lonely wood;

yet Beren had by fortune good

long hunted far afield that day,

and benighted in strange places lay

far from his fellows. In his sleep

[100]{.float}he felt a dreadful darkness creep

upon his heart, and thought the trees

were bare and bent in mournful breeze;

no leaves they had, but ravens dark

sat thick as leaves on bough and bark,

[105]{.float}and croaked, and as they croaked each neb

::: {#calibre_link-28 .centered-image1}
![](images/000028.jpg){.calibre21}
:::

let fall a gout of blood; a web

unseen entwined him hand and limb,

until worn out, upon the rim

of stagnant pool he lay and shivered.

[110]{.float}There saw he that a shadow quivered

far out upon the water wan,

and grew to a faint form thereon

that glided o'er the silent lake

and coming slowly, softly spake

[115]{.float}and sadly said; 'Lo! Gorlim here,

traitor betrayed, now stands! Nor fear,

but haste! For Morgoth's fingers close

upon thy father's throat. He knows

your secret tryst, your hidden lair',

[120]{.float}and all the evil he laid bare

that he had done and Morgoth wrought.

Then Beren waking swiftly sought

his sword and bow, and sped like wind

that cuts with knives the branches thinned

[125]{.float}of autumn trees. At last he came,

his heart afire with burning flame,

where Barahir his father lay;

he came too late. At dawn of day

he found the homes of hunted men,

[130]{.float}a wooded island in the fen

and birds rose up in sudden cloud---

no fen-fowl were they crying loud.

The raven and the carrion-crow

sat in the alders all a-row;

[135]{.float}one croaked: 'Ha! Beren comes too late',

and answered all: 'Too late! Too late!'

There Beren buried his father's bones,

and piled a heap of boulder-stones,

and cursed the name of Morgoth thrice,

[140]{.float}but wept not, for his heart was ice.

Then over fen and field and mountain

he followed, till beside a fountain

upgushing hot from fires below

he found the slayers and his foe,

[145]{.float}the murderous soldiers of the king.

And one there laughed, and showed a ring

he took from Barahir's dead hand.

'This ring in far Beleriand,

now mark ye, mates,' he said, 'was wrought.

[150]{.float}Its like with gold could not be bought,

for this same Barahir I slew,

this robber fool, they say, did do

a deed of service long ago

for Felagund. It may be so;

[155]{.float}for Morgoth bade me bring it back,

and yet, methinks, he has no lack

of weightier treasure in his hoard.

Such greed befits not such a lord,

and I am minded to declare

[160]{.float}the hand of Barahir was bare!'

Yet as he spake an arrow sped;

with riven heart he crumpled dead.

Thus Morgoth loved that his own foe

should in his service deal the blow

[165]{.float}that punished the breaking of his word.

But Morgoth laughed not when he heard

that Beren like a wolf alone

sprang madly from behind a stone

amid that camp beside the well,

[170]{.float}and seized the ring, and ere the yell

of wrath and rage had left their throat

had fled his foes. His gleaming coat

was made of rings of steel no shaft

could pierce, a web of dwarvish craft;

[175]{.float}and he was lost in rock and thorn,

for in charméd hour was Beren born;

their hungry hunting never learned

the way his fearless feet had turned.

As fearless Beren was renowned,

[180]{.float}as man most hardy upon ground,

while Barahir yet lived and fought;

but sorrow now his soul had wrought

to dark despair, and robbed his life

of sweetness, that he longed for knife,

[185]{.float}or shaft, or sword, to end his pain,

and dreaded only thraldom's chain.

Danger he sought and death pursued,

and thus escaped the fate he wooed,

and deeds of breathless wonder dared

[190]{.float}whose whispered glory widely fared,

and softly songs were sung at eve

of marvels he did once achieve

alone, beleaguered, lost at night

[]{#calibre_link-127 .calibre3}by mist or moon, or neath the light

[195]{.float}of the broad eye of day. The woods

that northward looked with bitter feuds

he filled and death for Morgoth's folk;

his comrades were the beech and oak,

who failed him not, and many things

[200]{.float}with fur and fell and feathered wings;

and many spirits, that in stone

in mountains old and wastes alone,

do dwell and wander, were his friends.

Yet seldom well an outlaw ends,

[205]{.float}and Morgoth was a king more strong

than all the world has since in song

recorded, and his wisdom wide

slow and surely who him defied

did hem and hedge. Thus at the last

[210]{.float}must Beren flee the forest fast

and lands he loved where lay his sire

by reeds bewailed beneath the mire.

Beneath a heap of mossy stones

now crumble those once most mighty bones.

[215]{.float}but Beren flees the friendless North

one autumn night, and creeps him forth;

the leaguer of his watchful foes

he passes---silently he goes.

No more his hidden bowstring sings,

[220]{.float}no more his shaven arrow wings,

no more his hunted head doth lie

upon the heath beneath the sky.

The moon that looked amid the mist

upon the pines, the wind that hissed

[225]{.float}among the heather and the fern

found him no more. The stars that burn

about the North with silver fire

in frosty airs, the Burning Briar

that men did name in days long gone,

[230]{.float}were set behind his back, and shone

o'er land and lake and darkened hill,

forsaken fen and mountain rill.

His face was South from the Land of Dread

whence only evil pathways led,

[235]{.float}and only the feet of men most bold

might cross the Shadowy Mountains cold.

Their northern slopes were filled with woe,

with evil and with mortal foe;

their southern faces mounted sheer

[240]{.float}in rocky pinnacle and pier,

whose roots were woven with deceit

and washed with waters bitter-sweet.

There magic lurked in gulf and glen,

for far away beyond the ken

[245]{.float}of searching eyes, unless it were

from dizzy tower that pricked the air

where only eagles lived and cried,

might grey and gleaming be descried

Beleriand, Beleriand,

[250]{.float}the borders of the faëry land.
::::
::::::

::::: {#calibre_link-11 .calibre}
## []{#calibre_link-56 .calibre15}![](images/000009.jpg){.calibre22} {#section-5 .chapter-number1}

## THE *QUENTA NOLDORINWA* {#the-quenta-noldorinwa .chapter-number2}

::: extract
After the *Sketch of the Mythology* this text, which I will refer to as
'the *Quenta*', was the only complete and finished version of 'The
Silmarillion' that my father achieved: a typescript that he made in (as
seems certain) 1930. No preliminary drafts or outlines, if there were
any, survive; but it is plain that for a good part of its length he had
the *Sketch* before him. It is longer than the *Sketch,* and the
'Silmarillion style' has clearly appeared, but it remains a compression,
a compendious account. In the sub-title it is said that it is 'the brief
history of the Noldoli or Gnomes', drawn from the *Book of Lost Tales*
which Eriol \[Ælfwine\] wrote. The long poems were of course now in
being, substantial but massively unfinished, and my father was still
working on *The Lay of Leithian*.

In the *Quenta* there emerges the major transformation of the legend of
Beren and Lúthien by the entry of the Noldorin prince, Felagund, son of
Finrod. To explain how []{#calibre_link-41 .calibre3}this could come
about I will give here a passage from this text, but a note on names is
needed. The leader of the Noldor in the great journey of the Elves from
Cuiviénen, the Water of Awakening in the furthest East, was Finwë; his
three sons were Fëanor, Fingolfin, and Finrod, who was the father of
Felagund. (Later the names were changed: The third son of Finwë became
*Finarfin*, and *Finrod* the name of his son; but Finrod was also
*Felagund*. This name meant 'Lord of Caves' or 'Cave-hewer' in the
language of the Dwarves, for he was the founder of Nargothrond. The
sister of Finrod Felagund was Galadriel.)
:::

::: centered-image
![](images/000010.jpg){.calibre23}
:::
:::::

::::: {#calibre_link-12 .calibre}
## []{#calibre_link-45 .calibre15}![](images/000011.jpg){.calibre24} {#section-6 .chapter-number1}

## A PASSAGE EXTRACTED FROM THE *QUENTA* {#a-passage-extracted-from-the-quenta .chapter-number2}

This was the time that songs call the Siege of Angband. The swords of
the Gnomes then fenced the earth from the ruin of Morgoth, and his power
was shut behind the walls of Angband. The Gnomes boasted that never
could he break their leaguer, and that none of his folk could ever pass
to work evil in the ways of the world . . .

In those days Men came over the Blue Mountains into Beleriand, bravest
and fairest of their race. Felagund it was that found them, and he was
ever their friend. On a time he was the guest of Celegorm in the East,
and rode a-hunting with him. But he became separated from the others,
and at a time of night he came upon a dale in the western foothills of
the Blue Mountains. There were lights in the dale and the sound of
rugged song. Then Felagund marvelled, for the tongue of those songs was
not the tongue of Eldar or of Dwarves. Nor was it the tongue of Orcs,
though this at first he feared. There were camped the people of Bëor, a
mighty []{#calibre_link-44 .calibre3}warrior of Men, whose son was
Barahir the bold. They were the first of Men to come into Beleriand
. . .

That night Felagund went among the sleeping men of Bëor's host and sat
by their dying fires where none kept watch, and he took a harp which
Bëor had laid aside, and he played music on it such as mortal ear had
never heard, having learned the strains of music from the Dark-elves
alone. Then men woke and listened and marvelled, for great wisdom was in
that song, as well as beauty, and the heart grew wiser that listened to
it. Thus came it that Men called Felagund, whom they met first of the
Noldoli, Wisdom, and after him they called his race the Wise, whom we
call the Gnomes.

Bëor lived till death with Felagund, and Barahir his son was the
greatest friend of the sons of Finrod.

Now began the time of the ruin of the Gnomes. It was long before this
was achieved, for great was their power grown, and they were very
valiant, and their allies were many and bold, Dark-elves and Men.

But the tide of their fortune took a sudden turn. Long had Morgoth
prepared his forces in secret. On a time of night at winter he let forth
great rivers of flame that poured over all the plain before the
Mountains of Iron and burned it to a desolate waste. Many of the Gnomes
of Finrod's sons perished in that burning, and the fumes of it wrought
darkness and confusion among the foes of Morgoth. In the train of the
fire came the black armies of the Orcs in numbers such as the Gnomes had
never before seen or imagined. In this way Morgoth broke the leaguer of
Angband and slew by the hands of the Orcs []{#calibre_link-38
.calibre3}a great slaughter of the bravest of the besieging hosts. His
enemies were scattered far and wide, Gnomes, Ilkorins and Men. Men he
drove for the most part over the Blue Mountains, save the children of
Bëor and of Hador who took refuge in Hithlum beyond the Shadowy
Mountains, where as yet the Orcs came not in force. The Dark-elves fled
south to Beleriand and beyond, but many went to Doriath, and the kingdom
and power of Thingol grew great in that time, till he became a bulwark
and a refuge of the Elves. The magics of Melian that were woven about
the borders of Doriath fenced evil from his halls and realm.

The pine-forest Morgoth took and turned it into a place of dread, and
the watchtower of Sirion he took and made it into a stronghold of evil
and of menace. There dwelt Thû the chief servant of Morgoth, sorcerer of
dreadful power, the lord of wolves. Heaviest had the burden of that
dreadful battle, the second battle and the first defeat of the Gnomes,
fallen upon the sons of Finrod. There were Angrod and Egnor slain. There
too would Felagund have been taken or slain, but Barahir came up with
all his men and saved the Gnomish king and made a wall of spears about
him; and though grievous was their loss they fought their way from the
Orcs and fled to the fens of Sirion to the South. There Felagund swore
an oath of undying friendship and aid in time of need to Barahir and all
his kin and seed, and in token of his vow he gave to Barahir his ring.

Then Felagund went South, and on the banks of Narog established after
the manner of Thingol a hidden and cavernous city and a realm. Those
deep places were called Nargothrond. There came Orodreth \[son of
Finrod, brother of Felagund\] after a time of breathless flight and
perilous wanderings, and with him Celegorm and Curufin, the sons of
Fëanor, his friends. The people of Celegorm swelled the strength of
Felagund, but it would have been better if they had gone rather to their
own kin, who fortified the hill of Himling east of Doriath and filled
the Gorge of Aglon with hidden arms . . .

In these days of doubt and fear, after the \[Battle of Sudden Flame\],
many dreadful things befell of which but few are here told. It is told
that Bëor was slain and Barahir yielded not to Morgoth, but all his land
was won from him and his people scattered, enslaved or slain, and he
himself went in outlawry with his son Beren and ten faithful men. Long
they hid and did secret and valiant deeds of war against the Orcs. But
in the end, as is told in the beginning of the lay of Lúthien and Beren,
the hiding place of Barahir was betrayed, and he was slain and his
comrades, all save Beren who by fortune was that day hunting afar.
Thereafter Beren lived an outlaw alone, save for the help he had from
birds and beasts which he loved; and seeking for death in desperate
deeds found it not, but glory and renown in the secret songs of
fugitives and hidden enemies of Morgoth, so that the tale of his deeds
came even to Beleriand, and was rumoured in Doriath. At length Beren
fled south from the ever-closing circle of those that hunted him, and
crossed the dreadful Mountains of Shadow, and came at last worn and
haggard into Doriath. There in secret he won []{#calibre_link-42
.calibre3}the love of Lúthien daughter of Thingol, and he named her
Tinúviel, the nightingale, because of the beauty of her singing in the
twilight beneath the trees; for she was the daughter of Melian.

But Thingol was wroth and he dismissed him in scorn, but did not slay
him because he had sworn an oath to his daughter. But he desired
nonetheless to send him to his death. And he thought in his heart of a
quest that could not be achieved, and he said: If thou bring me a
Silmaril from the crown of Morgoth, I will let Lúthien wed thee, if she
will. And Beren vowed to achieve this, and went from Doriath to
Nargothrond bearing the ring of Barahir. The quest of the Silmaril there
aroused the oath from sleep that the sons of Fëanor had sworn, and evil
began to grow from it. Felagund, though he knew the quest to be beyond
his power, was willing to lend all his aid to Beren, because of his own
oath to Barahir. But Celegorm and Curufin dissuaded his people and
roused up rebellion against him. And evil thoughts awoke in their
hearts, and they thought to usurp the throne of Nargothrond, because
they were sons of the eldest line. Rather than a Silmaril should be won
and given to Thingol, they would ruin the power of Doriath and
Nargothrond.

So Felagund gave his crown to Orodreth and departed from his people with
Beren and ten faithful men of his own board. They waylaid an Orc-band
and slew them, and disguised themselves by the aid of Felagund's magic
as Orcs. But they were seen by Thû from his watchtower, which once had
been Felagund's own, and were questioned by him, and their magic was
overthrown in a contest between Thû []{#calibre_link-61 .calibre3}and
Felagund. Thus they were revealed as Elves, but the spells of Felagund
concealed their names and quest. Long were they tortured in the dungeons
of Thû, but none betrayed the other.

::: extract
The oath referred to at the end of this passage was sworn by Fëanor and
his seven sons, in the words of the *Quenta,* 'to pursue with hate and
vengeance to the ends of the world Vala, Demon, Elf, or Man, or Orc who
hold or take or keep a Silmaril against their will.' See [pp.
117--18](#calibre_link-58){.calibre3}, lines 171--80.
:::

::: centered-image
![](images/000012.jpg){.calibre25}
:::
:::::

:::::::: {#calibre_link-13 .calibre}
## ![](images/000013.jpg){.calibre26} {#section-7 .chapter-number1}

## A SECOND EXTRACT FROM *THE LAY OF LEITHIAN* {#a-second-extract-from-the-lay-of-leithian .chapter-number2}

::: extract
I give now a further passage of *The Lay of Leithian* (see [pp.
91](#calibre_link-59){.calibre3}, [93](#calibre_link-60){.calibre3})
telling the story that has just been given in its very compressed form
in the *Quenta.* I take up the poem where the Siege of Angband was ended
in what was later called the Battle of Sudden Flame. According to the
dates that my father wrote on the manuscript the whole passage was
composed in March--April 1928. At line 246 Canto VI of the *Lay* ends
and Canto VII begins.
:::

:::: verse1
An end there came, when fortune turned

and flames of Morgoth's vengeance burned,

and all the might which he prepared

in secret in his fastness flared

[5]{.float}and poured across the Thirsty Plain;

and armies black were in his train.

The leaguer of Angband Morgoth broke;

his enemies in fire and smoke

were scattered, and the Orcs there slew,

[10]{.float}and slew, until the blood like dew

dripped from each cruel and crooked blade.

Then Barahir the bold did aid

with mighty spear, with shield and men,

Felagund wounded. To the fen

[15]{.float}escaping, there they bound their troth,

and Felagund deeply swore an oath

of friendship to his kin and seed

of love and succour in time of need.

But there of Finrod's children four

[20]{.float}were Angrod slain and proud Egnor.

Felagund and Orodreth then

gathered the remnant of their men,

their maidens and their children fair;

forsaking war they made their lair

[25]{.float}and cavernous hold far in the south.

On Narog's towering bank its mouth

was opened; which they hid and veiled,

and mighty doors, that unassailed

till Túrin's day stood vast and grim,

[30]{.float}they built by trees o'ershadowed dim.

And with them dwelt a long time there

Curufin, and Celegorm the fair;

and a mighty folk grew neath their hands

in Narog's secret halls and lands.

[35]{.float}Thus Felagund in Nargothrond

still reigned, a hidden king whose bond

[]{#calibre_link-134 .calibre3}was sworn to Barahir the bold.

And now his son through forests cold

wandered alone as in a dream.

[40]{.float}Esgalduin's dark and shrouded stream

he followed, till its waters frore

were joined to Sirion, Sirion hoar,

pale silver water wide and free

rolling in splendour to the sea.

[45]{.float}Now Beren came unto the pools,

wide shallow meres where Sirion cools

his gathered tide beneath the stars,

ere chafed and sundered by the bars

of reedy banks a mighty fen

[50]{.float}he feeds and drenches, plunging then

into vast chasms underground,

where many miles his way is wound.

Umboth-Muilin, Twilight Meres,

those great wide waters grey as tears

[55]{.float}the Elves then named. Through driving rain

from thence across the Guarded Plain

the Hills of the Hunters Beren saw

with bare tops bitten bleak and raw

by western winds, but in the mist

[60]{.float}of streaming rains that flashed and hissed

into the meres he knew there lay

beneath those hills the cloven way

of Narog, and the watchful halls

of Felagund beside the falls

[65]{.float}of Ingwil tumbling from the wold.

An everlasting watch they hold,

the Gnomes of Nargothrond renowned,

and every hill is tower-crowned,

where wardens sleepless peer and gaze

[70]{.float}guarding the plain and all the ways

between Narog swift and Sirion pale;

and archers whose arrows never fail

there range the woods, and secret kill

all who creep thither against their will.

[75]{.float}Yet now he thrusts into that land

bearing the gleaming ring on hand

of Felagund, and oft doth cry:

'Here comes no wandering Orc or spy,

but Beren son of Barahir

[80]{.float}who once to Felagund was dear.'

So ere he reached the eastward shore

of Narog, that doth foam and roar

o'er boulders black, those archers green

came round him. When the ring was seen

[85]{.float}they bowed before him, though his plight

was poor and beggarly. Then by night

they led him northward, for no ford

nor bridge was built where Narog poured

before the gates of Nargothrond,

[90]{.float}and friend nor foe might pass beyond.

To northward, where that stream yet young

more slender flowed, below the tongue

of foam-splashed land that Ginglith pens

when her brief golden torrent ends

[95]{.float}and joins the Narog, there they wade.

Now swiftest journey thence they made

to Nargothrond's sheer terraces

and dim gigantic palaces.

They came beneath a sickle moon

[100]{.float}to doors there darkly hung and hewn

with posts and lintels of ponderous stone

and timbers huge. Now open thrown

were gaping gates, and in they strode

where Felagund on throne abode.

[105]{.float}Fair were the words of Narog's king

to Beren, and his wandering

and all his feuds and bitter wars

recounted soon. Behind closed doors

they sat, while Beren told his tale

[110]{.float}of Doriath; and words him fail

recalling Lúthien dancing fair

with wild white roses in her hair,

remembering her elven voice that rung

while stars in twilight round her hung.

[115]{.float}He spake of Thingol's marvellous halls

by enchantment lit, where fountain falls

and ever the nightingale doth sing

to Melian and to her king.

The quest he told that Thingol laid

[120]{.float}in scorn on him; how for love of maid

more fair than ever was born to Men,

of Tinúviel, of Lúthien,

he must essay the burning waste,

and doubtless death and torment taste.

[125]{.float}This Felagund in wonder heard,

and heavily spoke at last this word:

'It seems that Thingol doth desire

thy death. The everlasting fire

of those enchanted jewels all know

[130]{.float}is cursed with an oath of endless woe,

and Fëanor's sons alone by right

are lords and masters of their light.

He cannot hope within his hoard

to keep this gem, nor is he lord

[135]{.float}of all the folk of Elfinesse.

And yet thou saist for nothing less

can thy return to Doriath

be purchased? Many a dreadful path

in sooth there lies before thy feet---

[140]{.float}and after Morgoth, still a fleet

untiring hate, as I know well,

would hunt thee from heaven unto hell.

Fëanor's sons would, if they could,

slay thee or ever thou reached his wood

[145]{.float}or laid in Thingol's lap that fire,

or gained at least thy sweet desire.

Lo! Celegorm and Curufin

here dwell this very realm within,

and even though I, Finrod's son,

[150]{.float}am king, a mighty power have won

[]{#calibre_link-58 .calibre3}and many of their own folk lead.

Friendship to me in every need

they yet have shown, but much I fear

that to Beren son of Barahir

[155]{.float}mercy or love they will not show

if once thy dreadful quest they know.'

True words he spoke. For when the king

to all his people told this thing,

and spake of the oath to Barahir,

[160]{.float}and how that mortal shield and spear

had saved them from Morgoth and from woe

on Northern battlefields long ago,

then many were kindled in their hearts

once more to battle. But up there starts

[165]{.float}amid the throng, and loudly cries

for hearing, one with flaming eyes,

proud Celegorm with gleaming hair

and shining sword. Then all men stare

upon his stern unyielding face,

[170]{.float}and a great hush falls upon that place.

'Be he friend or foe, or demon wild

of Morgoth, Elf, or mortal child,

or any that here on earth may dwell,

no law, nor love, nor league of hell,

[175]{.float}no might of Gods, no binding spell,

shall him defend from hatred fell

of Fëanor's sons, whoso take or steal

[]{#calibre_link-137 .calibre3}or finding keep a Silmaril.

These we alone do claim by right,

[180]{.float}our thrice enchanted jewels bright.'

Many wild and potent words he spoke,

and as before in Tûn awoke

his father's voice their hearts to fire,

so now dark fear and brooding ire

[185]{.float}he cast on them, foreboding war

of friend with friend; and pools of gore

their minds imagined lying red

in Nargothrond about the dead,

did Narog's host with Beren go;

[190]{.float}or haply battle, ruin, and woe

in Doriath where great Thingol reigned,

if Fëanor's fatal jewel he gained.

And even such as were most true

to Felagund his oath did rue,

[195]{.float}and thought with terror and despair

of seeking Morgoth in his lair

with force or guile. This Curufin

when his brother ceased did then begin

more to impress upon their minds;

[200]{.float}and such a spell he on them binds

that never again till Túrin's day

would Gnome of Narog in array

of open battle go to war.

With secrecy, ambush, spies and lore

[205]{.float}of wizardry, with silent leaguer

of wild things wary, watchful, eager,

of phantom hunters, venomed darts,

and unseen stealthy creeping arts,

with padding hatred that its prey

[210]{.float}with feet of velvet all the day

followed remorseless out of sight

and slew it unawares at night---

thus they defended Nargothrond,

and forgot their kin and solemn bond

[215]{.float}for dread of Morgoth that the art

of Curufin set within their heart.

So would they not that angry day

King Felagund their lord obey,

but sullen murmured that Finrod

[220]{.float}nor yet his son were as a god.

Then Felagund took off his crown

and at his feet he cast it down,

the silver helm of Nargothrond:

'Yours ye may break, but I my bond

[225]{.float}must keep, and kingdom here forsake.

If hearts here were that did not quake,

or that to Finrod's son were true,

then I at least should find a few

to go with me, not like a poor

[230]{.float}rejected beggar scorn endure,

turned from my gates to leave my town,

my people, and my realm and crown!'

[]{#calibre_link-43 .calibre3}Hearing these words there swiftly stood

beside him ten tried warriors good,

[235]{.float}men of his house who had ever fought

wherever his banners had been brought.

One stooped and lifted up his crown,

and said: 'O king, to leave this town

is now our fate, but not to lose

[240]{.float}thy rightful lordship. Thou shalt choose

one to be steward in thy stead.'

Then Felagund upon the head

of Orodreth set it: 'Brother mine,

till I return this crown is thine.'

[245]{.float}Then Celegorm no more would stay,

and Curufin smiled and turned away.

\*\*\*\*\*\*

Thus twelve alone there ventured forth

from Nargothrond, and to the North

they turned their silent secret way,

[250]{.float}and vanished in the fading day.

No trumpet sounds, no voice there sings,

as robed in mail of cunning rings

now blackened dark with helmets grey

and sombre cloaks they steal away.

[255]{.float}Far-journeying Narog's leaping course

they followed till they found his source,

the flickering falls, whose freshets sheer

a glimmering goblet glassy-clear

with crystal waters fill that shake

[260]{.float}and quiver down from Ivrin's lake,

from Ivrin's mere that mirrors dim

the pallid faces bare and grim

of Shadowy Mountains neath the moon.

Now far beyond the realm immune

[265]{.float}from Orc and demon and the dread

of Morgoth's might their ways had led.

In woods o'er shadowed by the heights

they watched and waited many nights,

till on a time when hurrying cloud

[270]{.float}did moon and constellation shroud,

and winds of autumn's wild beginning

soughed in the boughs, and leaves went spinning

down the dark eddies rustling soft,

they heard a murmur hoarsely waft

[275]{.float}from far, a croaking laughter coming;

now louder; now they heard the drumming

of hideous stamping feet that tramp

the weary earth. Then many a lamp

of sullen red they saw draw near,

[280]{.float}swinging, and glistening on spear

and scimitar. There hidden nigh

they saw a band of Orcs go by

with goblin faces swart and foul.

Bats were about them, and the owl,

[285]{.float}the ghostly forsaken night-bird cried

from trees above. The voices died,

[]{#calibre_link-120 .calibre3}the laughter like clash of stone and
steel

passed and faded. At their heel

the Elves and Beren crept more soft

[290]{.float}than foes stealing through a croft

in search of prey. Thus to the camp

lit by flickering fire and lamp

they stole, and counted sitting there

full thirty Orcs in the red flare

[295]{.float}of burning wood. Without a sound

they one by one stood silent round,

each in the shadow of a tree;

each slowly, grimly, secretly

bent then his bow and drew the string.

[300]{.float}Hark! how they sudden twang and sing,

when Felagund lets forth a cry;

and twelve Orcs sudden fall and die.

Then forth they leap casting their bows.

Out their bright swords, and swift their blows!

[305]{.float}The stricken Orcs now shriek and yell

as lost things deep in lightless hell.

Battle there is beneath the trees

bitter and swift, but no Orc flees;

there left their lives that wandering band

[310]{.float}and stained no more the sorrowing land

with rape and murder. Yet no song

of joy, or triumph over wrong,

the Elves there sang. In peril sore

they were, for never alone to war

[315]{.float}so small an Orc-band went, they knew.

Swiftly the raiment off they drew

and cast the corpses in a pit.

This desperate counsel had the wit

of Felagund for them devised:

[320]{.float}as Orcs his comrades he disguised.

The poisoned spears, the bows of horn,

the crooked swords their foes had borne

they took; and loathing each him clad

in Angband's raiment foul and sad.

[325]{.float}They smeared their hands and faces fair

with pigment dark; the matted hair

all lank and black from goblin head

they shore, and joined it thread by thread

with Gnomish skill. As each one leers

[330]{.float}at each dismayed, about his ears

he hangs it noisome, shuddering.

Then Felagund a spell did sing

of changing and of shifting shape;

their ears grew hideous, and agape

[335]{.float}their mouths did start, and like a fang

each tooth became, as slow he sang.

Their Gnomish raiment then they hid

and one by one behind him slid,

behind a foul and goblin thing

[340]{.float}that once was elven-fair and king.

[]{#calibre_link-141 .calibre3}Northward they went; and Orcs they met

who passed, nor did their going let,

but hailed them in greeting; and more bold

they grew as past the long miles rolled.

[345]{.float}At length they came with weary feet

beyond Beleriand. They found the fleet

young waters, rippling, silver-pale

of Sirion hurrying through that vale

where Taur-na-Fuin, Deadly Night,

[350]{.float}the trackless forest's pine-clad height,

falls dark forbidding slowly down

upon the east, while westward frown

the northward-bending Mountains grey

and bar the westering light of day.

[355]{.float}An isléd hill there stood alone

amid the valley, like a stone

rolled from the mountains vast

when giants in tumult hurtled past.

Around its feet the river looped

[360]{.float}a stream divided, that had scooped

the hanging edges into caves.

There briefly shuddered Sirion's waves

and ran to other shores more clean.

An elven watchtower had it been,

[365]{.float}and strong it was, and still was fair;

but now did grim with menace stare

one way to pale Beleriand,

the other to that mournful land

[]{#calibre_link-121 .calibre3}beyond the valley's northern mouth.

[370]{.float}Thence could be glimpsed the fields of drouth,

the dusty dunes, the desert wide;

and further far could be descried

the brooding cloud that hangs and lowers

on Thangorodrim's thunderous towers.

[375]{.float}Now in that hill was the abode

of one most evil; and the road

that from Beleriand thither came

he watched with sleepless eyes of flame.

Men called him Thû, and as a god

[380]{.float}in after days beneath his rod

bewildered bowed to him, and made

his ghastly temples in the shade.

Not yet by Men enthralled adored,

now was he Morgoth's mightiest lord,

[385]{.float}Master of Wolves, whose shivering howl

for ever echoed in the hills, and foul

enchantments and dark sigaldry

did weave and wield. In glamoury

that necromancer held his hosts

[390]{.float}of phantoms and of wandering ghosts,

of misbegotten or spell-wronged

monsters that about him thronged,

working his bidding dark and vile:

the werewolves of the Wizard's Isle.

[395]{.float}From Thû their coming was not hid

and though beneath the eaves they slid

of the forest's gloomy-hanging boughs,

he saw them afar, and wolves did rouse:

'Go! fetch me those sneaking Orcs,' he said,

[400]{.float}'that fare thus strangely, as if in dread,

and do not come, as all Orcs use

and are commanded, to bring me news

of all their deeds, to me, to Thû.'

From his tower he gazed, and in him grew

[405]{.float}suspicion and a brooding thought,

waiting, leering, till they were brought.

Now ringed about with wolves they stand,

and fear their doom. Alas! the land,

the land of Narog left behind!

[410]{.float}Foreboding evil weights their mind,

as downcast, halting, they must go

and cross the stony bridge of woe

to Wizard's Isle, and to the throne

there fashioned of blood-darkened stone.

::: {#calibre_link-29 .centered-image1}
![](images/000029.jpg){.calibre27}
:::

[415]{.float}'Where have ye been? What have ye seen?'

'In Elfinesse; and tears and distress,

the fire blowing and the blood flowing,

these have we seen, there have we been.

Thirty we slew and their bodies threw

[]{#calibre_link-157 .calibre3}[420]{.float}in a dark pit. The ravens
sit

and the owl cries where our swath lies.'

'Come, tell me true, O Morgoth's thralls,

what then in Elfinesse befalls?

What of Nargothrond? Who reigneth there?

[425]{.float}Into that realm did your feet dare?'

'Only its borders did we dare.

There reigns King Felagund the fair.'

'Then heard ye not that he is gone,

that Celegorm sits his throne upon?'

[430]{.float}'That is not true! If he is gone,

then Orodreth sits his throne upon.'

'Sharp are your ears, swift have they got

tidings of realms ye entered not!

What are your names, O spearmen bold?

[435]{.float}Who your captain, ye have not told.'

'Nereb and Dungalef and warriors ten,

so we are called, and dark our den

under the mountains. Over the waste

we march on an errand of need and haste.

[440]{.float}Boldog the captain awaits us there

where fires from under smoke and flare.'

'Boldog, I heard, was lately slain

warring on the borders of that domain

where Robber Thingol and outlaw folk

[445]{.float}cringe and crawl beneath elm and oak

in drear Doriath. Heard ye not then

of that pretty fay, of Lúthien?

Her body is fair, very white and fair.

Morgoth would possess her in his lair.

[450]{.float}Boldog he sent, but Boldog was slain:

strange ye were not in Boldog's train.

Nereb looks fierce, his frown is grim.

Little Lúthien! What troubles him?

Why laughs he not to think of his lord

[455]{.float}crushing a maiden in his hoard,

that foul should be what once was clean,

that dark should be where light has been?

Whom do ye serve, Light or Mirk?

Who is the maker of mightiest work?

[460]{.float}Who is the king of earthly kings,

the greatest giver of gold and rings?

Who is the master of the wide earth?

Who despoiled them of their mirth,

the greedy Gods! Repeat your vows,

[465]{.float}Orcs of Bauglir! Do not bend your brows!

Death to light, to law, to love!

Cursed be moon and stars above!

May darkness everlasting old

that waits outside in surges cold

[470]{.float}drown Manwë, Varda, and the sun!

May all in hatred be begun

and all in evil ended be,

in the moaning of the endless Sea!'

But no true Man nor Elf yet free

[475]{.float}would ever speak that blasphemy,

and Beren muttered: 'Who is Thû

to hinder work that is to do?

Him we serve not, nor to him owe

obeisance, and we now would go.'

[480]{.float}Thû laughed: 'Patience! Not very long

shall ye abide. But first a song

I will sing to you, to ears intent.'

Then his flaming eyes he on them bent

and darkness black fell round them all.

[485]{.float}Only they saw as through a pall

of eddying smoke those eyes profound

in which their senses choked and drowned.

He chanted a song of wizardry,

of piercing, opening, of treachery,

[490]{.float}revealing, uncovering, betraying.

Then sudden Felagund there swaying

sang in answer a song of staying,

resisting, battling against power,

of secrets kept, strength like a tower,

[500]{.float}and trust unbroken, freedom, escape;

[]{#calibre_link-40 .calibre3}of changing and of shifting shape,

of snares eluded, broken traps,

the prison opening, the chain that snaps.

Backwards and forwards swayed their song.

[505]{.float}Reeling and foundering, as ever more strong

Thû's chanting swelled, Felagund fought,

and all the magic and might he brought

of Elfinesse into his words.

Softly in the gloom they heard the birds

[510]{.float}singing afar in Nargothrond,

the sighing of the sea beyond,

beyond the western world, on sand,

on sand of pearls in Elvenland.

Then the gloom gathered: darkness growing

[515]{.float}in Valinor, the red blood flowing

beside the sea, where the Gnomes slew

the Foamriders, and stealing drew

their white ships with their white sails

from lamplit havens. The wind wails.

[520]{.float}The wolf howls. The ravens flee.

The ice mutters in the mouths of the sea.

The captives sad in Angband mourn.

Thunder rumbles, the fires burn,

a vast smoke gushes out, a roar---

[525]{.float}and Felagund swoons upon the floor.

Behold! they are in their own fair shape,

fairskinned, brighteyed. No longer gape

Orclike their mouths; and now they stand

betrayed into the wizard's hand.

[530]{.float}Thus came they unhappy into woe,

to dungeons no hope nor glimmer know,

where chained in chains that eat the flesh

and woven in webs of strangling mesh

they lay forgotten, in despair.

[535]{.float}Yet not all unavailing were

the spells of Felagund; for Thû

neither their names nor purpose knew.

These much he pondered and bethought,

and in their woeful chains them sought,

[540]{.float}and threatened all with dreadful death,

if one would not with traitor's breath

reveal this knowledge. Wolves should come

and slow devour them one by one

before the others' eyes, and last

[545]{.float}should one alone be left aghast,

then in a place of horror hung

with anguish should his limbs be wrung,

in the bowels of the earth be slow

endlessly, cruelly, put to woe

[550]{.float}and torment, till he all declared.

Even as he threatened, so it fared.

From time to time in the eyeless dark

two eyes would grow, and they would hark

to frightful cries, and then a sound

[]{#calibre_link-62 .calibre3}[555]{.float}of rending, a slavering on
the ground,

and blood flowing they would smell.

But none would yield, and none would tell.
::::

::: extract
Here Canto VII ends. I return now to the *Quenta*, and take it up from
the words 'Long were they tortured in the dungeons of Thû, but none
betrayed the other' with which the previous extract ends ([p.
110](#calibre_link-61){.calibre3}); and as previously I follow the
*Quenta* account with the vastly different passage in the *Lay*.
:::

::: centered-image
![](images/000014.jpg){.calibre28}
:::
::::::::

:::: {#calibre_link-14 .calibre}
## []{#calibre_link-63 .calibre15}![](images/000015.jpg){.calibre29} {#section-8 .chapter-number1}

## A FURTHER EXTRACT FROM THE *QUENTA* {#a-further-extract-from-the-quenta .chapter-number2}

In the meanwhile Lúthien, learning by the far sight of Melian that Beren
had fallen into the power of Thû, sought in her despair to fly from
Doriath. This became known to Thingol, who imprisoned her in a house in
the tallest of his mighty beeches far above the ground. How she escaped
and came into the woods, and was found there by Celegorm as they hunted
on the borders of Doriath, is told in *The Lay of Leithian*. They took
her treacherously to Nargothrond, and Curufin the crafty became
enamoured of her beauty. From her tale they learned that Felagund was in
the hands of Thû; and they purposed to let him perish there, and keep
Lúthien with them, and force Thingol to wed Lúthien to Curufin, and so
build up their power and usurp Nargothrond and become the mightiest of
the princes of the Gnomes. They did not think to go in search of the
Silmarils, or suffer any others to do so, until they had all the power
of the Elves beneath themselves and obedient to them. But their designs
came to nought save estrangement and bitterness between the kingdoms of
the Elves.

Huan was the name of the chief of the hounds of Celegorm. He was of
immortal race from the hunting-lands of Oromë. Oromë gave him to
Celegorm long before in Valinor, when Celegorm often rode in the train
of the God and followed his horn. He came into the Great Lands with his
master, and dart nor weapon, spell nor poison, could harm him, so that
he went into battle with his lord and saved him many times from death.
His fate had decreed that he should not meet death save at the hands of
the mightiest wolf that should ever walk the world.

Huan was true of heart, and he loved Lúthien from the hour that he first
found her in the woods and brought her to Celegorm. His heart was
grieved by his master's treachery, and he set Lúthien free and went with
her to the North.

There Thû slew his captives one by one, till only Felagund and Beren
were left. When the hour for Beren's death came Felagund put forth all
his power, and burst his bonds, and wrestled with the werewolf that came
to slay Beren; and he killed the wolf, but was himself slain in the
dark. There Beren mourned in despair, and waited for death. But Lúthien
came and sang outside the dungeons. Thus she beguiled Thû to come forth,
for the fame of the loveliness of Lúthien had gone through all lands and
the wonder of her song. Even Morgoth desired her, and had promised the
greatest reward to any who could capture her. Each wolf that Thû sent
Huan slew silently, till Draugluin the greatest of his wolves came. Then
there was fierce battle, and Thû knew that Lúthien was not alone. But
[]{#calibre_link-68 .calibre3}he remembered the fate of Huan, and he
made himself the greatest wolf that had yet walked the world, and came
forth. But Huan overthrew him, and won from him the keys and the spells
that held together his enchanted walls and towers. So the stronghold was
broken and the towers thrown down and the dungeons opened. Many captives
were released, but Thû flew in bat's form to Taur-na-Fuin. There Lúthien
found Beren mourning beside Felagund. She healed his sorrow and the
wasting of his imprisonment, but Felagund they buried on the top of his
own island hill, and Thû came there no more.

Then Huan returned to his master, and less was the love between them
after. Beren and Lúthien wandered careless in happiness until they came
nigh to the borders of Doriath once more. There Beren remembered his
vow, and bade Lúthien farewell, but she would not be sundered from him.
In Nargothrond there was tumult. For Huan and many of the captives of
Thû brought back the tidings of the deeds of Lúthien, and the death of
Felagund, and the treachery of Celegorm and Curufin was laid bare. It is
said they had sent a secret embassy to Thingol ere Lúthien escaped, but
Thingol in wrath had sent their letters back by his own servants to
Orodreth. Wherefore now the hearts of the people of Narog turned back to
the house of Finrod, and they mourned their king Felagund whom they had
forsaken, and they did the bidding of Orodreth.

But he would not suffer them to slay the sons of Fëanor as they wished.
Instead he banished them from Nargothrond, and swore that little love
should there be between Narog and any of the sons of Fëanor thereafter.
And so it was.

Celegorm and Curufin were riding in haste and wrath through the woods to
find their way to Himling when they came upon Beren and Lúthien, even as
Beren sought to part from his love. They rode down on them, and
recognizing them tried to trample Beren under their hooves.

But Curufin lifted Lúthien to his saddle. Then befell the leap of Beren,
the greatest leap of mortal Men. For he sprang like a lion right upon
the speeding horse of Curufin, and grasped him about the throat, and
horse and rider fell in confusion upon the earth, but Lúthien was flung
far off and lay dazed upon the ground. There Beren choked Curufin, but
his death was very nigh from Celegorm, who rode back with his spear. In
that hour Huan forsook the service of Celegorm, and sprang upon him so
that his horse swerved aside, and no man for fear of the terror of the
great hound dared go nigh. Lúthien forbade the death of Curufin, but
Beren despoiled him of his horse and weapons, chief of which was his
famous knife, made by the Dwarves. It would cut iron like wood. Then the
brothers rode off, but shot back at Huan treacherously and at Lúthien.
Huan they did not hurt, but Beren sprang before Lúthien and was wounded,
and Men remembered that wound against the sons of Fëanor, when it became
known.

Huan stayed with Lúthien, and hearing of their perplexity and the
purpose Beren had still to go to Angband, he went and fetched them from
the ruined halls of Thû a werewolf's coat and a bat's. Three times only
did Huan speak with the tongue of Elves or Men. The first was when he
came to Lúthien in Nargothrond. This was the second, when he devised the
desperate counsel for their quest. So they rode North, till they could
no longer go on horse in safety. Then they put on the garments as of
wolf and bat, and Lúthien in guise of evil fay rode upon the werewolf.

In *The Lay of Leithian* is all told how they came to Angband's gate,
and found it newly guarded, for rumour of he knew not what design abroad
among the Elves had come to Morgoth. Wherefore he fashioned the
mightiest of all wolves, Carcharas Knife-fang, to sit at the gates. But
Lúthien set him in spells, and they won their way to the presence of
Morgoth, and Beren slunk beneath his chair. Then Lúthien dared the most
dreadful and most valiant deed that any of the Elves have ever dared; no
less than the challenge of Fingolfin is it accounted, and may be
greater, save that she was half-divine. She cast off her disguise and
named her own name, and feigned that she was brought captive by the
wolves of Thû. And she beguiled Morgoth, even as his heart plotted foul
evil within him; and she danced before him, and cast all his court in
sleep; and she sang to him, and she flung the magic robe she had woven
in Doriath in his face, and she set a binding dream upon him---what song
can sing the marvel of that deed, or the wrath and humiliation of
Morgoth, for even the Orcs laugh in secret when they remember it,
telling how Morgoth fell from his chair and his iron crown rolled upon
the floor.

Then forth leaped Beren casting aside the wolvish robe, and drew out the
knife of Curufin. With that he cut forth a Silmaril. But daring more he
essayed to gain them all. Then the knife of the treacherous Dwarves
snapped, and the ringing sound of it stirred the sleeping hosts and
Morgoth groaned. []{#calibre_link-66 .calibre3}Terror seized the hearts
of Beren and Lúthien, and they fled down the dark ways of Angband. The
doors were barred by Carcharas, now aroused from the spell of Lúthien.
Beren set himself before Lúthien, which proved ill; for ere she could
touch the wolf with her robe or speak word of magic, he sprang upon
Beren, who now had no weapon. With his right he smote at the eyes of
Carcharas, but the wolf took the hand into his jaws and bit it off. Now
that hand held the Silmaril. Then was the maw of Carcharas burned with a
fire of anguish and torment, when the Silmaril touched his evil flesh;
and he fled howling from before them, so that all the mountains
shuddered, and the madness of the wolf of Angband was of all the horrors
that ever came into the North the most dire and terrible. Hardly did
Lúthien and Beren escape, ere all Angband was aroused.

Of their wanderings and despair, and of the healing of Beren, who ever
since has been called Beren Ermabwed the One-handed, of their rescue by
Huan, who had vanished suddenly from them ere they came to Angband, and
of their coming to Doriath once more, here there is little to tell. But
in Doriath many things had befallen. Ever things had gone ill there
since Lúthien fled away. Grief had fallen on all the people and silence
on their songs when their hunting found her not. Long was the search,
and in searching Dairon the piper of Doriath was lost, who loved Lúthien
before Beren came to Doriath. He was the greatest of the musicians of
the Elves, save Maglor son of Fëanor, and Tinfang Warble. But he came
never back to Doriath and strayed into the East of the world.

Assaults too there were on Doriath's borders, for rumours that Lúthien
was astray had reached Angband. Boldog the captain of the Orcs was there
slain in battle by Thingol, and his great warriors Beleg the Bowman and
Mablung Heavyhand were with Thingol in that battle. Thus Thingol learned
that Lúthien was yet free of Morgoth, but that he knew of her wandering;
and Thingol was filled with fear. In the midst of his fear came the
embassy of Celegorm in secret, and said that Beren was dead, and
Felagund, and Lúthien was at Nargothrond. Then Thingol found it in his
heart to regret the death of Beren, and his wrath was aroused at the
hinted treachery of Celegorm to the house of Finrod, and because he kept
Lúthien and did not send her home. Wherefore he sent spies into the land
of Nargothrond and prepared for war. But he learned that Lúthien had
fled and that Celegorm and his brother were gone to Aglon. So now he
sent an embassy to Aglon, since his might was not great enough to fall
upon all the seven brothers, nor was his quarrel with others than
Celegorm and Curufin. But this embassy journeying in the woods met with
the onslaught of Carcharas. That great wolf had run in madness through
all the woods of the North, and death and devastation went with him.
Mablung alone escaped to bear the news of his coming to Thingol. Of
fate, or the magic of the Silmaril that he bore to his torment, he was
not stayed by the spells of Melian, but burst into the inviolate woods
of Doriath, and far and wide terror and destruction was spread.

Even as the sorrows of Doriath were at their worst came Lúthien and
Beren and Huan back to Doriath. Then the heart of []{#calibre_link-72
.calibre3}Thingol was lightened, but he looked not with love upon Beren
in whom he saw the cause of all his woes. When he had learned how Beren
had escaped from Thû he was amazed, but he said: 'Mortal, what of thy
quest and of thy vow?' Then said Beren: 'Even now I have a Silmaril in
my hand.' 'Show it to me,' said Thingol. 'That I cannot,' said Beren,
'for my hand is not here.' And all the tale he told, and made clear the
cause of the madness of Carcharas, and Thingol's heart was softened by
his brave words, and his forbearance, and the great love that he saw
between his daughter and this most valiant Man.

Now therefore did they plan the wolf-hunt of Carcharas. In that hunt was
Huan and Thingol and Mablung and Beleg and Beren and no more. And here
the sad tale of it must be short, for it is elsewhere told more fully.
Lúthien remained behind in foreboding, as they went forth; and well she
might, for Carcharas was slain, but Huan died in the same hour, and he
died to save Beren. Yet Beren was hurt to the death, but lived to place
the Silmaril in the hands of Thingol, when Mablung had cut it from the
belly of the wolf. Then he spoke not again, until they had borne him
with Huan at his side back to the doors of Thingol's halls. There
beneath the beech, wherein before she had been imprisoned, Lúthien met
them, and kissed Beren ere his spirit departed to the halls of awaiting.
So ended the long tale of Lúthien and Beren. But not yet was *The Lay of
Leithian*, release from bondage, told in full. For it has long been said
that Lúthien failed and faded swiftly and vanished from the earth,
though some songs say that Melian summoned Thorondor, and he bore her
living unto Valinor. And she came to the halls of Mandos, and she sang
to him a tale of moving love so fair that he was moved to pity, as never
has befallen since. Beren he summoned, and thus, as Lúthien had sworn as
she kissed him at the hour of death, they met beyond the western sea.
And Mandos suffered them to depart, but he said that Lúthien should
become mortal even as her lover, and should leave the earth once more in
the manner of mortal women, and her beauty become but a memory of song.
So it was, but it is said that in recompense Mandos gave to Beren and to
Lúthien thereafter a long span of life and joy, and they wandered
knowing thirst nor cold in the fair land of Beleriand, and no mortal Man
thereafter spoke to Beren or his spouse.

::: centered-image
![](images/000016.jpg){.calibre30}
:::
::::

:::::::::::::: {#calibre_link-15 .calibre}
## ![](images/000017.jpg){.calibre31} {#section-9 .chapter-number1}

## THE NARRATIVE IN *THE LAY OF LEITHIAN* TO ITS TERMINATION {#the-narrative-in-the-lay-of-leithian-to-its-termination .chapter-number2}

::: extract
This substantial portion of the poem takes up from the last line of
Canto VII in *The Lay of Leithian* ('But none would yield, and none
would tell', [p. 132](#calibre_link-62){.calibre3}), and the opening of
Canto VIII corresponds to the very compressed account in the *Quenta*
([p. 133](#calibre_link-63){.calibre3}) of the confinement of Lúthien in
Nargothrond, imposed on her by Celegorm and Curufin and from which she
was rescued by Huan, whose origin is told. A line of asterisks in the
text of the *Lay* marks the start of a further Canto; Canto IX at line
329; Canto X at line 619; Canto XI at line 1009; Canto XII at line 1301;
Canto XIII at line 1603; and Canto XIV, the last, at line 1939.
:::

::::::: verse1
Hounds there were in Valinor

with silver collars. Hart and boar,

the fox and hare and nimble roe

there in the forests green did go.

[5]{.float}Oromë was the lord divine

[]{#calibre_link-133 .calibre3}of all those woods. The potent wine

went in his halls and hunting song.

The Gnomes anew have named him long

Tavros, the God whose horns did blow

[10]{.float}over the mountains long ago;

who alone of Gods had loved the world

before the banners were unfurled

of Moon and Sun; and shod with gold

were his great horses. Hounds untold

[15]{.float}baying in woods beyond the West

of race immortal he possessed:

grey and limber, black and strong

white with silken coats and long,

brown and brindled, swift and true

[20]{.float}as arrow from a bow of yew;

their voices like the deeptoned bells

that ring in Valmar's citadels,

their eyes like living jewels, their teeth

like ruel-bone. As sword from sheath

[25]{.float}they flashed and fled from leash to scent

for Tavros' joy and merriment.

In Tavros' friths and pastures green

had Huan once a young whelp been.

He grew the swiftest of the swift

[30]{.float}and Oromë gave him as a gift

to Celegorm, who loved to follow

the great god's horn o'er hill and hollow.

Alone of hounds of the Land of Light,

[]{#calibre_link-115 .calibre3}when sons of Fëanor took to flight

[35]{.float}and came into the North, he stayed

beside his master. Every raid

and every foray wild he shared,

and into mortal battle dared.

Often he saved his Gnomish lord

[40]{.float}from Orc and wolf and leaping sword.

A wolf-hound, tireless, grey and fierce

he grew; his gleaming eyes would pierce

all shadows and all mist, the scent

moons old he found through fen and bent,

[45]{.float}through rustling leaves and dusty sand;

all paths of wide Beleriand

he knew. But wolves, he loved them best;

he loved to find their throats and wrest

their snarling lives and evil breath.

[50]{.float}The packs of Thû him feared as death.

No wizardry, nor spell, nor dart,

no fang, nor venom devil's art

could brew had harmed him; for his weird

was woven. Yet he little feared

[55]{.float}that fate decreed and known to all:

before the mightiest he should fall,

before the mightiest wolf alone

that ever was whelped in cave of stone.

::: {#calibre_link-30 .centered-image1}
![](images/000030.jpg){.calibre32}
:::

Hark! afar in Nargothrond,

[60]{.float}far over Sirion and beyond,

there are dim cries and horns blowing,

and barking hounds through the trees going.

The hunt is up, the woods are stirred.

Who rides to-day? Ye have not heard

[65]{.float}that Celegorm and Curufin

have loosed their dogs? With merry din

they mounted ere the sun arose,

and took their spears and took their bows.

The wolves of Thû of late have dared

[70]{.float}both far and wide. Their eyes have glared

by night across the roaring stream

of Narog. Doth their master dream,

perchance, of plots and counsels deep,

of secrets that the Elf-lords keep,

[75]{.float}of movements in the Gnomish realm

and errands under beech and elm?

Curufin spake: 'Good brother mine,

I like it not. What dark design

doth this portend? These evil things

[80]{.float}we swift must end their wanderings!

And more, 'twould please my heart full well

to hunt a while and wolves to fell.'

And then he leaned and whispered low

that Orodreth was a dullard slow;

[85]{.float}long time it was since the king had gone,

and rumour or tidings came there none.

'At least thy profit it would be

to know whether dead he is or free;

to gather thy men and thy array.

[]{#calibre_link-128 .calibre3}[90]{.float}"I go to hunt" then thou wilt
say,

and men will think that Narog's good

ever thou heedest. But in the wood

things may be learned; and if by grace,

by some blind fortune he retrace

[95]{.float}his footsteps mad, and if he bear

a Silmaril---I need declare

no more in words; but one by right

is thine (and ours), the jewel of light;

another may be won---a throne.

[100]{.float}The eldest blood our house doth own.'

Celegorm listened. Nought he said,

but forth a mighty host he led;

and Huan leaped at the glad sounds,

the chief and captain of his hounds.

[105]{.float}Three days they ride by holt and hill

the wolves of Thû to hunt and kill,

and many a head and fell of grey

they take, and many drive away,

till nigh to the borders in the West

[110]{.float}of Doriath a while they rest.

There were dim cries and horns blowing,

and barking dogs through the woods going.

The hunt was up. The woods were stirred,

and one there fled like a startled bird,

[115]{.float}and fear was in her dancing feet.

She knew not who the woods did beat.

Far from her home, forwandered, pale,

she flitted ghostlike through the vale;

ever her heart bade her up and on

[120]{.float}but her limbs were worn, her eyes were wan.

The eyes of Huan saw a shade

wavering, darting down a glade

like a mist of evening snared by day

and hasting fearfully away.

[125]{.float}He bayed, and sprang with sinewy limb

to chase the shy thing strange and dim.

On terror's wings, like a butterfly

pursued by a sweeping bird on high,

she fluttered hither, darted there,

[130]{.float}now poised, now flying through the air---

in vain. At last against a tree

she leaned and panted. Up leaped he.

No word of magic gasped with woe,

no elvish mystery she did know

[135]{.float}or had entwined in raiment dark

availed against that hunter stark,

whose old immortal race and kind

no spells could ever turn or bind.

Huan alone that she ever met

[140]{.float}she never in enchantment set

nor bound with spells. But loveliness

and gentle voice and pale distress

and eyes like starlight dimmed with tears

tamed him that death nor monster fears.

[145]{.float}Lightly he lifted her, light he bore

his trembling burden. Never before

had Celegorm beheld such prey:

'What hast thou brought, good Huan say!

Dark-elvish maid, or wraith, or fay?

[150]{.float}Not such to hunt we came today.'

''Tis Lúthien of Doriath,'

the maiden spake. 'A wandering path

far from the Wood-elves' sunny glades

she sadly winds, where courage fades

[155]{.float}and hope grows faint.' And as she spoke

down she let slip her shadowy cloak,

and there she stood in silver and white.

Her starry jewels twinkled bright

in the risen sun like morning dew;

[160]{.float}the lilies gold on mantle blue

gleamed and glistened. Who could gaze

on that fair face without amaze?

Long did Curufin look and stare.

The perfume of her flower-twined hair

[165]{.float}her lissom limbs, her elvish face,

smote to his heart, and in that place

enchained he stood. 'O maiden royal,

O lady fair, wherefore in toil

and lonely journey dost thou go?

[170]{.float}What tidings dread of war and woe

in Doriath have betid? Come tell!

For fortune thee hath guided well;

friends thou hast found,' said Celegorm,

and gazed upon her elvish form.

[175]{.float}In his heart him thought her tale unsaid

he knew in part, but nought she read

of guile upon his smiling face.

'Who are ye then, the lordly chase

that follow in this perilous wood?'

[180]{.float}she asked; and answer seeming-good

they gave. 'Thy servants, lady sweet,

lords of Nargothrond thee greet,

and beg that thou wouldst with them go

back to their hills, forgetting woe

[185]{.float}a season, seeking hope and rest.

And now to hear thy tale were best.'

So Lúthien tells of Beren's deeds

in northern lands, how fate him leads

to Doriath, of Thingol's ire,

[190]{.float}the dreadful errand that her sire

decreed for Beren. Sign nor word

the brothers gave that aught they heard

that touched them near. Of her escape

and the marvellous mantle she did shape

[195]{.float}she lightly tells, but words her fail

recalling sunlight in the vale,

moonlight, starlight in Doriath,

ere Beren took the perilous path.

'Need, too, my lords, there is of haste!

[200]{.float}No time in ease and rest to waste.

For days are gone now since the queen

Melian whose heart hath vision keen,

looking afar me said in fear

that Beren lived in bondage drear.

[205]{.float}The Lord of Wolves hath prisons dark,

chains and enchantments cruel and stark,

and there entrapped and languishing

doth Beren lie---if direr thing

hath not brought death or wish for death':

[210]{.float}then gasping woe bereft her breath.

To Celegorm said Curufin

apart and low: 'Now news we win

of Felagund, and now we know

wherefore Thû's creatures prowling go',

[215]{.float}and other whispered counsels spake,

and showed him what answer he should make.

'Lady,' said Celegorm, 'thou seest

we go a-hunting roaming beast,

and though our host is great and bold,

[220]{.float}'tis ill prepared the wizard's hold

and island fortress to assault.

Deem not our hearts and wills at fault.

Lo! here our chase we now forsake

and home our swiftest road we take,

[225]{.float}counsel and aid there to devise

for Beren that in anguish lies.'

[]{#calibre_link-69 .calibre3}To Nargothrond they with them bore

Lúthien, whose heart misgave her sore.

Delay she feared; each moment pressed

[230]{.float}upon her spirit, yet she guessed

they rode not as swiftly as they might.

Ahead leaped Huan day and night,

and ever looking back his thought

was troubled. What his master sought,

[235]{.float}and why he rode not like the fire,

why Curufin looked with hot desire

on Lúthien, he pondered deep,

and felt some evil shadow creep

of ancient curse o'er Elfinesse.

[240]{.float}His heart was torn for the distress

of Beren bold, and Lúthien dear,

and Felagund who knew no fear.

In Nargothrond the torches flared

and feast and music were prepared.

[245]{.float}Lúthien feasted not but wept.

Her ways were trammelled; closely kept

she might not fly. Her magic cloak

was hidden, and no prayer she spoke

was heeded, nor did answer find

[250]{.float}her eager questions. Out of mind,

it seemed, were those afar that pined

in anguish and in dungeons blind

in prison and in misery.

Too late she knew their treachery.

[255]{.float}It was not hid in Nargothrond

that Fëanor's sons her held in bond,

who Beren heeded not, and who

had little cause to wrest from Thû

the king they loved not and whose quest

[260]{.float}old vows of hatred in their breast

had roused from sleep. Orodreth knew

the purpose dark they would pursue:

King Felagund to leave to die,

and with King Thingol's blood ally

[265]{.float}the house of Fëanor by force

or treaty. But to stay their course

he had no power, for all his folk

the brothers had yet beneath their yoke,

and all yet listened to their word.

[270]{.float}Orodreth's counsel no man heard;

their shame they crushed, and would not heed

the tale of Felagund's dire need.

At Lúthien's feet there day by day

and at night beside her couch would stay

[275]{.float}Huan the hound of Nargothrond;

and words she spoke to him soft and fond:

'O Huan, Huan, swiftest hound

that ever ran on mortal ground,

what evil doth thy lords possess

[280]{.float}to heed no tears nor my distress?

Once Barahir all men above

good hounds did cherish and did love;

[]{#calibre_link-129 .calibre3}once Beren in the friendless North,

when outlaw wild he wandered forth,

[285]{.float}had friends unfailing among things

with fur and fell and feathered wings,

and among the spirits that in stone

in mountains old and wastes alone

still dwell. But now nor Elf nor Man,

[290]{.float}none save the child of Melian,

remembers him who Morgoth fought

and never to thraldom base was brought.'

Nought said Huan; but Curufin

thereafter never near might win

[295]{.float}to Lúthien, nor touch that maid,

but shrank from Huan's fangs afraid.

Then on a night when autumn damp

was swathed about the glimmering lamp

of the wan moon, and fitful stars

[300]{.float}were flying seen between the bars

of racing cloud, when winter's horn

already wound in trees forlorn,

lo! Huan was gone. Then Lúthien lay,

fearing new wrong, till just ere day,

[305]{.float}when all is dead and breathless still

and shapeless fears the sleepless fill,

a shadow came along the wall.

Then something let there softly fall

her magic cloak beside her couch.

[310]{.float}Trembling she saw the great hound crouch

beside her, heard a deep voice swell

as from a tower a far slow bell.

Thus Huan spake, who never before

had uttered words, and but twice more

[315]{.float}did speak in elven tongue again:

'Lady beloved, whom all Men,

whom Elfinesse, and whom all things

with fur and fell and feathered wings

should serve and love---arise! away!

[320]{.float}Put on thy cloak! Before the day

comes over Nargothrond we fly

to Northern perils, thou and I.'

And ere he ceased he counsel wrought

for achievement of the thing they sought.

[325]{.float}There Lúthien listened in amaze,

and softly on Huan did she gaze.

Her arms about his neck she cast---

in friendship that to death should last.

\*\*\*\*\*\*

In Wizard's Isle still lay forgot

[330]{.float}enmeshed and tortured in that grot

cold, evil, doorless, without light,

and blank-eyed stared at endless night

two comrades. Now alone they were.

The others lived no more, but bare

[335]{.float}their broken bones would lie and tell

how ten had served their master well.

To Felagund then Beren said:

''Twere little loss if I were dead,

and I am minded all to tell,

[340]{.float}and thus, perchance, from this dark hell

thy life to loose. I set thee free

from thine old oath, for more for me

hast thou endured than e'er was earned.'

'A! Beren, Beren hast not learned

[345]{.float}that promises of Morgoth's folk

are frail as breath. From this dark yoke

of pain shall neither ever go,

whether he learn our names or no,

with Thû's consent. Nay more, I think

[350]{.float}yet deeper of torment we should drink,

knew he that son of Barahir

and Felagund were captive here,

and even worse if he should know

the dreadful errand we did go.'

[355]{.float}A devil's laugh they ringing heard

within their pit. 'True, true the word

I hear you speak,' a voice then said.

''Twere little loss if he were dead,

the outlaw mortal. But the king,

[360]{.float}the Elf undying, many a thing

no man could suffer may endure.

Perchance, when what these walls immure

of dreadful anguish thy folk learn,

their king to ransom they will yearn

[365]{.float}with gold and gem and high hearts cowed;

or maybe Celegorm the proud

will deem a rival's prison cheap,

and crown and gold himself will keep.

Perchance, the errand I shall know,

[370]{.float}ere all is done, that ye did go.

The wolf is hungry, the hour is nigh;

no more need Beren wait to die.'

The slow time passed. Then in the gloom

two eyes there glowed. He saw his doom,

[375]{.float}Beren, silent, as his bonds he strained

beyond his mortal might enchained.

Lo! sudden there was rending sound

of chains that parted and unwound,

of meshes broken. Forth there leaped

[380]{.float}upon the wolvish thing that crept

in shadow faithful Felagund,

careless of fang or mortal wound.

There in the dark they wrestled slow,

remorseless, snarling, to and fro,

[385]{.float}teeth in flesh, gripe on throat,

fingers locked in shaggy coat,

spurning Beren who there lying

heard the werewolf gasping, dying.

Then a voice he heard: 'Farewell!

[390]{.float}On earth I need no longer dwell,

friend and comrade, Beren bold.

My heart is burst, my limbs are cold.

Here all my power I have spent

to break my bonds, and dreadful rent

[395]{.float}of poisoned teeth is in my breast.

I now must go to my long rest

neath Timbrenting in timeless halls

where drink the Gods, where the light falls

upon the shining sea.' Thus died the king,

[400]{.float}as elvish harpers yet do sing.

There Beren lies. His grief no tear,

his despair no horror has nor fear,

waiting for footsteps, a voice, for doom.

Silences profounder than the tomb

[405]{.float}of long-forgotten kings, neath years

and sands uncounted laid on biers

and buried everlasting-deep,

slow and unbroken round him creep.

The silences were sudden shivered

[410]{.float}to silver fragments. Faint there quivered

a voice in song that walls of rock,

enchanted hill, and bar and lock,

and powers of darkness pierced with light.

He felt about him the soft night

[]{#calibre_link-163 .calibre3}[415]{.float}of many stars, and in the
air

were rustlings and a perfume rare;

the nightingales were in the trees,

slim fingers flute and viol seize

beneath the moon, and one more fair

[420]{.float}than all there be or ever were

upon a lonely knoll of stone

in shimmering raiment danced alone.

Then in his dream it seemed he sang,

and loud and fierce his chanting rang,

[425]{.float}old songs of battle in the North,

of breathless deeds, of marching forth

to dare uncounted odds and break

great powers, and towers, and strong walls shake;

and over all the silver fire

[430]{.float}that once Men named the Burning Briar,

the Seven Stars that Varda set

about the North, were burning yet,

a light in darkness, hope in woe,

the emblem vast of Morgoth's foe.

[435]{.float}'Huan, Huan! I hear a song

far under welling, far but strong

a song that Beren bore aloft.

I hear his voice, I have heard it oft

in dream and wandering.' Whispering low

[440]{.float}thus Lúthien spake. On the bridge of woe

in mantle wrapped at dead of night

she sat and sang, and to its height

and to its depth the Wizard's Isle,

rock upon rock and pile on pile,

[445]{.float}trembling echoed. The werewolves howled,

and Huan hidden lay and growled

watchful listening in the dark,

waiting for battle cruel and stark.

::: {#calibre_link-31 .centered-image1}
![](images/000031.jpg){.calibre33}
:::

Thû heard that voice, and sudden stood

[450]{.float}wrapped in his cloak and sable hood

in his high tower. He listened long,

and smiled, and knew that elvish song.

'A! little Lúthien! What brought

the foolish fly to web unsought?

[455]{.float}Morgoth! a great and rich reward

to me thou wilt owe when to thy hoard

this jewel is added.' Down he went,

and forth his messengers he sent.

Still Lúthien sang. A creeping shape

[460]{.float}with bloodred tongue and jaws agape

stole on the bridge; but she sang on

with trembling limbs and wide eyes wan.

The creeping shape leaped to her side,

and gasped, and sudden fell and died.

[465]{.float}And still they came, still one by one,

and each was seized, and there were none

returned with padding feet to tell

that a shadow lurketh fierce and fell

at the bridge's end, and that below

[470]{.float}the shuddering waters loathing flow

o'er the grey corpses Huan killed.

A mightier shadow slowly filled

the narrow bridge, a slavering hate,

an awful werewolf fierce and great:

[475]{.float}pale Draugluin, the old grey lord

of wolves and beasts of blood abhorred,

that fed on flesh of Man and Elf

beneath the chair of Thû himself.

No more in silence did they fight.

[480]{.float}Howling and baying smote the night,

till back by the chair where he had fed

to die the werewolf yammering fled.

'Huan is there' he gasped and died,

and Thû was filled with wrath and pride.

[485]{.float}'Before the mightiest he shall fall,

before the mightiest wolf of all',

so thought he now, and thought he knew

how fate long spoken should come true.

Now there came slowly forth and glared

[490]{.float}into the night a shape long-haired,

dank with poison, with awful eyes

wolvish, ravenous; but there lies

a light therein more cruel and dread

than ever wolvish eyes had fed.

[495]{.float}More huge were its limbs, its jaws more wide,

its fangs more gleaming-sharp, and dyed

with venom, torment, and with death.

The deadly vapour of its breath

swept on before it. Swooning dies

[500]{.float}the song of Lúthien, and her eyes

are dimmed and darkened with a fear,

cold and poisonous and drear.

Thus came Thû, as wolf more great

than e'er was seen from Angband's gate

[505]{.float}to the burning south, than ever lurked

in mortal lands or murder worked.

Sudden he sprang, and Huan leaped

aside in shadow. On he swept

to Lúthien lying swooning faint.

[510]{.float}To her drowning senses came the taint

of his foul breathing, and she stirred;

dizzily she spake a whispered word,

her mantle brushed across his face.

He stumbled staggering in his pace.

[515]{.float}Out leaped Huan. Back he sprang.

Beneath the stars there shuddering rang

the cry of hunting wolves at bay,

the tongue of hounds that fearless slay.

Backward and forth they leaped and ran

[520]{.float}feinting to flee, and round they span,

and bit and grappled, and fell and rose.

Then suddenly Huan holds and throws

his ghastly foe; his throat he rends,

choking his life. Not so it ends.

[525]{.float}From shape to shape, from wolf to worm,

from monster to his own demon form,

Thû changes, but that desperate grip

he cannot shake, nor from it slip.

No wizardry, nor spell, nor dart,

[530]{.float}no fang, nor venom, nor devil's art

could harm that hound that hart and boar

had hunted once in Valinor.

Nigh the foul spirit Morgoth made

and bred of evil shuddering strayed

[535]{.float}from its dark house, when Lúthien rose

and shivering looked upon his throes.

'O demon dark, O phantom vile

of foulness wrought, of lies and guile,

here shalt thou die, thy spirit roam

[540]{.float}quaking back to thy master's home

his scorn and fury to endure;

thee he will in the bowels immure

of groaning earth, and in a hole

everlastingly thy naked soul

[545]{.float}shall wail and gibber---this shall be

unless the keys thou render me

of thy black fortress, and the spell

that bindeth stone to stone thou tell,

and speak the words of opening.'

[550]{.float}With gasping breath and shuddering

he spake, and yielded as he must,

and vanquished betrayed his master's trust.

Lo! by the bridge a gleam of light,

like stars descended from the night

[555]{.float}to burn and tremble here below.

There wide her arms did Lúthien throw,

and called aloud with voice as clear

as still at whiles may mortal hear

long elvish trumpets o'er the hill

[560]{.float}echo, when all the world is still.

The dawn peered over mountains wan;

their grey heads silent looked thereon.

The hill trembled; the citadel

crumbled, and all its towers fell;

[565]{.float}the rocks yawned and the bridge broke,

and Sirion spumed in sudden smoke.

Like ghosts the owls were flying seen

hooting in the dawn, and bats unclean

went skimming dark through the cold airs

[570]{.float}shrieking thinly to find new lairs

in Deadly Nightshade's branches dread.

The wolves whimpering and yammering fled

like dusky shadows. Out there creep

pale forms and ragged as from sleep.

[575]{.float}crawling, and shielding blinded eyes:

the captives in fear and in surprise

from dolour long in clinging night

beyond all hope set free to light.

A vampire shape with pinions vast

[580]{.float}screeching leaped from the ground, and passed,

its dark blood dripping on the trees;

and Huan neath him lifeless sees

a wolvish corpse---for Thû had flown

to Taur-na-Fuin, a new throne

[585]{.float}and darker stronghold there to build.

The captives came and wept and shrilled

their piteous cries of thanks and praise.

But Lúthien anxious-gazing stays.

Beren comes not. At length she said:

[590]{.float}'Huan, Huan, among the dead

must we then find him whom we sought,

for love of whom we toiled and fought?'

Then side by side from stone to stone

o'er Sirion they climbed. Alone

[595]{.float}unmoving they him found, who mourned

by Felagund, and never turned

to see what feet drew halting nigh.

'A! Beren, Beren!' came her cry,

'almost too late have I thee found?

[600]{.float}Alas! that here upon the ground

the noblest of the noble race

in vain thy anguish doth embrace!

Alas! in tears that we should meet

who once found meeting passing sweet!'

[605]{.float}Her voice such love and longing filled

he raised his eyes, his mourning stilled,

and felt his heart new-turned to flame

for her that through peril to him came.

'O Lúthien, O Lúthien,

[610]{.float}more fair than any child of Men,

O loveliest maid of Elfinesse,

what might of love did thee possess

to bring thee here to terror's lair!

O lissom limbs and shadowy hair,

[615]{.float}O flower-entwinéd brows so white,

O slender hands in this new light!'

She found his arms and swooned away

just at the rising of the day.

\*\*\*\*\*\*

Songs have recalled the Elves have sung

[620]{.float}in old forgotten elven tongue

how Lúthien and Beren strayed

by the banks of Sirion. Many a glade

they filled with joy, and there their feet

passed by lightly, and days were sweet.

[625]{.float}Though winter hunted through the wood

still flowers lingered where she stood.

Tinúviel! Tinúviel!

the birds are unafraid to dwell

and sing beneath the peaks of snow

[630]{.float}where Beren and where Lúthien go.

The isle in Sirion they left behind;

but there on hill-top might one find

a green grave, and a stone set,

and there there lie the white bones yet

[635]{.float}of Felagund, of Finrod's son---

unless that land is changed and gone,

or foundered in unfathomed seas,

while Felagund laughs beneath the trees

in Valinor, and comes no more

[640]{.float}to this grey world of tears and war.

To Nargothrond no more he came;

but thither swiftly ran the fame,

of their king dead, of Thû o'erthrown,

of the breaking of the towers of stone.

[645]{.float}For many now came home at last

who long ago to shadow passed;

and like a shadow had returned

Huan the hound, and scant had earned

or praise or thanks of master wroth;

[650]{.float}yet loyal he was, though he was loath.

The halls of Narog clamours fill

that vainly Celegorm would still.

There men bewailed their fallen king,

crying that a maiden dared that thing

[655]{.float}which sons of Fëanor would not do.

'Let us slay these faithless lords untrue!'

the fickle folk now loudly cried

with Felagund who would not ride.

Orodreth spake: 'The kingdom now

[660]{.float}is mine alone. I will allow

no spilling of kindred blood by kin.

But bread nor rest shall find herein

these brothers who have set at nought

the house of Finrod.' They were brought.

[665]{.float}Scornful, unbowed, and unashamed

stood Celegorm. In his eye there flamed

a light of menace. Curufin

smiled with his crafty mouth and thin.

'Be gone for ever---ere the day

[670]{.float}shall fall into the sea. Your way

shall never lead you hither more,

nor any son of Fëanor;

nor ever after shall be bond

of love twixt yours and Nargothrond.'

[675]{.float}'We will remember it,' they said,

and turned upon their heels, and sped,

and took their horses and such folk

as still them followed. Nought they spoke

but sounded horns, and rode like fire,

[680]{.float}and went away in anger dire.

Towards Doriath the wanderers now

were drawing nigh. Though bare the bough,

though cold the wind, and grey the grasses

through which the hiss of winter passes,

[685]{.float}they sang beneath the frosty sky

uplifted o'er them pale and high.

They came to Mindeb's narrow stream

that from the hills doth leap and gleam

by western borders where begin

[690]{.float}the spells of Melian to fence in

King Thingol's land, and stranger steps

to wind bewildered in their webs.

There sudden sad grew Beren's heart:

'Alas, Tinúviel, here we part

[695]{.float}and our brief song together ends,

and sundered ways each lonely wends!'

'Why part we here? What dost thou say,

just at the dawn of brighter day?'

'For safe thou'rt come to borderlands

[700]{.float}o'er which in the keeping of the hands

of Melian thou wilt walk at ease

and find thy home and well-loved trees.'

'My heart is glad when the fair trees

far off uprising grey it sees

[705]{.float}of Doriath inviolate.

Yet Doriath my heart did hate,

and Doriath my feet forsook,

my home, my kin. I would not look

on grass nor leaf there evermore

[710]{.float}without thee by me. Dark the shore

of Esgalduin the deep and strong!

Why there alone forsaking song

by endless waters rolling past

must I then hopeless sit at last,

[715]{.float}and gaze at waters pitiless

in heartache and in loneliness?'

'For never more to Doriath

can Beren find the winding path,

though Thingol willed it or allowed;

[720]{.float}for to thy father there I vowed

to come not back save to fulfill

the quest of the shining Silmaril,

and win by valour my desire.

"Not rock nor steel nor Morgoth's fire

[725]{.float}nor all the power of Elfinesse,

shall keep the gem I would possess":

thus swore I once of Lúthien

more fair than any child of Men.

My word, alas! I must achieve,

[730]{.float}though sorrow pierce and parting grieve.'

'Then Lúthien will not go home,

but weeping in the woods will roam,

[]{#calibre_link-149 .calibre3}nor peril heed, nor laughter know.

And if she may not by thee go

[735]{.float}against thy will thy desperate feet

she will pursue, until they meet,

Beren and Lúthien, love once more

on earth or on the shadowy shore.'

'Nay, Lúthien, most brave of heart,

[740]{.float}thou makest it more hard to part.

Thy love me drew from bondage drear,

but never to that outer fear,

that darkest mansion of all dread,

shall thy most blissful light be led.'

[745]{.float}'Never, never!' he shuddering said.

But even as in his arms she pled,

a sound came like a hurrying storm.

There Curufin and Celegorm

in sudden tumult like the wind

[750]{.float}rode up. The hooves of horses dinned

loud on the earth. In rage and haste

madly northward they now raced

the path twixt Doriath to find

and the shadows dreadly dark entwined

[755]{.float}of Taur-na-fuin. That was their road

most swift to where their kin abode

in the east, where Himling's watchful hill

o'er Aglon's gorge hung tall and still.

They saw the wanderers. With a shout

[760]{.float}straight on them swung their hurrying rout

as if neath maddened hooves to rend

the lovers and their love to end.

But as they came their horses swerved

with nostrils wide and proud necks curved;

[765]{.float}Curufin, stooping, to saddlebow

with mighty arm did Lúthien throw,

and laughed. Too soon; for there a spring

fiercer than tawny lion-king

maddened with arrows barbéd smart,

[770]{.float}greater than any hornéd hart

that hounded to a gulf leaps o'er,

there Beren gave, and with a roar

leaped on Curufin; round his neck

his arms entwined, and all to wreck

[775]{.float}both horse and rider fell to ground;

and there they fought without a sound.

Dazed in the grass did Lúthien lie

beneath bare branches and the sky;

the Gnome felt Beren's fingers grim

[780]{.float}close on his throat and strangle him,

and out his eyes did start, and tongue

gasping from his mouth there hung.

Up rode Celegorm with his spear,

and bitter death was Beren near.

[785]{.float}With elvish steel he nigh was slain

whom Lúthien won from hopeless chain,

but baying Huan sudden sprang

before his master's face with fang

white-gleaming, and with bristling hair,

[790]{.float}as if he on boar or wolf did stare.

The horse in terror leaped aside,

and Celegorm in anger cried:

'Curse thee, thou baseborn dog, to dare

against thy master teeth to bare!'

[795]{.float}But dog nor horse nor rider bold

would venture near the anger cold

of mighty Huan fierce at bay.

Red were his jaws. They shrank away,

and fearful eyed him from afar:

[800]{.float}nor sword nor knife, nor scimitar,

no dart of bow, nor cast of spear,

master nor man did Huan fear.

There Curufin had left his life,

had Lúthien not stayed that strife.

[805]{.float}Waking she rose and softly cried

standing distressed at Beren's side:

'Forbear thy anger now, my lord!

nor do the work of Orcs abhorred;

for foes there be of Elfinesse,

[810]{.float}unnumbered, and they grow not less,

while here we war by ancient curse

distraught, and all the world to worse

decays and crumbles. Make thy peace!'

Then Beren did Curufin release;

[815]{.float}but took his horse and coat of mail

[]{#calibre_link-132 .calibre3}and took his knife there gleaming pale,

hanging sheathless, wrought of steel.

No flesh could leeches ever heal

that point had pierced; for long ago

[820]{.float}the dwarves had made it, singing slow

enchantments, where their hammers fell

in Nogrod ringing like a bell.

Iron as tender wood it cleft,

and sundered mail like woollen weft.

[825]{.float}But other hands its haft now held;

its master lay by mortal felled.

Beren uplifting him, far him flung,

and cried 'Begone!', with stinging tongue;

'Begone! thou renegade and fool,

[830]{.float}and let thy lust in exile cool!

Arise and go, and no more work

like Morgoth's slaves or curséd Orc;

and deal, proud son of Fëanor,

in deeds more proud than heretofore!'

[835]{.float}Then Beren led Lúthien away,

while Huan still there stood at bay.

'Farewell,' cried Celegorm the fair.

'Far get you gone! And better were

to die forhungered in the waste

[840]{.float}than wrath of Fëanor's sons to taste,

that yet may reach o'er dale and hill.

No gem, nor maid, nor Silmaril

shall ever long in thy grasp lie!

We curse thee under cloud and sky,

[845]{.float}we curse thee from rising unto sleep!

Farewell!' He swift from horse did leap,

his brother lifted from the ground;

then bow of yew with gold wire bound

he strung, and shaft he shooting sent,

[850]{.float}as heedless hand in hand they went;

a dwarvish dart and cruelly hooked.

They never turned nor backward looked.

Loud bayed Huan, and leaping caught

the speeding arrow. Quick as thought

[855]{.float}another followed deadly singing;

but Beren had turned, and sudden springing

defended Lúthien with his breast.

Deep sank the dart in flesh to rest.

He fell to earth. They rode away,

[860]{.float}and laughing left him as he lay;

yet spurred like wind in fear and dread

of Huan's pursuing anger red.

Though Curufin with bruised mouth laughed,

yet later of that dastard shaft

[865]{.float}was tale and rumour in the North,

and Men remembered at the Marching Forth,

and Morgoth's will its hatred helped.

Thereafter never hound was whelped

would follow horn of Celegorm

[870]{.float}or Curufin. Though in strife and storm,

though all their house in ruin red

went down, thereafter laid his head

Huan no more at that lord's feet,

but followed Lúthien, brave and fleet.

[875]{.float}Now sank she weeping at the side

of Beren, and sought to stem the tide

of welling blood that flowed there fast.

The raiment from his breast she cast;

from shoulder plucked the arrow keen;

[880]{.float}his wound with tears she washed it clean.

Then Huan came and bore a leaf,

of all the herbs of healing chief,

that evergreen in woodland glade

there grew with broad and hoary blade.

[885]{.float}The powers of all grasses Huan knew,

who wide did forest-paths pursue.

Therewith the smart he swift allayed,

while Lúthien murmuring in the shade

the staunching song that Elvish wives

[890]{.float}long years had sung in those sad lives

of war and weapons, wove o'er him.

The shadows fell from mountains grim.

Then sprang about the darkened North

the Sickle of the Gods, and forth

[895]{.float}each star there stared in stony night

radiant, glistering cold and white.

But on the ground there is a glow,

a spark of red that leaps below:

under woven boughs beside a fire

[]{#calibre_link-140 .calibre3}[900]{.float}of crackling wood and
sputtering briar

there Beren lies in browsing deep,

walking and wandering in sleep.

Watchful bending o'er him wakes

a maiden fair; his thirst she slakes,

[905]{.float}his brow caresses, and softly croons

a song more potent than in runes

or leeches' lore hath since been writ.

Slowly the nightly watches flit.

The misty morning crawleth grey

[910]{.float}from dusk to the reluctant day.

Then Beren woke and opened eyes,

and rose and cried: 'Neath other skies,

in lands more awful and unknown,

I wandered long, methought, alone

[915]{.float}to the deep shadow where the dead dwell;

but ever a voice that I knew well,

like bells, like viols, like harps, like birds,

like music moving without words,

called me, called me through the night,

[920]{.float}enchanted drew me back to light!

Healed the wound, assuaged the pain!

Now are we come to morn again,

new journeys once more lead us on---

to perils whence may life be won,

[925]{.float}hardly for Beren; and for thee

a waiting in the wood I see

beneath the trees of Doriath,

[]{#calibre_link-135 .calibre3}while ever follow down my path

the echoes of thine elvish song,

[930]{.float}where hills are haggard and roads are long.'

'Nay, now no more we have for foe

dark Morgoth only, but in woe,

in wars and feuds of Elfinesse

thy quest is bound; and death, no less,

[935]{.float}for thee and me, for Huan bold

the end of weird of yore foretold,

all this I bode shall follow swift;

if thou go on. Thy hand shall lift

and lay on Thingol's lap the dire

[940]{.float}and flaming jewel, Fëanor's fire,

never, never! A why then go?

Why turn we not from fear and woe

beneath the trees to walk and roam

roofless, with all the world as home,

[945]{.float}over mountains, beside the seas,

in the sunlight, in the breeze?'

Thus long they spoke with heavy hearts;

and yet not all her elvish arts

nor lissom arms, nor shining eyes

[950]{.float}as tremulous stars in rainy skies,

nor tender lips, enchanted voice,

his purpose bent or swayed his choice.

Never to Doriath would he fare

save guarded fast to leave her there;

[]{#calibre_link-142 .calibre3}[955]{.float}never to Nargothrond would
go

with her, lest there came war and woe;

and never would in the world untrod

to wander suffer her, worn, unshod

roofless and restless, whom he drew

[960]{.float}with love from the hidden realms she knew.

'For Morgoth's power is now awake;

already hill and dale doth shake,

the hunt is up, the prey is wild:

a maiden lost, an elven child.

[965]{.float}Now Orcs and phantoms prowl and peer

from tree to tree, and fill with fear

each shade and hollow. Thee they seek!

At thought thereof my hope grows weak,

my heart is chilled. I curse mine oath,

[970]{.float}I curse the fate that joined us both

and snared thy feet in my sad doom

of flight and wandering in the gloom!

Now let us haste, and ere the day

be fallen, take our swiftest way,

[975]{.float}till o'er the marches of thy land

beneath the beech and oak we stand,

in Doriath, fair Doriath

whither no evil finds the path,

powerless to pass the listening leaves

[980]{.float}that droop upon those forest-eaves.'

Then to his will she seeming bent.

Swiftly to Doriath they went,

and crossed its borders. There they stayed

resting in deep and mossy glade;

[985]{.float}there lay they sheltered from the wind

under mighty beeches silken-skinned,

and sang of love that still shall be,

though earth be foundered under sea,

and sundered here for evermore

[990]{.float}shall meet upon the Western Shore.

One morning as asleep she lay

upon the moss, as though the day

too bitter were for gentle flower

to open in a sunless hour,

[995]{.float}Beren arose and kissed her hair,

and wept, and softly left her there.

'Good Huan,' said he, 'guard her well!

In leafless field no asphodel,

in thorny thicket never a rose

[1000]{.float}forlorn, so frail and fragrant blows.

Guard her from wind and frost, and hide

from hands that seize and cast aside;

keep her from wandering and woe,

for pride and fate now make me go.'

[1005]{.float}The horse he took and rode away,

nor dared to turn; but all that day

with heart as stone he hastened forth

and took the paths toward the North.

\*\*\*\*\*\*

Once wide and smooth a plain was spread,

[1010]{.float}where King Fingolfin proudly led

his silver armies on the green,

his horses white, his lances keen;

his helmets tall of steel were hewn,

his shields were shining as the moon.

[1015]{.float}There trumpets sang both long and loud,

and challenge rang unto the cloud

that lay on Morgoth's northern tower,

while Morgoth waited for his hour.

Rivers of fire at dead of night

[1020]{.float}in winter lying cold and white

upon the plain burst forth, and high

the red was mirrored in the sky.

From Hithlum's walls they saw the fire,

the steam and smoke in spire on spire

[1025]{.float}leap up, till in confusion vast

the stars were choked. And so it passed,

the mighty field, and turned to dust,

to drifting sand and yellow rust,

to thirsty dunes where many bones

[1030]{.float}lay broken among barren stones.

Dor-na-Fauglith, Land of Thirst,

they after named it, waste accurst,

the raven-haunted roofless grave

of many fair and many brave.

[1035]{.float}Thereon the stony slopes look forth

from Deadly Nightshade falling north,

[]{#calibre_link-117 .calibre3}from sombre pines with pinions vast,

black-plumed and drear, as many a mast

of sable-shrouded ships of death

[1040]{.float}slow wafted on a ghostly breath.

Thence Beren grim now gazes out

across the dunes and shifting drought,

and sees afar the frowning towers

where thunderous Thangorodrim lowers.

[1045]{.float}The hungry horse there drooping stood,

proud Gnomish steed; it feared the wood;

upon the haunted ghastly plain

no horse would ever stride again.

'Good steed of master ill,' he said,

[1050]{.float}'farewell now here! Lift up thy head,

and get thee gone to Sirion's vale

back as we came, past island pale

where Thû once reigned, to waters sweet

and grasses long about thy feet.

[1055]{.float}And if Curufin no more thou find,

grieve not! but free with hart and hind

go wander, leaving work and war,

and dream thee back in Valinor,

whence came of old thy mighty race

[1060]{.float}from Tavros' mountain-fencéd chase.'

There still sat Beren, and he sang

and loud his lonely singing rang.

Though Orcs should hear, or wolf a-prowl,

or any of the creatures foul

[1065]{.float}within the shade that slunk and stared

of Taur-na-Fuin, nought he cared

who now took leave of light and day,

grim-hearted, bitter, fierce and fey.

'Farewell now here, ye leaves of trees,

[1070]{.float}your music in the morning-breeze!

Farewell now blade and bloom and grass

that see the changing seasons pass;

ye waters murmuring over stone,

and meres that silent stand alone!

[1075]{.float}Farewell now mountain, vale, and plain!

Farewell now wind and frost and rain,

and mist and cloud, and heaven's air;

ye star and moon so blinding-fair

that still shall look down from the sky

[1080]{.float}on the wide earth, though Beren die---

though Beren die not, and yet deep,

deep, whence comes of those that weep

no dreadful echo, lie and choke

in everlasting dark and smoke.

[1085]{.float}'Farewell sweet earth and northern sky,

for ever blest, since here did lie,

and here with lissom limbs did run

beneath the moon, beneath the sun,

Lúthien Tinúviel

[1090]{.float}more fair than mortal tongue can tell.

Though all to ruin fell the world,

and were dissolved and backward hurled

unmade into the old abyss,

yet were its making good, for this---

[1095]{.float}the dawn, the dusk, the earth, the sea---

that Lúthien on a time should be!'

His blade he lifted high in hand,

and challenging alone did stand

before the threat of Morgoth's power;

[1100]{.float}and dauntless cursed him, hall and tower,

o'ershadowing hand and grinding foot,

beginning, end, and crown and root;

then turned to strike forth down the slope

abandoning fear, forsaking hope.

[1105]{.float}'A, Beren, Beren!' came a sound,

'almost too late have I thee found!

O proud and fearless hand and heart,

not yet farewell, not yet we part!

Not thus do those of elven race

[1110]{.float}forsake the love that they embrace.

A love is mine, as great a power

as thine, to shake the gate and tower

of death with challenge weak and frail

that yet endures, and will not fail

[1115]{.float}nor yield, unvanquished were it hurled

beneath the foundations of the world.

Beloved fool! escape to seek

from such pursuit; in might so weak

to trust not, thinking it well to save

[]{#calibre_link-165 .calibre3}[1120]{.float}from love thy loved, who
welcomes grave

and torment sooner than in guard

of kind intent to languish, barred,

wingless and helpless him to aid

for whose support her love was made!'

[1125]{.float}Thus back to him came Lúthien:

they met beyond the ways of Men;

upon the brink of terror stood

between the desert and the wood.

He looked on her, her lifted face

[1130]{.float}beneath his lips in sweet embrace:

'Thrice now mine oath I curse,' he said,

'that under shadow thee hath led!

But where is Huan, where the hound

to whom I trusted, whom I bound

[1135]{.float}by love of thee to keep thee well

from deadly wandering into hell?'

'I know not! But good Huan's heart

is wiser, kinder, than thou art,

grim lord, more open unto prayer!

[1140]{.float}Yet long and long I pleaded there,

until he brought me, as I would,

upon thy trail---a palfrey good

would Huan make, of flowing pace:

thou wouldst have laughed to see us race,

[1145]{.float}as Orc on werewolf ride like fire

[]{#calibre_link-130 .calibre3}night after night through fen and mire,

through waste and wood! But when I heard

thy singing clear---(yea, every word

of Lúthien one rashly cried,

[1150]{.float}and listening evil fierce defied) --,

he set me down, and sped away;

but what he would I cannot say.'

Ere long they knew, for Huan came,

his great breath panting, eyes like flame,

[1155]{.float}in fear lest her whom he forsook

to aid some hunting evil took

ere he was nigh. Now there he laid

before their feet, as dark as shade,

two grisly shapes that he had won

[1160]{.float}from that tall isle in Sirion:

a wolfhame huge---its savage fell

was long and matted, dark the spell

that drenched the dreadful coat and skin;

the werewolf cloak of Draugluin;

[1165]{.float}the other was a batlike garb

with mighty fingered wings, a barb

like iron nail at each joint's end---

such wings as their dark cloud extend

against the moon, when in the sky

[1170]{.float}from Deadly Nightshade screeching fly

Thû's messengers.

'What hast thou brought,

[]{#calibre_link-126 .calibre3}good Huan? What thy hidden thought?

Of trophy of prowess and strong deed,

when Thû thou vanquishedst, what need

[1175]{.float}here in the waste?' Thus Beren spoke,

and once more words in Huan woke:

his voice was like the deeptoned bells

that ring in Valmar's citadels:

'Of one fair gem thou must be thief,

[1180]{.float}Morgoth's or Thingol's, loath or lief;

thou must here choose twixt love and oath!

If vow to break is still thee loath,

then Lúthien must either die

alone, or death with thee defie

[1185]{.float}beside thee, marching on your fate

that hidden before you lies in wait.

Hopeless the quest, but not yet mad,

unless thou, Beren, run thus clad

in mortal raiment, mortal hue,

[1190]{.float}witless and redeless, death to woo.

'Lo! good was Felagund's device,

but may be bettered, if advice

of Huan ye will dare to take,

and swift a hideous change will make

[1195]{.float}to forms most curséd, foul and vile,

of werewolf of the Wizard's Isle,

of monstrous bat's envermined fell

with ghostly clawlike wings of hell.

'To such dark straits, alas! now brought

[1200]{.float}are ye I love, for whom I fought.

Nor further with you can I go---

whoever did a great hound know

in friendship at a werewolf's side

to Angband's grinning portals stride?

[1205]{.float}Yet my heart tells that at the gate

what there ye find, 'twill be my fate

myself to see, though to that door

my feet shall bear me nevermore.

Darkened is hope and dimmed my eyes,

[1210]{.float}I see not clear what further lies;

yet maybe backwards leads your path

beyond all hope to Doriath,

and thither, perchance, we three shall wend,

and meet again before the end.'

[1215]{.float}They stood and marvelled thus to hear

his mighty tongue so deep and clear;

then sudden he vanished from their sight

even at the onset of the night.

His dreadful counsel then they took,

[1220]{.float}and their own gracious forms forsook;

in werewolf fell and batlike wing

prepared to robe them, shuddering.

With elvish magic Lúthien wrought,

lest raiment foul with evil fraught

[1225]{.float}to dreadful madness drive their hearts;

and there she wrought with elvish arts

a strong defence, a binding power,

singing until the midnight hour.

Swift as the wolvish coat he wore,

[1230]{.float}Beren lay slavering on the floor,

redtongued and hungry; but there lies

a pain and longing in his eyes,

a look of horror as he sees

a batlike form crawl to its knees

[1235]{.float}and drag its creased and creaking wings.

Then howling under moon he springs

fourfooted, swift, from stone to stone

from hill to plain---but not alone:

a dark shape down the slope doth skim,

[1240]{.float}and wheeling flitters over him.

Ashes and dust and thirsty dune

withered and dry beneath the moon,

under the cold and shifting air

sifting and sighing, bleak and bare;

[1245]{.float}of blistered stones and gasping sand,

of splintered bones was built that land,

o'er which now slinks with powdered fell

and hanging tongue a shape of hell.

Many parching leagues lay still before

[1250]{.float}when sickly day crept back once more;

many choking miles lay stretched ahead

when shivering night once more was spread

with doubtful shadow and ghostly sound

that hissed and passed o'er dune and mound.

[1255]{.float}A second morning in cloud and reek

struggled, when stumbling, blind and weak,

a wolvish shape came staggering forth

and reached the foothills of the North;

upon its back there folded lay

[1260]{.float}a crumpled thing that blinked at day.

The rocks were reared like bony teeth,

and claws that grasped from opened sheath,

on either side the mournful road

that onward led to that abode

[1265]{.float}far up within the Mountain dark

with tunnels drear and portals stark.

They crept within a scowling shade

and cowering darkly down them laid.

Long lurked they there beside the path,

[1270]{.float}and shivered, dreaming of Doriath,

of laughter and music and clean air,

in fluttered leaves birds singing fair.

They woke, and felt the trembling sound,

the beating echo far underground

[1275]{.float}shake beneath them, the rumour vast

of Morgoth's forges; and aghast

they heard the stamp of stony feet

that shod with iron went down that street:

the Orcs went forth to rape and war,

[1280]{.float}and Balrog captains marched before.

[]{#calibre_link-139 .calibre3} stirred, and under cloud and shade

at eve stepped forth, and no more stayed;

as dark things on dark errand bent

up the long slopes in haste they went.

[1285]{.float}Ever the sheer cliffs rose beside,

where birds of carrion sat and cried;

and chasms black and smoking yawned,

whence writhing serpent-shapes were spawned;

until at last in that huge gloom,

[1290]{.float}heavy as overhanging doom,

that weighs on Thangorodrim's foot

like thunder at the mountain's root,

they came, as to a sombre court

walled with great towers, fort on fort

[1295]{.float}of cliffs embattled, to that last plain

that opens, abysmal and inane

before he final topless wall

of Bauglir's immeasurable hall,

whereunder looming awful waits

[1300]{.float}the gigantic shadow of his gates.

\*\*\*\*\*\*

In that vast shadow once of yore

Fingolfin stood: his shield he bore

with field of heaven's blue and star

of crystal shining pale afar.

[1305]{.float}In overmastering wrath and hate

desperate he smote upon that gate,

the Gnomish king, there standing lone,

while endless fortresses of stone

engulfed the thin clear ringing keen

[1310]{.float}of silver horn on baldric green.

His hopeless challenge dauntless cried

Fingolfin there: 'Come, open wide,

dark king, your ghastly brazen doors!

Come forth, whom earth and heaven abhors!

[1315]{.float}Come forth, O monstrous craven lord

and fight with thine own hand and sword,

thou wielder of hosts of banded thralls,

thou tyrant leaguered with strong walls,

thou foe of Gods and elvish race!

[1320]{.float}I wait thee here. Come! Show thy face!'

Then Morgoth came. For the last time

in those great wars he dared to climb

from subterranean throne profound,

the rumour of his feet a sound

[1325]{.float}of rumbling earthquake underground.

Black-armoured, towering, iron-crowned

he issued forth; his mighty shield

a vast unblazoned sable field

with shadow like a thundercloud;

[1330]{.float}and o'er the gleaming king it bowed,

as huge aloft like mace he hurled

that hammer of the underworld,

Grond. Clanging to ground it tumbled

down like a thunder-bolt, and crumbled

[]{#calibre_link-150 .calibre3}[1335]{.float}the rocks beneath it; smoke
up-started,

a pit yawned, and a fire darted.

Fingolfin like a shooting light

beneath a cloud, a stab of white,

sprang then aside, and Ringil drew

[1340]{.float}like ice that gleameth cold and blue,

his sword devised of elvish skill

to pierce the flesh with deadly chill.

With seven wounds it rent his foe,

and seven mighty cries of woe

[1345]{.float}rang in the mountains, and the earth quook,

and Angband's trembling armies shook.

Yet Orcs would after laughing tell

of the duel at the gates of hell;

though elvish song thereof was made

[1350]{.float}ere this but one---when sad was laid

the mighty king in barrow high,

and Thorondor, Eagle of the sky,

the dreadful tidings brought and told

to mourning Elfinesse of old.

[1355]{.float}Thrice was Fingolfin with great blows

to his knees beaten, thrice he rose

still leaping up beneath the cloud

aloft to hold star-shining, proud,

his stricken shield, his sundered helm,

[1360]{.float}that dark nor might could overwhelm

till all the earth was burst and rent

in pits about him. He was spent.

[]{#calibre_link-119 .calibre3}His feet stumbled. He fell to wreck

upon the ground, and on his neck

[1365]{.float}a foot like rooted hills was set,

and he was crushed---not conquered yet;

one last despairing stroke he gave:

the mighty foot pale Ringil clave

about the heel, and black the blood

[1370]{.float}gushed as from smoking fount in flood.

Halt goes for ever from that stroke

great Morgoth; but the king he broke,

and would have hewn and mangled thrown

to wolves devouring. Lo! from throne

[1375]{.float}that Manwë bade him build on high,

on peak unscaled beneath the sky,

Morgoth to watch, now down there swooped

Thorondor the King of Eagles, stooped,

and rending beak of gold he smote

[1380]{.float}in Bauglir's face, then up did float

on pinions thirty fathoms wide

bearing away, though loud they cried,

the mighty corse, the Elven-king;

and where the mountains make a ring

[1385]{.float}far to the south about that plain

where after Gondolin did reign,

embattled city, at great height

upon a dizzy snowcap white

in mounded cairn the mighty dead

[1390]{.float}he laid upon the mountain's head.

Never Orc nor demon after dared

that pass to climb, o'er which there stared

Fingolfin's high and holy tomb,

till Gondolin's appointed doom.

::: {#calibre_link-32 .centered-image1}
![](images/000032.jpg){.calibre34}
:::

[1395]{.float}Thus Bauglir earned the furrowed scar

that his dark countenance doth mar,

and thus his limping gait he gained;

but afterward profound he reigned

darkling upon his hidden throne;

[1400]{.float}and thunderous paced his halls of stone,

slow building there his vast design

the world in thraldom to confine.

Wielder of armies, lord of woe,

no rest now gave he slave or foe;

[1405]{.float}his watch and ward he thrice increased,

his spies were sent from West to East

and tidings brought from all the North,

who fought, who fell; who ventured forth,

who wrought in secret; who had hoard;

[1410]{.float}if maid were fair or proud were lord;

well nigh all things he knew, all hearts

well nigh enmeshed in evil arts.

Doriath only, beyond the veil

woven by Melian, no assail

[1415]{.float}could hurt or enter; only rumour dim

of things there passing came to him.

A rumour loud and tidings clear

of other movements far and near

among his foes, and threat of war

[]{#calibre_link-143 .calibre3}[1420]{.float}from the seven sons of
Fëanor,

from Nargothrond, from Fingon still

gathering his armies under hill

and under tree in Hithlum's shade,

these daily came. He grew afraid

[1425]{.float}amidst his power once more; renown

of Beren vexed his ears, and down

the aisléd forests there was heard

great Huan baying.

Then came word

most passing strange of Lúthien

[1430]{.float}wild-wandering by wood and glen,

and Thingol's purpose long he weighed,

and wondered, thinking of that maid

so fair, so frail. A captain dire,

Boldog, he sent with sword and fire

[1435]{.float}to Doriath's march; but battle fell

sudden upon him; news to tell

never one returned of Boldog's host,

and Thingol humbled Morgoth's boast.

Then his heart with doubt and wrath was burned:

[1440]{.float}new tidings of dismay he learned,

how Thû was o'erthrown and his strong isle

broken and plundered, how with guile

his foes now guile beset; and spies

he feared, till each Orc to his eyes

[1445]{.float}was half suspect. Still ever down

the aisléd forests came renown

of Huan baying, hound of war

that Gods unleashed in Valinor.

Then Morgoth of Huan's fate bethought

[1450]{.float}long-rumoured, and in dark he wrought.

Fierce hunger-haunted packs he had

that in wolvish form and flesh were clad,

but demon spirits dire did hold;

and ever wild their voices rolled

[1455]{.float}in cave and mountain where they housed

and endless snarling echoes roused.

From these a whelp he chose and fed

with his own hand on bodies dead,

on fairest flesh of Elves and Men,

[1460]{.float}till huge he grew and in his den

no more could creep, but by the chair

of Morgoth's self would lie and glare,

nor suffer Balrog, Orc, nor beast

to touch him. Many a ghastly feast

[1465]{.float}he held beneath that awful throne

rending flesh and gnawing bone.

There deep enchantment on him fell,

the anguish and the power of hell;

more great and terrible he became

[1470]{.float}with fire-red eyes and jaws aflame,

with breath like vapours of the grave,

than any beast of wood or cave,

than any beast of earth or hell

that ever in any time befell,

[1475]{.float}surpassing all his race and kin,

the ghastly tribe of Draugluin.

Him Carcharoth, the Red Maw, name

the songs of Elves. Not yet he came

disastrous, ravening, from the gates

[1480]{.float}of Angband. There he sleepless waits;

where those great portals threatening loom

his red eyes smoulder in the gloom,

his teeth are bare, his jaws are wide;

and none may walk, nor creep, nor glide,

[1485]{.float}nor thrust with power his menace past

to enter Morgoth's dungeon vast.

Now, lo! before his watchful eyes

a slinking shape he far descries

that crawls into the frowning plain

[1490]{.float}and halts at gaze, then on again

comes stalking near, a wolvish shape

haggard, wayworn, with jaws agape;

and o'er it batlike in wide rings

a reeling shadow slowly wings.

[1495]{.float}Such shapes there oft were seen to roam,

this land their native haunt and home;

and yet his mood with strange unease

is filled, and boding thoughts him seize.

'What grievous terror, what dread guard

[1500]{.float}hath Morgoth set to wait, and barred

[]{#calibre_link-147 .calibre3}his doors against all entering feet?

Long ways we have come at last to meet

the very maw of death that opes

between us and our quest! Yet hopes

[1505]{.float}we never had. No turning back!'

Thus Beren speaks, as in his track

he halts and sees with werewolf eyes

afar the horror that there lies.

Then onward desperate he passed,

[1510]{.float}skirting the black pits yawning vast,

where King Fingolfin ruinous fell

alone before the gates of hell.

Before those gates alone they stood,

while Carcharoth in doubtful mood

[1515]{.float}glowered upon them, and snarling spoke,

and echoes in the arches woke:

'Hail! Draugluin, my kindred's lord!

'Tis very long since hitherward

thou camest. Yea, 'tis passing strange

[1520]{.float}to see thee now: a grievous change

is on thee, lord, who once so dire

so dauntless, and as fleet as fire,

ran over wild and waste, but now

with weariness must bend and bow!

[1525]{.float}'Tis hard to find the struggling breath

when Huan's teeth as sharp as death

have rent the throat? What fortune rare

brings thee back living here to fare---

if Draugluin thou art? come near!

[1530]{.float}I would know more, and see thee clear!'

'Who art thou, hungry upstart whelp,

to bar my ways whom thou shouldst help?

I fare with hasty tidings new

to Morgoth from forest-haunting Thû.

[1535]{.float}Aside! for I must in; or go

and swift my coming tell below!'

Then up that doorward slowly stood,

eyes shining grim with evil mood,

uneasy growling: 'Draugluin,

[1540]{.float}if such thou be, now enter in!

But what is this that crawls beside

slinking as if 'twould neath thee hide?

Though wingéd creatures to and fro

unnumbered pass here, all I know.

[1545]{.float}I know not this. Stay, vampire, stay!

I like not thy kin nor thee. Come, say

what sneaking errand thee doth bring,

thou wingéd vermin, to the king!

Small matter, I doubt not, if thou stay

[1550]{.float}or enter, or if in my play

I crush thee like a fly on wall,

or bite thy wings and let thee crawl.'

Huge-stalking, noisome, close he came.

In Beren's eyes there gleamed a flame;

[1555]{.float}the hair upon his neck uprose.

Nought may the fragrance fair enclose,

the odour of immortal flowers

in everlasting spring neath showers

that glitter silver in the grass

[1560]{.float}in Valinor. Where'er did pass

Tinúviel, such air there went.

From that foul devil-sharpened scent

its sudden sweetness no disguise

enchanted dark to cheat the eyes

[1565]{.float}could keep, if near those nostrils drew

snuffling in doubt. This Beren knew

upon the brink of hell prepared

for battle and death. There threatening stared

those dreadful shapes, in hatred both,

[1570]{.float}false Draugluin and Carcharoth

when, lo! a marvel to behold:

some power, descended from of old,

from race divine beyond the West,

sudden Tinúviel possessed

[1575]{.float}like inner fire. The vampire dark

she flung aside, and like a lark

cleaving through night to dawn she sprang,

while sheer, heart-piercing silver, rang

her voice, as those long trumpets keen

[1580]{.float}thrilling, unbearable, unseen

in the cold aisles of morn. Her cloak

by white hands woven, like a smoke,

like all-bewildering, all-enthralling,

all-enfolding evening, falling

[1585]{.float}from lifted arms, as forth she stepped

across those awful eyes she swept,

a shadow and a mist of dreams

whereon entangled starlight gleams.

'Sleep, O unhappy, tortured thrall!

[1590]{.float}Thou woebegotten, fail and fall

down, down from anguish, hatred, pain,

from lust, from hunger, bond and chain,

to that oblivion, dark and deep,

the well, the lightless pit of sleep!

[1595]{.float}For one brief hour escape the net,

the dreadful doom of life forget!'

His eyes were quenched, his limbs were loosed;

he fell like running steer that noosed

and tripped grows crashing to the ground.

[1600]{.float}Deathlike, moveless, without a sound

outstretched he lay, as lightning stroke

had felled a huge o'ershadowing oak.

\*\*\*\*\*\*

Into the vast and echoing gloom,

more dread than many-tunnelled tomb

[1605]{.float}in labyrinthine pyramid

where everlasting death is hid

down awful corridors that wind

[]{#calibre_link-118 .calibre3}down to a menace dark enshrined;

down to the mountain's roots profound,

[1610]{.float}devoured, tormented, bored and ground

by seething vermin spawned of stone;

down to the depths they went alone.

The arch behind of twilit shade

they saw recede and dwindling fade;

[1615]{.float}the thunderous forges' rumour grew,

a burning wind there roaring blew

foul vapours up from gaping holes.

Huge shapes there stood like carven trolls

enormous hewn of blasted rock

[1620]{.float}to forms that mortal likeness mock;

monstrous and menacing, entombed,

at every turn they silent loomed

in fitful glares that leaped and died.

There hammers clanged, and tongues there cried

[1625]{.float}with sound like smitten stone; there wailed

faint from far under, called and failed

amid the iron clink of chain

voices of captives put to pain.

Loud rose a din of laughter hoarse,

[1630]{.float}self-loathing yet without remorse;

loud came a singing harsh and fierce

like swords of terror souls to pierce.

Red was the glare through open doors

of firelight mirrored on brazen floors,

[1635]{.float}and up the arches towering clomb

[]{#calibre_link-155 .calibre3}to glooms unguessed, to vaulted dome

swathed in wavering smokes and steams

stabbed with flickering lightning-gleams.

To Morgoth's hall, where dreadful feast

[1640]{.float}he held, and drank the blood of beast

and lives of Men, they stumbling came:

their eyes were dazed with smoke and flame.

The pillars, reared like monstrous shores

to bear earth's overwhelming floors,

[1645]{.float}were devil-carven, shaped with skill

such as unholy dreams doth fill:

they towered like trees into the air,

whose trunks are rooted in despair,

whose shade is death, whose fruit is bane,

[1650]{.float}whose boughs like serpents writhe in pain.

Beneath them ranged with spear and sword

stood Morgoth's sable-armoured horde:

the fire on blade and boss of shield

was red as blood on stricken field.

[1655]{.float}Beneath a monstrous column loomed

the throne of Morgoth, and the doomed

and dying gasped upon the floor:

his hideous footstool, rape of war.

About him sat his awful thanes,

[1660]{.float}the Balrog-lords with fiery manes,

redhanded, mouthed with fangs of steel;

devouring wolves were crouched at heel.

And o'er the host of hell there shone

with a cold radiance, clear and wan,

[1665]{.float}the Silmarils, the gems of fate,

emprisoned in the crown of hate.

Lo! through the grinning portals dread

sudden a shadow swooped and fled;

and Beren gasped---he lay alone,

[1670]{.float}with crawling belly on the stone:

a form bat-wingéd, silent, flew

where the huge pillared branches grew,

amid the smokes and mounting steams.

And as on the margin of dark dreams

[1675]{.float}a dim-felt shadow unseen grows

to cloud of vast unease, and woes

foreboded, nameless, roll like doom

upon the soul, so in that gloom

the voices fell, and laughter died

[1680]{.float}slow to silence many-eyed.

A nameless doubt, a shapeless fear,

had entered in their caverns drear

and grew, and towered above them cowed,

hearing in heart the trumpets loud

[1685]{.float}of gods forgotten. Morgoth spoke,

and thunderous the silence broke:

'Shadow, descend! And do not think

to cheat mine eyes! In vain to shrink

from thy Lord's gaze, or seek to hide.

[1690]{.float}My will by none may be defied.

Hope nor escape doth here await

those that unbidden pass my gate.

[]{#calibre_link-166 .calibre3}Descend! ere anger blast thy wing,

thou foolish, frail, bat-shapen thing,

[1695]{.float}and yet not bat within! Come down!'

Slow-wheeling o'er his iron crown,

reluctantly, shivering and small,

Beren there saw the shadow fall,

and droop before the hideous throne,

[1700]{.float}a weak and trembling thing, alone.

And as thereon great Morgoth bent

his darkling gaze, he shuddering went,

belly to earth, the cold sweat dank

upon his fell, and crawling shrank

[1705]{.float}beneath the darkness of that seat,

beneath the shadow of those feet.

Tinúviel spake, a shrill, thin, sound

piercing those silences profound:

'A lawful errand here me brought;

[1710]{.float}from Thû's dark mansions have I sought,

from Taur-na-Fuin's shade I fare

to stand before thy mighty chair!'

'Thy name, thou shrieking waif, thy name!

Tidings enough from Thû there came

[1715]{.float}but short while since. What would he now?

Why send such messenger as thou?'

'Thuringwethil I am, who cast

a shadow o'er the face aghast

of the sallow moon in the doomed land

[1720]{.float}of shivering Beleriand!'

'Liar art thou, who shalt not weave

deceit before mine eyes. Now leave

thy form and raiment false, and stand

revealed, and delivered to my hand!'

[1725]{.float}There came a slow and shuddering change:

the batlike raiment dark and strange

was loosed, and slowly shrank and fell

quivering. She stood revealed in hell.

About her slender shoulders hung

[1730]{.float}her shadowy hair, and round her clung

her garment dark, where glimmered pale

the starlight caught in magic veil.

Dim dreams and faint oblivious sleep

fell softly thence, in dungeons deep

[1735]{.float}an odour stole of elven-flowers

from elven-dells where silver showers

drip softly through the evening air;

and round there crawled with greedy stare

dark shapes of snuffling hunger dread.

[1740]{.float}With arms upraised and drooping head

then softly she began to sing

a theme of sleep and slumbering,

wandering, woven with deeper spell

than songs wherewith in ancient dell

[1745]{.float}Melian did once the twilight fill,

profound and fathomless, and still.

The fires of Angband flared and died,

smouldered into darkness; through the wide

and hollow halls there rolled unfurled

[1750]{.float}the shadows of the underworld.

All movement stayed, and all sound ceased,

save vaporous breath of Orc and beast.

One fire in darkness still abode:

the lidless eyes of Morgoth glowed;

[1755]{.float}one sound the breathing silence broke:

the mirthless voice of Morgoth spoke.

'So Lúthien, so Lúthien,

a liar like all Elves and Men!

Yet welcome, welcome, to my hall!

[1760]{.float}I have a use for every thrall.

What news of Thingol in his hole

shy lurking like a timid vole?

What folly fresh is in his mind

who cannot keep his offspring blind

[1765]{.float}from straying thus? or can devise

no better counsel for his spies?'

She wavered, and she stayed her song.

'The road,' she said, 'was wild and long,

but Thingol sent me not, nor knows

[1770]{.float}what way his rebellious daughter goes.

Yet every road and path will lead

Northward at last, and here of need

I trembling come with humble brow,

and here before thy throne I bow;

[1775]{.float}for Lúthien hath many arts

for solace sweet of kingly hearts.'

'And here of need thou shalt remain

now, Lúthien, in joy or pain---

or pain, the fitting doom for all,

[1780]{.float}for rebel, thief, and upstart thrall.

Why should ye not in our fate share

of woe and travail? Or should I spare

to slender limb and body frail

breaking torment? Of what avail

[1785]{.float}here dost thou deem thy babbling song

and foolish laughter? Minstrels strong

are at my call. Yet I will give

a respite brief, a while to live,

a little while, though purchased dear,

[1790]{.float}to Lúthien the fair and clear,

a pretty toy for idle hour.

In slothful gardens many a flower

like thee the amorous gods are used

honey-sweet to kiss, and cast then bruised

[1795]{.float}their fragrance loosing, under feet.

But here we seldom find such sweet

amid our labours long and hard,

from godlike idleness debarred.

And who would not taste the honey-sweet

[1800]{.float}lying to lips, or crush with feet

the soft cool tissue of pale flowers,

easing like gods the dragging hours?

A! curse the Gods! O hunger dire,

O blinding thirst's unending fire!

[1805]{.float}One moment shall ye cease, and slake

your sting with morsel I here take!'

In his eyes the fire to flame was fanned,

and forth he stretched his brazen hand.

Lúthien as shadow shrank aside.

[1810]{.float}'Not thus, O king! Not thus!' she cried,

'do great lords hark to humble boon!

For every minstrel hath his tune;

and some are strong and some are soft

and each would bear his song aloft,

[1815]{.float}and each a little while be heard,

though rude the note, and light the word.

But Lúthien hath cunning arts

for solace sweet of kingly hearts.

Now hearken!' And her wings she caught

[1820]{.float}then deftly up, and swift as thought

slipped from his grasp, and wheeling round,

fluttering before his eyes, she wound

a mazy-wingéd dance, and sped

about his iron-crownéd head.

[1825]{.float}Suddenly her song began anew;

[]{#calibre_link-131 .calibre3}and soft came dropping like a dew

down from on high in that domed hall

her voice bewildering, magical,

and grew to silver-murmuring streams

[1830]{.float}pale falling in dark pools in dreams.

::: {#calibre_link-33 .centered-image1}
![](images/000033.jpg){.calibre35}
:::

She let her flying raiment sweep,

enmeshed with woven spells of sleep,

as round the dark void she ranged and reeled.

From wall to wall she turned and wheeled

[1835]{.float}in dance such as never Elf nor fay

before devised, nor since that day;

than swallow swifter, than flittermouse

in dying light round darkened house

more silken-soft, more strange and fair

[1840]{.float}than sylphine maidens of the Air

whose wings in Varda's heavenly hall

in rhythmic movement beat and fall.

Down crumpled Orc, and Balrog proud;

all eyes were quenched, all heads were bowed;

[1845]{.float}the fires of heart and maw were stilled,

and ever like a bird she thrilled

above a lightless world forlorn

in ecstasy enchanted borne.

All eyes were quenched, save those that glared

[1850]{.float}in Morgoth's lowering brows, and stared

in slowly wandering wonder round,

and slow were in enchantment bound.

Their will wavered, and their fire failed,

and as beneath his brows they paled,

[1855]{.float}the Silmarils like stars were kindled

that in the reek of Earth had dwindled

escaping upwards clear to shine,

glistening marvellous in heaven's mine.

Then flaring suddenly they fell,

[1860]{.float}down, down upon the floors of hell.

The dark and mighty head was bowed;

like mountain-top beneath a cloud

the shoulders foundered, the vast form

crashed, as in overwhelming storm

[1865]{.float}huge cliffs in ruin slide and fall;

and prone lay Morgoth in his hall.

His crown there rolled upon the ground,

a wheel of thunder; then all sound

died, and a silence grew as deep

[1870]{.float}as were the heart of Earth asleep.

Beneath the vast and empty throne

the adders lay like twisted stone,

the wolves like corpses foul were strewn;

and there lay Beren deep in swoon:

[1875]{.float}no thought, no dream nor shadow blind

moved in the darkness of his mind.

'Come forth, come forth! The hour hath knelled,

and Angband's mighty lord is felled!

Awake, awake! For we two meet

[1880]{.float}alone before the awful seat.'

This voice came down into the deep

where he lay drowned in wells of sleep;

a hand flower-soft and flower-cool

passed o'er his face, and the still pool

[1885]{.float}of slumber quivered. Up then leaped

his mind to waking; forth he crept.

The wolvish fell he flung aside

and sprang unto his feet, and wide

staring amid the soundless gloom

[1890]{.float}he gasped as one living shut in tomb.

There to his side he felt her shrink,

felt Lúthien now shivering sink,

her strength and magic dimmed and spent,

and swift his arms about her went.

[1895]{.float}Before his feet he saw amazed

the gems of Fëanor, that blazed

with white fire glistening in the crown

of Morgoth's might now fallen down.

To move that helm of iron vast

[1900]{.float}no strength he found, and thence aghast

he strove with fingers mad to wrest

the guerdon of their hopeless quest,

till in his heart there fell the thought

of that cold morn whereon he fought

[1905]{.float}with Curufin; then from his belt

[]{#calibre_link-153 .calibre3}the sheathless knife he drew, and knelt,

and tried its hard edge, bitter-cold,

o'er which in Nogrod songs had rolled

of dwarvish armourers singing slow

[1910]{.float}to hammer-music long ago.

Iron as tender wood it clove

and mail as woof of loom it rove.

The claws of iron that held the gem,

it bit them through and sundered them;

[1915]{.float}a Silmaril he clasped and held,

and the pure radiance slowly welled

red glowing through the clenching flesh.

Again he stooped and strove afresh

one more of the holy jewels three

[1920]{.float}that Fëanor wrought of yore to free.

But round those fires was woven fate;

not yet should they leave the halls of hate.

The dwarvish steel of cunning blade

by treacherous smiths of Nogrod made

[1925]{.float}snapped; then ringing sharp and clear

in twain it sprang, and like a spear

or errant shaft the brow it grazed

of Morgoth's sleeping head, and dazed

their hearts with fear. For Morgoth groaned

[1930]{.float}with voice entombed, like wind that moaned

in hollow caverns penned and bound.

There came a breath; a gasping sound

moved through the halls, as Orc and beast

turned in their dreams of hideous feast;

[1935]{.float}in sleep uneasy Balrogs stirred,

and far above was faintly heard

an echo that in tunnels rolled,

a wolvish howling long and cold.

\*\*\*\*\*\*

Up through the dark and echoing gloom

[1940]{.float}as ghosts from many-tunnelled tomb,

up from the mountains' roots profound

and the vast menace underground,

their limbs aquake with deadly fear,

terror in eyes, and dread in ear,

[1945]{.float}together fled they, by the beat

affrighted of their flying feet.

At last before them far away

they saw the glimmering wraith of day,

the mighty archway of the gate---

[1950]{.float}and there a horror new did wait.

Upon the threshold, watchful, dire,

his eyes new-kindled with dull fire,

towered Carcharoth, a biding doom:

his jaws were gaping like a tomb,

[1955]{.float}his teeth were bare, his tongue aflame;

aroused he watched that no one came,

no flitting shade nor hunted shape,

seeking from Angband to escape.

[]{#calibre_link-146 .calibre3}Now past that guard what guile or might

[1960]{.float}could thrust from death into the light?

He heard afar their hurrying feet,

he snuffed an odour strange and sweet;

he smelled their coming long before

they marked the waiting threat at door.

[1965]{.float}His limbs he stretched and shook off sleep,

then stood at gaze. With sudden leap

upon them as they sped he sprang,

and his howling in the arches rang.

Too swift for thought his onset came,

[1970]{.float}too swift for any spell to tame;

and Beren desperate then aside

thrust Lúthien, and forth did stride

unarmed, defenceless to defend

Tinúviel until the end.

[1975]{.float}With left he caught at hairy throat,

with right hand at the eyes he smote---

his right, from which the radiance welled

of the holy Silmaril he held.

As gleam of swords in fire there flashed

[1980]{.float}the fangs of Carcharoth, and crashed

together like a trap, that tore

the hand about the wrist, and shore

through brittle bone and sinew nesh,

devouring the frail mortal flesh;

[1985]{.float}and in that cruel mouth unclean

engulfed the jewel's holy sheen.
:::::::

::: extract
[]{#calibre_link-71 .calibre3}An isolated page gives five further lines
in the process of composition:
:::

::: verse1
Against the wall then Beren reeled

but still with his left he sought to shield

fair Lúthien, who cried aloud

to see his pain, and down she bowed

in anguish sinking to the ground.
:::

::: extract
With the abandonment, towards the end of 1931, of *The Lay of Leithian*
at this point in the tale of Beren and Lúthien my father had very
largely reached the final form *in narrative structure*---as represented
in the published *Silmarillion.* Although, after the completion of his
work on *The Lord of the Rings*, he made some extensive revisions to
*The* *Lay of Leithian* as it had lain since 1931 (see the Appendix, [p.
257](#calibre_link-64){.calibre3}), it seems certain that he never
extended the story any further in verse, save for this passage found on
a separate sheet headed 'a piece from the end of the poem'.
:::

::: verse
Where the forest-stream went through the wood,

and silent all the stems there stood

of tall trees, moveless, hanging dark

with mottled shadows on their bark

above the green and gleaming river,

there came through leaves a sudden shiver,

a windy whisper through the still

cool silences; and down the hill,

as faint as a deep sleeper's breath,

an echo came as cold as death:

'Long are the paths, of shadow made

where no foot's print is ever laid,

over the hills, across the seas!

Far, far away are the Lands of Ease,

but the Land of the Lost is further yet,

where the Dead wait, while ye forget.

No moon is there, no voice, no sound

of beating heart; a sigh profound

once in each age as each age dies

alone is heard. Far, far it lies,

the Land of Waiting where the Dead sit,

in their thought's shadow, by no moon lit.'
:::

::: centered-image
![](images/000018.jpg){.calibre36}
:::
::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::: {#calibre_link-16 .calibre}
## ![](images/000019.jpg){.calibre37} {#section-10 .chapter-number1}

## THE *QUENTA SILMARILLION* {#the-quenta-silmarillion .chapter-number2}

::: extract
[]{#calibre_link-73 .calibre3}In the years that followed, my father
turned to a new prose version of the history of the Elder Days, and that
is found in a manuscript bearing the title *Quenta Silmarillion*, which
I will refer to as 'QS'. Of intermediate texts between this and its
predecessor the *Quenta Noldorinwa* ([p.
103](#calibre_link-56){.calibre3}) there is now no trace, though they
must have existed; but from the point where the story of Beren and
Lúthien enters the *Silmarillion* history there are several largely
incomplete drafts, owing to my father's long hesitation between longer
and shorter versions of the legend. A fuller version, which may be
called for this purpose 'QS I', was abandoned, on account of its length,
at the point where King Felagund in Nargothrond gave the crown to
Orodreth his brother ([p. 109](#calibre_link-42){.calibre3}, extract
from the *Quenta Noldorinwa*).

This was followed by a very rough draft of the whole story; and that was
the basis of a second, 'short' version, 'QS II', preserved in the same
manuscript as QS I. It was very largely from these two versions that I
derived the story of Beren and Lúthien as told in the published
*Silmarillion*.

The making of QS II was a work still in progress in 1937; but in that
year there entered considerations altogether aloof from the history of
the Elder Days. On 21 September *The Hobbit* was published by Allen and
Unwin, and was an immediate success; but it brought with it great
pressure on my father to write a further book about hobbits. In October
he said in a letter to Stanley Unwin, the chairman of Allen and Unwin,
that he was 'a little perturbed. I cannot think of anything more to say
about *hobbits.* Mr Baggins seems to have exhibited so fully both the
Took and the Baggins side of their nature. But I have only too much to
say, and much already written, about the world into which the hobbit
intruded.' He said that he wanted an opinion on the value of these
writings on the subject of 'the world into which the hobbit intruded';
and he put together a collection of manuscripts and sent them off to
Stanley Unwin on 15 November 1937. Included in the collection was QS II,
which had reached the moment when Beren took into his hand the Silmaril
which he had cut from Morgoth's crown.

Long afterwards I learned that the list made out at Allen and Unwin of
the manuscripts in my father's consignment contained, in addition to
*Farmer Giles of Ham*, *Mr Bliss*, and *The Lost Road*, two elements
referred to as *Long Poem* and *The Gnomes Material*, titles which carry
a suggestion of despair. Obviously the unwelcome manuscripts landed on
the desk at Allen and Unwin without adequate explanation. I have told in
detail the strange story of this consignment in an appendix to *The Lays
of Beleriand* (1985), but to be brief, it is painfully clear that the
*Quenta Silmarillion* (included in 'the Gnomes Material', together with
whatever other texts may have been given this name) never reached the
publishers' reader---save for a few pages that had been attached,
independently (and in the circumstances very misleadingly) to *The Lay
of Leithian*. He was utterly perplexed, and proposed a solution to the
relationship between the Long Poem and this fragment (much approved) of
the prose work (i.e. the *Quenta Silmarillion*) that was (very
understandably) radically incorrect. He wrote a puzzled report conveying
his opinion, across which a member of the staff wrote, also
understandably, 'What are we to do?'

The outcome of a tissue of subsequent misunderstandings was that my
father, wholly unaware that the *Quenta* *Silmarillion* had not in fact
been read by anybody, told Stanley Unwin that he rejoiced that at least
it had not been rejected 'with scorn', and that he now certainly hoped
'to be able, or to be able to afford, to publish the Silmarillion!'

While QS II was gone he continued the narrative in a further manuscript,
which told of the death of Beren in *The Wolf-hunt of Carcharoth,*
intending to copy the new writing into QS II when the texts were
returned; but when they were, on 16 December 1937, he put *Th*e
*Silmarillion* aside. He still asked, in a letter to Stanley Unwin of
that date, 'And what more can hobbits do? They can be comic, but their
comedy is suburban unless it is set against things more elemental.' But
three days later, on 19 December 1937, he announced to Allen and Unwin:
'I have written the first chapter of a new story about Hobbits---"A long
expected party".'

It was at this point, as I wrote in the Appendix to *The Children of
Húrin*, that the continuous and evolving tradition of *The Silmarillion*
in the summarising, *Quenta* mode came to an end, brought down in full
flight, at Túrin's departure from Doriath, becoming an outlaw. The
further history from that point remained during the years that followed
in the compressed and undeveloped form of the *Quenta* of 1930, frozen,
as it were, while the great structures of the Second and Third Ages
arose with the writing of *The* *Lord of the Rings*. But that further
history was of cardinal importance in the ancient legends, for the
concluding stories (deriving from the original *Book of Lost Tales*)
told of the disastrous history of Húrin, father of Túrin, after Morgoth
released him, and of the ruin of the Elvish kingdoms of Nargothrond,
Doriath, and Gondolin of which Gimli chanted in the mines of Moria many
thousands of years afterwards.
:::

::: verse1
*The world was fair, the mountains tall,*

*in Elder Days before the fall*

*of mighty kings in Nargothrond*

*And Gondolin,* *who now beyond*

*the Western Seas have passed* *away* . . .
:::

::: extract
And this was to be the crown and completion of the whole: the doom of
the Noldorin Elves in their long struggle against the power of Morgoth,
and the parts that Húrin and Túrin played in that history; ending with
the *Tale of Eärendil*, who escaped from the burning ruin of Gondolin.

Many years later my father wrote in a letter (16 July 1964): 'I offered
them the legends of the Elder Days, but their readers turned that down.
They wanted a sequel. But I wanted heroic legends and high romance. The
result was *The Lord of the Rings.*'

\*

When *The Lay of Leithian* was abandoned there was no explicit account
of what followed the moment when 'the fangs of Carcharoth crashed
together like a trap' on Beren's hand in which he clutched the Silmaril;
for this we must go back to the original *Tale of Tinúviel* ([pp.
77--80](#calibre_link-65){.calibre3}), where there was a story of the
desperate flight of Beren and Lúthien, of the hunt out of Angband
pursuing them, and of Huan's finding them and guiding them back to
Doriath. In the *Quenta Noldorinwa* ([p.
138](#calibre_link-66){.calibre3}) my father said of this simply that
'there is little to tell'.

In the final story of the return of Beren and Lúthien to Doriath the
chief (and radical) change to notice is the manner of their escape from
the gates of Angband after the wounding of Beren by Carcharoth. This
event, which *The Lay of Leithian* did not reach, is told in the words
of *The Silmarillion*:
:::

Thus the quest of the Silmaril was like to have ended in ruin and
despair; but in that hour above the wall of the valley three mighty
birds appeared, flying northward with wings swifter than the wind.

Among all birds and beasts the wandering and need of Beren had been
noised, and Huan himself had bidden all things watch, that they might
bring him aid. High above the realm of Morgoth Thorondor and his vassals
soared, and seeing now the madness of the Wolf and Beren's fall came
swiftly down, even as the powers of Angband were released from the toils
of sleep. Then they lifted up Beren and Lúthien from the earth, and bore
them aloft into the clouds . . .

(As they passed high over the lands) Lúthien wept, for she thought that
Beren would surely die; he spoke no word, nor opened his eyes, and knew
thereafter nothing of his flight. And at the last the eagles set them
down upon the borders of Doriath; and they were come to that same dell
whence Beren had stolen in despair and left Lúthien asleep.

There the eagles laid her at Beren's side and returned to the peaks of
Crissaegrim and their high eyries; but Huan came to her, and together
they tended Beren, even as before when she healed him of the wound that
Curufin gave to him. But this wound was fell and poisonous. Long Beren
lay, and his spirit wandered upon the dark borders of death, knowing
ever an anguish that pursued him from dream to dream. Then suddenly,
when her hope was almost spent, he woke again, and looked up, seeing
leaves against the sky; and he heard beneath the leaves singing soft and
slow beside him LúthienTinúviel. And it was spring again.

Thereafter Beren was named Erchamion, which is the One-handed; and
suffering was graven in his face. But at last he was drawn back to life
by the love of Lúthien, and he rose, and together they walked in the
woods once more.

\*

The story of Beren and Lúthien has now been told as it evolved in prose
and verse over twenty years from the original *Tale of Tinúviel*. After
initial hesitation Beren, whose father was at first Egnor the Forester,
of the Elvish people called the Noldoli, translated into English as
'Gnomes', has become the son of Barahir, a chieftain of Men, and the
leader of a band of rebels in hiding against the hateful tyranny of
Morgoth. The memorable story has emerged (in 1925, in *The* *Lay of
Leithian*) of the treachery of Gorlim and the slaying of Barahir ([pp.
94 ff](#calibre_link-67){.calibre3}.); and while Vëannë who told the
'lost tale' knew nothing of what had brought Beren to Artanor, and
surmised that it was a simple love of wandering ([p.
41](#calibre_link-47){.calibre3}), he has become after the death of his
father a far-famed enemy of Morgoth forced to flee to the South, where
he opens the story of Beren and Tinúviel as he peers in the twilight
through the trees of Thingol's forest.

Very remarkable is the story, as it was told in *The Tale of Tinúviel*,
of the captivity of Beren, on his journey to Angband in quest of a
Silmaril, by Tevildo Prince of Cats; so too is the total subsequent
transformation of that story. But if we say that the castle of the cats
'is' the tower of Sauron on Tol-in-Gaurhoth 'Isle of Werewolves' it can
only be, as I have remarked elsewhere, in the sense that it occupies the
same 'space' in the narrative. Beyond this there is no point in seeking
even shadowy resemblances between the two establishments. The monstrous
gormandising cats, their kitchens and their sunning terraces, and their
engagingly Elvish-feline names, *Miaugion*, *Miaulë*, *Meoita*, have all
vanished without trace. But beyond their hatred of dogs (and the
importance to the story of the mutual loathing of Huan and Tevildo) it
is evident that the inhabitants of the castle are no ordinary cats: very
notable is this passage from the *Tale* ([p.
69](#calibre_link-51){.calibre3}) concerning 'the secret of the cats and
the spell that Melko had entrusted to \[Tevildo\]':

and those were words of magic whereby the stones of his evil house were
held together, and whereby he held all beasts of the catfolk under his
sway, filling them with an evil power beyond their nature; for long has
it been said that Tevildo was an evil fay in beastlike shape.

::: extract
It is also interesting to observe in this passage, as elsewhere, the
manner in which aspects and incidents of the original tale may reappear
but in a wholly different guise, arising from a wholly altered narrative
conception. In the old *Tale* Tevildo was forced by Huan to reveal the
spell, and when Tinúviel uttered it 'the house of Tevildo shook; and
there came therefrom a host of indwellers' (which was a host of cats).
In the *Quenta Noldorinwa* ([p. 135](#calibre_link-68){.calibre3}) when
Huan overthrew the terrible werewolf-wizard Thû, the Necromancer, in
Tol-in-Gaurhoth he 'won from him the keys and the spells that held
together his enchanted walls and towers. So the stronghold was broken
and the towers thrown down and the dungeons opened. Many captives were
released . . .'

But here we move into the major shift in the story of Beren and Lúthien,
when it was combined with the altogether distinct legend of Nargothrond.
Through the oath of undying friendship and aid sworn to Barahir, the
father of Beren, Felagund the founder of Nargothrond was drawn into
Beren's quest of the Silmaril ([p. 117](#calibre_link-58){.calibre3},
lines 157 ff.); and there entered the story of the Elves from
Nargothrond who disguised as Orcs were taken by Thû and ended their days
in the gruesome dungeons of Tol-in-Gaurhoth. The quest of the Silmaril
involved also Celegorm and Curufin, sons of Fëanor and a powerful
presence in Nargothrond, through the destructive oath sworn by the
Fëanorians of vengeance against any 'who hold or take or keep a Silmaril
against their will'. The captivity of Lúthien in Nargothrond, from which
Huan rescued her, involved her in the plots and ambitions of Celegorm
and Curufin: [pp. 151--2](#calibre_link-69){.calibre3}, lines 247--72.

There remains the aspect of the story that is also the end of it, and of
primary significance, as I believe, in the mind of its author. The
earliest reference to the fates of Beren and Lúthien after Beren's death
in the hunt of Carcharoth is in *The Tale of Tinúviel;* but at that time
both Beren and Lúthien were Elves. There it was said ([p.
87](#calibre_link-70){.calibre3}):
:::

'Tinúviel crushed with sorrow and finding no comfort or light in all the
world followed him swiftly down those dark ways that all must tread
alone. Now her beauty and tender loveliness touched even the cold heart
of Mandos, so that he suffered her to lead Beren forth once more into
the world, nor has this ever been done since to Man or Elf . . . Yet
said Mandos to those twain: "Lo, O Elves, it is not to any life of
perfect joy that I dismiss you, for such may no longer be found in all
the world where sits Melko of the evil heart---and know that ye will
become mortal even as Men, and when ye fare hither again it will be for
ever . . . ."'

::: extract
That Beren and Lúthien had a further history in Middle-earth is made
plain in this passage ('their deeds afterward were very great, and many
tales are told thereof'), but no more is said there than that they are
*i-Cuilwarthon*, the Dead that Live Again, and 'they became mighty
fairies in the lands about the north of Sirion.'

In another of the *Lost Tales*, *The Coming of the Valar*, there is an
account of those who came to Mandos (the name of his halls as well as
that of the God, whose true name was Vê):
:::

Thither in after days fared the Elves of all the clans who were by
illhap slain with weapons or did die of grief for those who were
slain---and only so might the Eldar die, and then it was only for a
while. There Mandos spake their doom, and there they waited in the
darkness, dreaming of their past deeds, until such time as he appointed
when they might again be born into their children, and go forth to laugh
and sing again.

::: extract
With this may be compared the unplaced verses for *The* *Lay of
Leithian* given on [pp. 216--7](#calibre_link-71){.calibre3}, concerning
'the Land of the Lost . . . where the Dead wait, while ye forget':
:::

::: verse1
No moon is there, no voice, no sound

of beating heart; a sigh profound

once in each age as each age dies

alone is heard. Far, far it lies,

the Land of Waiting where the Dead sit,

in their thought's shadow, by no moon lit.
:::

::: extract
The conception that the Elves died only from wounds of weapons, or from
grief, endured, and appears in the published *Silmarillion*:
:::

For the Elves die not till the world dies, unless they are slain or
waste in grief (and to both these seeming deaths they are subject);
neither does age subdue their strength, unless one grow weary of ten
thousand centuries; and dying they are gathered to the halls of Mandos
in Valinor, whence they may in time return. But the sons of Men die
indeed, and leave the world; wherefore they are called the Guests, or
the Strangers. Death is their fate, the gift of Ilúvatar, which as Time
wears even the Powers shall envy.

::: extract
It seems to me that the words of Mandos in *The Tale of Tinúviel* cited
above, '*ye will become mortal even as Men*, and when ye fare hither
again it will be for ever', imply that he was uprooting their destiny as
Elves: having died as Elves could die, they would not be reborn, but be
permitted---uniquely---to leave Mandos still in their own particular
being. They would pay a price, nevertheless, for when they died a second
time there would be no possibility of return, no 'seeming death', but
the death that Men, of their nature, must suffer.

Later, in the *Quenta Noldorinwa* it is told ([pp.
140--1](#calibre_link-72){.calibre3}) that 'Lúthien failed and faded
swiftly and vanished from the earth . . . . And she came to the halls of
Mandos, and she sang to him a tale of moving love so fair that he was
moved to pity, as never has befallen since.'
:::

Beren he summoned, and thus, as Lúthien had sworn as she kissed him at
the hour of death, they met beyond the western sea. And Mandos suffered
them to depart, but he said that Lúthien *should become mortal even as
her lover*, and should leave the earth once more *in the manner of a
mortal woman*, and her beauty become but a memory of song. So it was,
but it is said that in recompense Mandos gave to Beren and to Lúthien
thereafter a long span of life and joy, and they wandered knowing thirst
nor cold in the fair land of Beleriand, and no mortal Man thereafter
spoke to Beren or his spouse.

::: extract
In the draft text of the story of Beren and Lúthien prepared for the
*Quenta Silmarillion*, referred to on [p.
218](#calibre_link-73){.calibre3}, there enters the idea of the 'choice
of fate' proposed to Beren and Lúthien before Mandos:
:::

And this was the choice that he decreed for Beren and Lúthien. They
should dwell now in Valinor until the world's end in bliss, but in the
end Beren and Lúthien must each go unto that appointed to their kind,
when all things are changed: and of the mind of Ilúvatar concerning Men
Manwë \[Lord of the Valar\] knows not. Or they might return unto
Middle-earth without certitude of joy or life; then Lúthien should
become mortal even as Beren, and subject to a second death, and in the
end she should leave the earth for ever and her beauty become only a
memory of song. And this doom they chose, that thus, whatsoever sorrow
lay before them, their fates might be joined, and their paths lead
together beyond the confines of the world. So it was that alone of the
Eldalië Lúthien died and left the world long ago; yet by her have the
Two Kindreds been joined, and she is the foremother of many.

::: extract
This conception of the 'Choice of Fate' was retained, but in a different
form, as seen in *The Silmarillion*: the choices were imposed on Lúthien
alone, and they were changed. Lúthien may still leave Mandos and dwell
until the end of the world in Valinor, because of her labours and her
sorrow, and because she was the daughter of Melian; but thither Beren
cannot come. Thus if she accepts the former, they must be separated now
and for ever: because he cannot escape from his own destiny, cannot
escape Death, which is the Gift of Ilúvatar and cannot be refused.

The second choice remained, and this she chose. Only so could Lúthien
become united with Beren 'beyond the world': she herself must change the
destiny of her being: she must become mortal, and die indeed.

[]{#calibre_link-77 .calibre3}As I have said, the story of Beren and
Lúthien did not end with the judgement of Mandos, and some account of
it, of its aftermath, and of the history of the Silmaril that Beren cut
from the iron crown of Morgoth, must be given. There are difficulties in
doing so in the form that I have chosen for this book, largely because
the part played by Beren in his second life hinges on aspects of the
history of the First Age that would cast the net too widely for the
purpose of this book.

I have remarked ([p. 103](#calibre_link-56){.calibre3}) of the *Quenta
Noldorinwa* of 1930, which followed from and was much longer than the
*Sketch of the Mythology*, that it remained 'a compression, a
compendious account': it is said in the title of the work to be 'the
brief history of the Noldoli or Gnomes, drawn from the *Book of Lost
Tales'*. Of these 'summarising' texts I wrote in *The War of the Jewels*
(1994): 'In these versions my father was drawing on (while also of
course continually developing and extending) long works that already
existed in prose or verse, and in the *Quenta Silmarillion* he perfected
that characteristic tone, melodious, grave, elegiac, burdened with a
sense of loss and distance in time, which resides partly, as I believe,
in the literary fact that he was drawing down into a brief compendious
history what he could also see in far more detailed, immediate, and
dramatic form. With the completion of the great 'intrusion' and
departure of *The Lord of the Rings* it seems that he returned to the
Elder Days with a desire to take up again the far more ample scale with
which he had begun long before, in *The Book of Lost Tales.* The
completion of the *Quenta Silmarillion* remained an aim; but the 'great
tales', vastly developed from their original forms---from which its
later chapters should be derived---were never achieved.'

We are here concerned with a story that goes back to the latest written
of the *Lost Tales*, where it bore the title *The Tale of the
Nauglafring*: that being the original name of the *Nauglamír,* the
Necklace of the Dwarves. But we come here to the furthest point in my
father's work on the Elder Days in the time following the completion of
*The Lord of the Rings*: there is no new narrative. To cite my
discussion in *The War of the Jewels* again, 'it is as if we come to the
brink of a great cliff and look down from highlands raised in some later
age onto an ancient plain far below. For the story of the Nauglamír and
the destruction of Doriath . . . we must return through more than a
quarter of a century to the *Quenta Noldorinwa* or beyond.' To the
*Quenta Noldorinwa* (see [p. 103](#calibre_link-56){.calibre3}) I will
now turn, giving the relevant text in a very slightly shortened form.

The tale begins with the further history of the great treasure of
Nargothrond that was taken by the evil dragon Glómund. After the death
of Glómund, slain by Túrin Turambar, Húrin father of Túrin came with a
few outlaws of the woods to Nargothrond, which as yet none, Orc, Elf, or
Man, had dared to plunder, for dread of the spirit of Glómund and his
very memory. But they found there one Mîm the Dwarf.
:::
::::::::::::::

::::: {#calibre_link-17 .calibre}
## ![](images/000020.jpg){.calibre38} {#section-11 .chapter-number1}

## THE RETURN OF BEREN AND LÚTHIEN ACCORDING TO THE *QUENTA NOLDORINWA* {#the-return-of-beren-and-lúthien-according-to-the-quenta-noldorinwa .chapter-number2}

Now Mîm had found the halls and treasure of Nargothrond unguarded; and
he took possession of them, and sat there in joy fingering the gold and
gems, and letting them run ever through his hands; and he bound them to
himself with many spells. But the folk of Mîm were few, and the outlaws
filled with the lust of the treasure slew them, though Húrin would have
stayed them; and at his death Mîm cursed the gold.

\[Húrin went to Thingol and sought his aid, and the folk of Thingol bore
the treasure to the Thousand Caves; then Húrin departed.\]

Then the enchantment of the accursed dragon gold began to fall even upon
the king of Doriath, and long he sat and gazed upon it, and the seed of
the love of gold that was in his heart was waked to growth. Wherefore he
summoned the greatest of all craftsmen that now were in the western
world, since Nargothrond was no more (and Gondolin was
[]{#calibre_link-138 .calibre3}not known), the Dwarves of Nogrod and
Belegost, that they might fashion the gold and silver and the gems (for
much was as yet unwrought) into countless vessels and fair things; and a
marvellous necklace of great beauty they should make, whereon to hang
the Silmaril.^[\*](#calibre_link-74){#calibre_link-80 .calibre3}^

But the Dwarves coming were stricken at once with the lust and desire of
the treasure, and they plotted treachery. They said one to another: 'Is
not this wealth as much the right of the Dwarves as of the Elvish king,
and was it not wrested evilly from Mîm?' Yet also they lusted for the
Silmaril. And Thingol, falling deeper into the thraldom of the spell,
for his part scanted his promised reward for their labour; and bitter
words grew between them, and there was battle in Thingol's halls. There
many Elves and Dwarves were slain, and the howe wherein they were lain
in Doriath was named Cûm-nan-Arasaith, the Mound of Avarice. But the
remainder of the Dwarves were driven forth without reward or fee.

Therefore gathering new forces in Nogrod and in Belegost they returned
at length, and aided by the treachery of certain Elves on whom the lust
of the accursed treasure had fallen they passed into Doriath secretly.

There they surprised Thingol upon a hunt with but small
[]{#calibre_link-37 .calibre3}company of arms; and Thingol was slain,
and the fortress of the Thousand Caves taken at unawares and plundered;
and so was brought well nigh to ruin the glory of Doriath and but one
stronghold of the Elves \[Gondolin\] against Morgoth now remained, and
their twilight was nigh at hand.

Queen Melian the Dwarves could not seize or harm, and she went forth to
seek Beren and Lúthien. Now the Dwarf-road to Nogrod and Belegost in the
Blue Mountains passed through East Beleriand and the woods about the
River Gelion, where aforetime were the hunting grounds of Damrod and
Díriel, sons of Fëanor. To the south of those lands between the river
Gelion and the mountains lay the land of Ossiriand, and there lived and
wandered still in peace and bliss Beren and Lúthien, in that time of
respite which Lúthien had won, ere both should die; and their folk were
the Green Elves of the South. But Beren went no more to war, and his
land was filled with loveliness and a wealth of flowers, and Men called
it oft Cuilwarthien, the Land of the Dead that Live.

To the north of that region is a ford across the river Ascar, and that
ford is named Sarn Athrad, the Ford of Stones. This ford the Dwarves
must pass ere they reached the mountain passes that led unto their
homes; and there Beren fought his last fight, warned of their approach
by Melian. In that battle the Green Elves took the Dwarves unawares as
they were in the midst of their passage, laden with their plunder; and
the Dwarvish chiefs were slain, and well nigh all their host. But Beren
took the Nauglamír, the Necklace of the Dwarves, whereon was hung the
Silmaril; and it is said and sung that Lúthien wearing that necklace and
that immortal jewel on her []{#calibre_link-78 .calibre3}white breast
was the vision of greatest beauty and glory that has ever been seen
outside the realms of Valinor, and that for a while the Land of the Dead
that Live became like a vision of the land of the Gods, and no places
have been since so fair, so fruitful, or so filled with light.

Yet Melian warned them ever of the curse that lay upon the treasure and
upon the Silmaril. The treasure they had drowned indeed in the river
Ascar, and named it anew Rathlorion, Goldenbed, yet the Silmaril they
retained. And in time the brief hour of loveliness of the land of
Rathlorion departed. For Lúthien faded as Mandos had spoken, even as the
Elves of later days faded and she vanished from the
world;^[\*](#calibre_link-75){#calibre_link-81 .calibre3}^ and Beren
died, and none know where their meeting shall be again.'

Thereafter was Dior Thingol's heir, child of Beren and Lúthien, king in
the woods: most fair of all the children of the world, for his race was
threefold: of the fairest and goodliest of Men, and of the Elves, and of
the spirits divine of Valinor; yet it shielded him not from the fate of
the oath of the sons of Fëanor. For Dior went back to Doriath and for a
time a part of its ancient glory was raised anew, though Melian no
longer dwelt in that place, and she departed to the land of the Gods
beyond the western sea, to muse on her sorrows in the gardens whence she
came.

But Dior wore the Silmaril upon his breast and the fame of that jewel
went far and wide; and the deathless oath was waked once more from
sleep.

For while Lúthien wore that peerless gem no Elf would dare assail her,
and not even Maidros dared ponder such a thought. But now hearing of the
renewal of Doriath and Dior's pride, the seven gathered again from
wandering; and they sent unto Dior to claim their own. But he would not
yield the jewel unto them, and they came upon him with all their host;
and so befell the second slaying of Elf by Elf, and the most grievous.
There fell Celegorm and Curufin and dark Cranthir, but Dior was slain,
and Doriath was destroyed and never rose again.

Yet the sons of Fëanor gained not the Silmaril; for faithful servants
fled before them and took with them Elwing the daughter of Dior, and she
escaped, and they bore with them the Nauglafring, and came in time to
the mouth of the river Sirion by the sea.

::: extract
\[In a text somewhat later than the *Quenta Noldorinwa,* the earliest
form of *The Annals of Beleriand,* the story was changed, in that Dior
returned to Doriath while Beren and Lúthien were still alive in
Ossiriand; and what befell him there I will give in the words of *The
Silmarillion*:
:::

There came a night of autumn, and when it grew late, one came and smote
upon the doors of Menegroth, demanding admittance to the King. He was a
lord of the Green Elves hastening from Ossiriand, and the doorwards
brought him to where Dior sat alone in his chamber; and there in silence
he gave to the King a coffer, and took his leave. But in that coffer lay
the Necklace of the Dwarves, wherein was set the Silmaril; and Dior
looking upon it knew it for a sign that Beren Erchamion and Lúthien
Tinúviel had died indeed, and gone where go the race of Men to a fate
beyond the world.

Long did Dior gaze upon the Silmaril, which his father and mother had
brought beyond hope out of the terror of Morgoth; and his grief was
great that death had come upon them so soon.\]

::: centered-image
![](images/000021.jpg){.calibre39}
:::
:::::

::::::::: {#calibre_link-18 .calibre}
## ![](images/000022.jpg){.calibre40} {#section-12 .chapter-number1}

## EXTRACT FROM THE *LOST TALE* OF THE NAUGLAFRING {#extract-from-the-lost-tale-of-the-nauglafring .chapter-number2}

::: extract
Here I will step back from the chronology of composition and turn to the
*Lost Tale* of the Nauglafring. The reason for this is that the passage
given here is a notable example of the expansive mode, observant of
visual and often dramatic detail, adopted by my father in the early days
of *The Silmarillion*; but the *Lost Tale* as a whole extends into
ramifications unneeded in this book. A very brief summary of the battle
at Sarn Athrad, the Stony Ford, appears therefore in the text of the
*Quenta*, [p. 235](#calibre_link-37){.calibre3}, while there follows
here the much fuller account from the *Lost Tale*, with the duel between
Beren and Naugladur, lord of the Dwarves of Nogrod in the Blue
Mountains.

The passage begins with the approach of the Dwarves, led by Naugladur,
to Sarn Athrad, on their return from the sack of the Thousand Caves.
:::

Now came all that host \[to the river Ascar\], and their array was thus:
first a number of unladen Dwarves most fully armed, and amidmost the
great company of those that bore the treasury of Glómund, and many a
fair thing beside that they had haled from Tinwelint's halls; and behind
these was Naugladur, and he bestrode Tinwelint's horse, and a strange
figure did he seem, for the legs of the Dwarves are short and crooked,
but two Dwarves led that horse for it went not willingly and it was
laden with spoil. But behind these came a mass of armed men but little
laden; and in this array they sought to cross Sarn Athrad on their day
of doom.

Morn was it when they reached the hither bank, and high noon saw them
yet passing in long-strung lines and wading slowly the shallow places of
the swift-running stream. Here doth it widen out and fare down narrow
channels filled with boulders atween long spits of shingle and stones
less great. Now did Naugladur slip from his burdened horse and prepare
to get him over, for the armed host of the vanguard had climbed already
the further bank, and it was great and sheer and thick with trees, and
the bearers of the gold were some already stepped thereon and some
amidmost of the stream, but the armed men of the rear were resting
awhile.

Suddenly is all that place filled with the sound of elven horns, and one
\[? brays\] with a clearer blast above the rest, and it is the horn of
Beren, the huntsman of the woods. Then is the air thick with the slender
arrows of the Eldar that err not neither doth the wind bear them aside,
and lo, from every tree and boulder do the brown Elves and the green
spring suddenly and loose unceasingly from full quivers. Then was there
a panic and a noise in the host of Naugladur, and those that waded in
the ford cast their golden burdens in the waters []{#calibre_link-116
.calibre3}and sought affrighted to either bank, but many were stricken
with those pitiless darts and fell with their gold into the currents of
the Aros, staining its clear waters with their dark blood.

Now were the warriors on the far bank \[? wrapped\] in battle and
rallying sought to come at their foes, but these fled nimbly before
them, while \[? others\] poured still the hail of arrows upon them, and
thus got the Eldar few hurts and the Dwarf-folk fell dead unceasingly.
Now was that great fight of the Stony Ford . . . nigh to Naugladur, for
even though Naugladur and his captains led their bands stoutly never
might they grip their foe, and death fell like rain upon their ranks
until the most part broke and fled, and a noise of clear laughter echoed
from the Elves thereat, and they forbore to shoot more, for the
illshapen figures of the Dwarves as they fled, their white beards torn
by the wind, filled them with mirth. But now stood Naugladur and few
were about him, and he remembered the words of
Gwendelin,^[\*](#calibre_link-76){#calibre_link-82 .calibre3}^ for
behold, Beren came towards him and he cast aside his bow, and drew a
bright sword; and Beren was of great stature among the Eldar, albeit not
of the girth and breadth of Naugladur of the Dwarves.

Then said Beren: 'Ward thy life if thou canst, O crook-legged murderer,
else will I take it,' and Naugladur bid him even the Nauglafring, the
necklace of wonder, that he be suffered to go unharmed; but Beren said:
'Nay, that may I still take when thou art slain,' and thereat he made
alone upon Naugladur and his companions, and having slain the foremost
of these the others fled away amid elven laughter, and so Beren came
upon Naugladur, slayer of Tinwelint. Then did that aged one defend
himself doughtily, and 'twas a bitter fight, and many of the Elves that
watched for love and fear of their captain fingered their bow-strings,
but Beren called even as he fought that all should stay their hands.

Now little doth the tale tell of wounds and blows of that affray, save
that Beren got many hurts therein, and many of his shrewdest blows did
little harm to Naugladur by reason of the \[? skill\] and magic of his
dwarfen mail; and it is said that three hours they fought and Beren's
arms grew weary, but not those of Naugladur accustomed to wield his
mighty hammer at the forge, and it is more than like that otherwise
would the issue have been but for the curse of Mîm; for marking how
Beren grew faint Naugladur pressed him ever more nearly, and the
arrogance that was of that grievous spell came into his heart, and he
thought: 'I will slay this Elf, and his folk will flee in fear before
me,' and grasping his sword he dealt a mighty blow and cried: 'Take here
thy bane, O stripling of the woods,' and in that moment his foot found a
jagged stone and he stumbled forward, but Beren slipped aside from that
blow and catching at his beard his hand found the carcanet of gold, and
therewith he swung Naugladur suddenly off his feet upon his face: and
Naugladur's sword was shaken from his grasp, but Beren seized it and
slew him therewith, for he said: 'I will not sully my bright blade with
thy dark blood, since there is no need.' But the body of Naugladur was
cast into the Aros.

Then did he unloose the necklace, and he gazed in wonder at it---and
beheld the Silmaril, even the jewel he won from Angband and gained
undying glory by his deed; and he said: 'Never have mine eyes beheld
thee O Lamp of Faëry burn one half so fair as now thou dost, set in gold
and gems and the magic of the Dwarves'; and that necklace he caused to
be washed of its stains, and he cast it not away, knowing nought of its
power, but bore it with him back into the woods of Hithlum.

::: extract
To this passage from the *Tale of the Nauglafring* there corresponds
only the few words of the *Quenta* cited in the extract cited on [p.
235](#calibre_link-37){.calibre3}:
:::

In that battle \[Sarn Athrad\] the Green Elves took the Dwarves at
unawares as they were in the midst of their passage, laden with their
plunder; and the Dwarvish chiefs were slain, and well nigh all their
host. But Beren took the Nauglamír, the Necklace of the Dwarves, whereon
was hung the Silmaril . . .

::: extract
This illustrates my observation on [p.
231](#calibre_link-77){.calibre3}, that my father 'was drawing down into
a brief compendious history what he could also see in a far more
detailed, immediate, and dramatic form.'

I will conclude this short excursion into the *Lost Tale* of the
Necklace of the Dwarves with a further quotation, origin of the story as
told in the *Quenta* ([pp. 236--7](#calibre_link-78){.calibre3}) of the
deaths of Beren and Lúthien, and the slaying of Dior, their son. I take
up this extract with words between Beren and Gwendelin (Melian) when
Lúthien first wore the Nauglafring. Beren declared that never had she
appeared so beautiful; but Gwendelin said: 'Yet the Silmaril abode in
the Crown of Melko, and that is the work of baleful smiths indeed.'
:::

Then said Tinúviel that she desired not things of worth or precious
stones, but the elven gladness of the forest, and to pleasure Gwendelin
she cast it from her neck; but Beren was little pleased and he would not
suffer it to be flung away, but warded it in his \[? treasury\].

Thereafter did Gwendelin abide a while in the woods among them and was
healed \[of her overwhelming grief for Tinwelint\]; and in the end she
fared wistfully back to the land of Lórien and came never again into the
tales of the dwellers of Earth; but upon Beren and Lúthien fell swiftly
that doom of mortality that Mandos had spoken when he sped them from his
halls---and in this perhaps did the curse of Mîm have \[? potency\] in
that it came more soon upon them; nor this time did those twain fare the
road together, but when yet was their child, Dior the Fair, a little
one, did Tinúviel slowly fade, even as the Elves of later days have done
throughout the world, and she vanished in the woods, and none have seen
her dancing ever there again. But Beren searched all the lands of
Hithlum and of Artanor ranging after her; and never has any of the Elves
had more loneliness than his, or ever he too faded from life, and Dior
his son was left ruler of the brown Elves and the green, and Lord of the
Nauglafring.

Mayhap what all Elves say is true, that those twain hunt now in the
forest of Oromë in Valinor, and Tinúviel dances on the green swards of
Nessa and Vána daughters of the Gods for ever more; yet great was the
grief of the Elves when the Guilwarthon went from among them, and being
leaderless and lessened of magic their numbers minished; and many fared
away to Gondolin, the rumour of whose growing power and glory ran in
secret whispers among all the Elves.

Still did Dior when come to manhood rule a numerous folk, and he loved
the woods even as Beren had done; and songs name him mostly Ausir the
Wealthy for his possession of that wondrous gem set in the Necklace of
the Dwarves. Now the tales of Beren and Tinúviel grew dim in his heart,
and he took to wearing it about his neck and to love its loveliness most
dearly; and the fame of that jewel spread like fire through all the
regions of the North, and the Elves said one to another: 'A Silmaril
burns in the woods of Hisilómë.'

::: extract
The *Tale of the Nauglafring* told in greater detail of the assault on
Dior and his death at the hands of the sons of Fëanor, and this last of
the *Lost Tales* to receive consecutive form ends with the escape of
Elwing:
:::

She wandered in the woods, and of the brown Elves and the green a few
gathered to her, and they departed for ever from the glades of Hithlum
and got them to the south towards Sirion's deep waters, and the pleasant
lands.

And thus did all the fates of the fairies weave then to one strand, and
that strand is the great tale of Eärendel; and to that tale's true
beginning are we now come.

\*

There follow in the *Quenta Noldorinwa* passages concerned with the
history of Gondolin and its fall, and the history of Tuor, who was
wedded to Idril Celebrindal daughter of Turgon king of Gondolin; their
son was Eärendel, who with them escaped from the destruction of the city
and came to the Mouths of Sirion. The *Quenta* continues, following from
the flight of Elwing daughter of Dior from Doriath to the mouths of
Sirion ([pp. 236--7](#calibre_link-78){.calibre3}):

By Sirion there grew up an elven folk, the gleanings of Doriath and
Gondolin, and they took to the sea and the making of fair ships, and
they dwelt nigh unto its shores and under the shadow of Ulmo's hand
. . .

In those days Tuor felt old age creep upon him, and he could not forbear
the longing that possessed him for the sea; wherefore he built a great
ship Eärámë, Eagle's Pinion, and with Idril he set sail into the sunset
and the West, and came no more into any tale. But Eärendel the shining
became the lord of the folk of Sirion and took to wife fair Elwing, the
daughter of Dior; and yet he could not rest. Two thoughts were in his
heart blended as one: the longing for the wide sea; and he thought to
sail thereon following after Tuor and Idril Celebrindal who returned
not, and he thought to find perhaps the last shore and bring ere he died
a message to the Gods and Elves of the West that should move their
hearts to pity on the world and the sorrows of Mankind.

Wingelot he built, fairest of the ships of song, the Foam-flower; white
were its timbers as the argent moon, golden were its oars, silver were
its shrouds, its masts were crowned with jewels like stars. In *The Lay
of Eärendel* is many a thing sung of his adventures in the deep and in
lands untrod, and in many seas and many isles. . . But Elwing sat
sorrowing at home.

Eärendel found not Tuor, nor came he ever on that journey to the shores
of Valinor; and at last he was driven by the winds back East, and he
came at a time of night to the havens of Sirion, unlooked for,
unwelcomed, for they were desolate . . .

The dwelling of Elwing at Sirion's mouth, where still she possessed the
Nauglamír and the glorious Silmaril, became known to the sons of Fëanor;
and they gathered together from their wandering hunting-paths.

But the folk of Sirion would not yield that jewel which Beren had won
and Lúthien had worn, and for which fair Dior had been slain. And so
befell the last and cruellest of the slaying of Elf by Elf, the third
woe achieved by the accursed oath; for the sons of Fëanor came down upon
the exiles of Gondolin and the remnant of Doriath, and though some of
their folk stood aside and some few rebelled and were slain upon the
other part aiding Elwing against their own lords, yet they won the day.
Damrod was slain and Díriel, and Maidros and Maglor alone now remained
of the Seven; but the last of the folk of Gondolin were destroyed or
forced to depart and join them to the people of Maidros. And yet the
sons of Fëanor gained not the Silmaril; for Elwing cast the Nauglamír
into the sea, whence it shall not return until the End; and she leapt
herself into the waves, and took the form of a white sea-bird, and flew
away lamenting and seeking for Eärendel about all the shores of the
world.

But Maidros took pity upon her child Elrond, and took him with him, and
harboured and nurtured him, for his heart was sick and weary with the
burden of the dreadful oath.

Learning these things Eärendel was overcome with sorrow; and he set sail
once more in search of Elwing and of Valinor. And it is told in the Lay
of Eärendel that he came at last unto the Magic Isles, and hardly
escaped their enchantment, and found again the Lonely Isle, and the
Shadowy Seas, and the Bay of Faërie on the borders of the world. There
he landed on the immortal shore alone of living Men, and his feet
climbed the marvellous hill of Kôr; and he walked in the deserted ways
of Tûn, where the dust on his raiment and his shoes was a dust of
diamonds and gems. But he ventured not into Valinor.

He built a tower in the Northern Seas to which all the sea-birds of the
world might at times repair, and ever he grieved for fair Elwing,
looking for her return to him. And Wingelot was lifted on their wings
and sailed now even in the airs searching for Elwing; marvellous and
magical was that ship, a starlit flower in the sky. But the Sun scorched
it and the Moon hunted it in heaven, and long Eärendel wandered over
Earth, glimmering as a fugitive star.

::: extract
Here the tale of Eärendel and Elwing ends in the *Quenta Noldorinwa* as
originally composed; but at a later time a rewriting of this last
passage altered profoundly the idea that the Silmaril of Beren and
Lúthien was lost for ever in the sea. As rewritten it reads:
:::

And yet Maidros gained not the Silmaril, for Elwing seeing that all was
lost and her children Elros and Elrond taken captive, eluded the host of
Maidros, and with the Nauglamír upon her breast she cast herself into
the sea, and perished, as folk thought. But Ulmo bore her up, and upon
her breast there shone as a star the shining Silmaril, as she flew over
the water to seek Eärendel her beloved. And on a time of night Eärendel
at the helm saw her come towards him, as a white cloud under moon
exceeding swift, as a star over the sea moving in strange course, a pale
flame on wings of storm.

And it is sung that she fell from the air upon the timbers of Wingelot,
in a swoon, nigh unto death for the urgency of her speed, and Eärendel
took her into his bosom. And in the morn with marvelling eyes he beheld
his wife in her own form beside him with her hair upon his face; and she
slept.

::: extract
From here onwards the tale told in the *Quenta Noldorinwa,* largely
rewritten, reached in essentials that in *The Silmarillion*, and I will
end the story in this book with citation of that work.
:::
:::::::::

:::::: {#calibre_link-19 .calibre}
## ![](images/000023.jpg){.calibre41} {#section-13 .chapter-number1}

## THE MORNING AND EVENING STAR {#the-morning-and-evening-star .chapter-number2}

Great was the sorrow of Eärendil and Elwing for the ruin of the havens
of Sirion, and the captivity of their sons, and they feared that they
would be slain; but it was not so. For Maglor took pity upon Elros and
Elrond, and he cherished them, and love grew after between them, as
little might be thought; but Maglor's heart was sick and weary with the
burden of the dreadful oath.

Yet Eärendil saw now no hope left in the lands of Middle-earth, and he
turned again in despair and came not home, but sought back once more to
Valinor with Elwing at his side. He stood now most often at the prow of
Vingilot, and the Silmaril was bound upon his brow; and ever its light
grew greater as they drew into the West . . .

Then Eärendil, first of living Men, landed on the immortal shores; and
he spoke there to Elwing and to those that were with him, and they were
three mariners who had sailed all the seas beside him: Falathar,
Erellont, and Aerandir were their names. And Eärendil said to them:
'Here none but myself shall set foot, lest you fall under the wrath of
the Valar. But that peril I will take on myself alone, for the sake of
the Two Kindreds.'

But Elwing answered: 'Then would our paths be sundered for ever, but all
thy perils I will take on myself also.' And she leaped into the white
foam and ran towards him; but Eärendil was sorrowful, for he feared the
anger of the Lords of the West upon any of Middle-earth that should dare
to pass the leaguer of Aman. And there they bade farewell to the
companions of their voyage, and were taken from them for ever.

Then Eärendil said to Elwing: 'Await me here; for one only may bring the
message that it is my fate to bear.' And he went up alone into the land,
and came into the Calacirya, and it seemed to him empty and silent; for
even as Morgoth and Ungoliant came in ages past, so now Eärendil had
come at a time of festival, and wellnigh all the Elvenfolk were gone to
Valimar, or were gathered in the halls of Manwë upon Taniquetil, and few
were left to keep watch upon the walls of Tirion.

But some there were who saw him from afar, and the great light that he
bore; and they went in haste to Valimar. But Eärendil climbed the green
hill of Túna and found it bare; and he entered into the streets of
Tirion, and they were empty; and his heart was heavy, for he feared that
some evil had come even to the Blessed Realm. He walked in the deserted
ways of Tirion, and the dust upon his raiment and his shoes was a dust
of diamonds, and he shone and glistened as he climbed the long white
stairs. And he called aloud in many tongues, both of Elves and Men, but
there were none to answer him. Therefore he turned back at last towards
the sea; but even as he took the shoreward road one stood upon the hill
and called to him in a great voice, crying:

'Hail Eärendil, of mariners most renowned, the looked for that cometh at
unawares, the longed for that cometh beyond hope! Hail Eärendil, bearer
of light before the Sun and Moon! Splendour of the Children of Earth,
star in the darkness, jewel in the sunset, radiant in the morning!'

That voice was the voice of Eönwë, herald of Manwë, and he came from
Valimar, and summoned Eärendil to come before the Powers of Arda. And
Eärendil went into Valinor and to the halls of Valimar, and never again
set foot upon the lands of Men. Then the Valar took counsel together,
and they summoned Ulmo from the deeps of the sea; and Eärendil stood
before their faces, and delivered the errand of the Two Kindreds. Pardon
he asked for the Noldor and pity for their great sorrows, and mercy upon
Men and Elves and succour in their need. And his prayer was granted.

It is told among the Elves that after Eärendil had departed, seeking
Elwing his wife, Mandos spoke concerning his fate; and he said: 'Shall
mortal man step living upon the undying lands, and yet live?' But Ulmo
said: 'For this he was born into the world. And say unto me: whether is
he Eärendil Tuor's son of the line of Hador, or the son of Idril,
Turgon's daughter, of the Elven-house of Finwë?' And Mandos answered:
'Equally the Noldor, who went wilfully into exile, may not return
hither.'

But when all was spoken, Manwë gave judgement, and he said: 'In this
matter the power of doom is given to me. The peril that he ventured for
love of the Two Kindreds shall not fall upon Eärendil, nor shall it fall
upon Elwing his wife, who entered into peril for love of him; but they
shall not walk again ever among Elves or Men in the Outer Lands. And
this is my decree concerning them: to Eärendil and Elwing, and to their
sons, shall be given leave each to choose freely to which kindred their
fates shall be joined, and under which kindred they shall be judged.'

\[Now when Eärendil was long time gone Elwing became lonely and afraid;
but as she wandered by the margin of the sea he found her.\] Ere long
they were summoned to Valimar; and there the decree of the Elder King
was declared to them.

Then Eärendil said to Elwing: 'Choose thou, for now I am weary of the
world.' And Elwing chose to be judged among the Firstborn Children of
Ilúvatar, because of Lúthien; and for her sake Eärendil chose alike,
though his heart was rather with the kindred of Men and the people of
his father.

Then at the bidding of the Valar Eönwë went to the shore of Aman, where
the companions of Eärendil still remained, awaiting tidings; and he took
a boat, and the three mariners were set therein, and the Valar drove
them away into the East with a great wind. But they took Vingilot, and
hallowed it, and bore it away through Valinor to the uttermost rim of
the world; and there it passed through the Door of Night and was lifted
up even into the oceans of heaven.

Now fair and marvellous was that vessel made, and it was filled with a
wavering flame, pure and bright; and Eärendil the Mariner sat at the
helm, glistening with dust of elven-gems, and the Silmaril was bound
upon his brow. Far he journeyed in that ship, even into the starless
voids; but most often was he seen at morning or at evening, glimmering
at sunrise or at sunset, as he came back to Valinor from voyages beyond
the confines of the world.

On those journeys Elwing did not go, for she might not endure the cold
and the pathless voids, and she loved rather the earth and the sweet
winds that blow on sea and hill. Therefore there was built for her a
white tower northward upon the borders of the Sundering Seas; and
thither at times all the sea-birds of the earth repaired. And it is said
that Elwing learned the tongues of birds, who herself had once worn
their shape; and they taught her the craft of flight, and her wings were
of white and of silver-grey. And at times, when Eärendil returning drew
near again to Arda, she would fly to meet him, even as she had flown
long ago, when she was rescued from the sea. Then the far-sighted among
the Elves that dwelt in the Lonely Isle would see her like a white bird,
shining, rose-stained in the sunset, as she soared in joy to greet the
coming of Vingilot to haven.

Now when first Vingilot was set to sail in the seas of heaven it rose
unlooked for, glittering and bright; and the people of Middle-earth
beheld it from afar and wondered, and they took it for a sign, and
called it Gil-Estel, the Star of High Hope. And when this new star was
seen at evening, Maedhros spoke to Maglor his brother, and he said:
'Surely that is a Silmaril that shines now in the West?'

::: extract
And of the final departure of Beren and Lúthien? In the words of the
*Quenta Silmarillion*: None saw Beren and Lúthien leave the world or
marked where at last their bodies lay.
:::

::: centered-image
![](images/000024.jpg){.calibre42}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-34 .centered-image1}
![](images/000034.jpg){.calibre43}
:::
::::::

:::::::: {#calibre_link-20 .calibre}
## []{#calibre_link-64 .calibre15}APPENDIX {#appendix .chapter-number}

### REVISIONS TO *THE LAY OF LEITHIAN* {#revisions-to-the-lay-of-leithian .chapter-subtitle1}

::: extract
Among the first, perhaps even the very first, of the literary tasks that
attracted my father after the completion of *The Lord of the Rings* was
a return to *The Lay of Leithian*: not (needless to say) to continue the
narrative from the point reached in 1931 (the attack on Beren by
Carcharoth at the gates of Angband), but from the beginning of the poem.
The textual history of the writing is very complex, and no more need be
said of it here beyond remarking that whereas at first my father seems
to have embarked on a radical rewriting of the *Lay* as a whole, the
impulse soon died away, or was overtaken, and was reduced to short and
scattered passages. I give here, however, as a substantial example of
the new verse after the lapse of a quarter of a century, the passage of
the *Lay* concerning the treachery of Gorlim the Unhappy that led to the
slaying of Barahir, the father of Beren, and all his companions, save
Beren alone. This is by far the longest of the new passages;
and---conveniently---it may be compared []{#calibre_link-158
.calibre3}with the original text that has been given on [pp.
94--102](#calibre_link-67){.calibre3}. It will be seen that Sauron
(Thû), ridden here from 'Gaurhoth Isle', has replaced Morgoth; and that
in the quality of the verse this is a new poem.

I begin the new text with a short passage entitled *Of Tarn Aeluin the
Blessed* which has no counterpart in the original version: these verses
are numbered 1--26.
:::

::: verse
Such deeds of daring there they wrought

that soon the hunters that them sought

at rumour of their coming fled.

Though price was set upon each head

[5]{.float}to match the weregild of a king,

no soldier could to Morgoth bring

news even of their hidden lair;

for where the highland brown and bare

above the darkling pines arose

[10]{.float}of steep Dorthonion to the snows

and barren mountain-winds, there lay

a tarn of water, blue by day,

by night a mirror of dark glass

for stars of Elbereth that pass

[15]{.float}above the world into the West.

Once hallowed, still that place was blest:

no shadow of Morgoth, and no evil thing

yet thither came; a whispering ring

of slender birches silver-grey

[20]{.float}stooped on its margin, round it lay

a lonely moor, and the bare bones

[]{#calibre_link-164 .calibre3}of ancient Earth like standing stones

thrust through the heather and the whin;

and there by houseless Aeluin

[25]{.float}the hunted lord and faithful men

under the grey stones made their den.
:::

[OF GORLIM UNHAPPY]{.small-caps}

::: verse
Gorlim Unhappy, Angrim's son,

as the tale tells, of these was one,

most fierce and hopeless. He to wife,

[30]{.float}while fair was the fortune of his life,

took the white maiden Eilinel:

dear love they had ere evil fell.

To war he rode; from war returned

to find his fields and homestead burned,

[35]{.float}his house forsaken roofless stood,

empty amid the leafless wood;

and Eilinel, white Eilinel,

was taken whither none could tell,

to death or thraldom far away.

[40]{.float}Black was the shadow of that day

for ever on his heart, and doubt

still gnawed him as he went about,

in wilderness wandring, or at night

oft sleepless, thinking that she might

[45]{.float}ere evil came have timely fled

into the woods: she was not dead,

she lived, she would return again

to seek him, and would deem him slain.

Therefore at whiles he left the lair,

[50]{.float}and secretly, alone, would peril dare,

and come to his old house at night,

broken and cold, without fire or light,

and naught but grief renewed would gain,

watching and waiting there in vain.

[55]{.float}In vain, or worse---for many spies

had Morgoth, many lurking eyes

well used to pierce the deepest dark;

and Gorlim's coming they would mark

and would report. There came a day

[60]{.float}when once more Gorlim crept that way,

down the deserted weedy lane

at dusk of autumn sad with rain

and cold wind whining. Lo! a light

at window fluttering in the night

[65]{.float}amazed he saw; and drawing near,

between faint hope and sudden fear,

he looked within. 'Twas Eilinel!

Though changed she was, he knew her well.

With grief and hunger she was worn,

[70]{.float}her tresses tangled, raiment torn;

her gentle eyes with tears were dim,

as soft she wept: 'Gorlim, Gorlim!

Thou canst not have forsaken me.

Then slain, alas! thou slain must be!

[75]{.float}And I must linger cold, alone,

and loveless as a barren stone!'

One cry he gave---and then the light

blew out, and in the wind of night

wolves howled; and on his shoulder fell

[80]{.float}suddenly the griping hands of hell.

There Morgoth's servants fast him caught

and he was cruelly bound, and brought

to Sauron captain of the host,

the lord of werewolf and of ghost,

[85]{.float}most foul and fell of all who knelt

at Morgoth's throne. In might he dwelt

on Gaurhoth Isle; but now had ridden

with strength abroad, by Morgoth bidden

to find the rebel Barahir.

[90]{.float}He sat in dark encampment near,

and thither his butchers dragged their prey.

There now in anguish Gorlim lay:

with bond on neck, on hand and foot,

to bitter torment he was put,

[95]{.float}to break his will and him constrain

to buy with treason end of pain.

But naught to them would he reveal

of Barahir, nor break the seal

of faith that on his tongue was laid;

[100]{.float}until at last a pause was made,

and one came softly to his stake,

a darkling form that stooped, and spake

to him of Eilinel his wife.

'Wouldst thou,' he said, 'forsake thy life,

[105]{.float}who with few words might win release

for her, and thee, and go in peace,

and dwell together far from war,

friends of the King? What wouldst thou more?'

And Gorlim, now long worn with pain,

[110]{.float}yearning to see his wife again

(whom well he weened was also caught

in Sauron's net), allowed the thought

to grow, and faltered in his troth.

Then straight, half willing and half loath,

[115]{.float}they brought him to the seat of stone

where Sauron sat. He stood alone

before that dark and dreadful face,

and Sauron said: 'Come, mortal base!

What do I hear? That thou wouldst dare

[120]{.float}to barter with me? Well, speak fair!

What is thy price?' And Gorlim low

bowed down his head, and with great woe,

word on slow word, at last implored

that merciless and faithless lord

[125]{.float}that he might free depart, and might

again find Eilinel the white,

and dwell with her, and cease from war

against the King. He craved no more.

Then Sauron smiled, and said: 'Thou thrall!

[130]{.float}The price thou askest is but small

for treachery and shame so great!

I grant it surely! Well, I wait:

Come! Speak now swiftly and speak true!'

Then Gorlim wavered, and he drew

[135]{.float}half back; but Sauron's daunting eye

there held him, and he dared not lie:

as he began, so must he wend

from first false step to faithless end:

he all must answer as he could,

[140]{.float}betray his lord and brotherhood,

and cease, and fall upon his face.

Then Sauron laughed aloud. 'Thou base,

thou cringing worm! Stand up,

and hear me! And now drink the cup

[145]{.float}that I have sweetly blent for thee!

Thou fool: a phantom thou didst see

that I, I Sauron, made to snare

thy lovesick wits. Naught else was there.

Cold 'tis with Sauron's wraiths to wed!

[150]{.float}Thy Eilinel! She is long since dead,

dead, food of worms less low than thou.

And yet thy boon I grant thee now:

to Eilinel thou soon shalt go,

and lie in her bed, no more to know

[155]{.float}of war---or manhood. Have thy pay!'

And Gorlim then they dragged away,

and cruelly slew him; and at last

in the dank mould his body cast,

where Eilinel long since had lain

[160]{.float}in the burned woods by butchers slain.

Thus Gorlim died an evil death,

and cursed himself with dying breath,

and Barahir at last was caught

in Morgoth's snare; for set at naught

[165]{.float}by treason was the ancient grace

that guarded long that lonely place,

Tarn Aeluin: now all laid bare

were secret paths and hidden lair.
:::

[OF BEREN SON OF BARAHIR & HIS ESCAPE]{.small-caps}

::: verse
Dark from the North now blew the cloud;

[170]{.float}the winds of autumn cold and loud

hissed in the heather; sad and grey

Aeluin's mournful water lay.

'Son Beren', then said Barahir,

'Thou knowst the rumour that we hear

[175]{.float}of strength from the Gaurhoth that is sent

against us; and our food nigh spent.

On thee the lot falls by our law

to go forth now alone to draw

what help thou canst from the hidden few

[180]{.float}that feed us still, and what is new

to learn. Good fortune go with thee!

In speed return, for grudgingly

[]{#calibre_link-145 .calibre3}we spare thee from our brotherhood

so small: and Gorlim in the wood

[185]{.float}is long astray or dead. Farewell!'

As Beren went, still like a knell

resounded in his heart that word,

the last of his father that he heard.

Through moor and fen, by tree and briar

[190]{.float}he wandered far: he saw the fire

of Sauron's camp, he heard the howl

of hunting Orc and wolf a-prowl,

and turning back, for long the way,

benighted in the forest lay.

[195]{.float}In weariness he then must sleep,

fain in a badger-hole to creep,

and yet he heard (or dreamed it so)

nearby a marching legion go

with clink of mail and clash of shields

[200]{.float}up towards the stony mountain-fields.

He slipped then into darkness down,

until, as man that waters drown

strives upwards gasping, it seemed to him

he rose through slime beside the brim

[205]{.float}of sullen pool beneath dead trees.

Their livid boughs in a cold breeze

trembled, and all their black leaves stirred:

each leaf a black and croaking bird,

whose neb a gout of blood let fall.

[210]{.float}He shuddered, struggling thence to crawl

through winding weeds, when far away

he saw a shadow faint and grey

gliding across the dreary lake.

Slowly it came, and softly spake:

[215]{.float}'Gorlim I was, but now a wraith

of will defeated, broken faith,

traitor betrayed. Go! Stay not here!

Awaken, son of Barahir,

and haste! For Morgoth's fingers close

[220]{.float}upon thy father's throat; he knows

your trysts, your paths, your secret lair.'

Then he revealed the devil's snare

in which he fell, and failed; and last

begging forgiveness, wept, and passed

[225]{.float}out into darkness. Beren woke,

leapt up as one by sudden stroke

with fire of anger filled. His bow

and sword he seized, and like the roe

hotfoot o'er rock and heath he sped

[230]{.float}before the dawn. Ere day was dead

to Aeluin at last he came,

as the red sun westward sank in flame;

but Aeluin was red with blood,

red were the stones and trampled mud.

[235]{.float}Black in the birches sat a-row

the raven and the carrion crow;

wet were their nebs, and dark the meat

that dripped beneath their griping feet.

One croaked: 'Ha, ha, he comes too late!'

[240]{.float}'Ha, ha!' they answered, 'ha! too late!'

There Beren laid his father's bones

in haste beneath a cairn of stones;

no graven rune nor word he wrote

o'er Barahir, but thrice he smote

[245]{.float}the topmost stone, and thrice aloud

he cried his name. 'Thy death', he vowed,

'I will avenge. Yea, though my fate

should lead at last to Angband's gate.'

And then he turned, and did not weep:

[250]{.float}too dark his heart, the wound too deep.

Out into night, as cold as stone,

loveless, friendless, he strode alone.

Of hunter's lore he had no need

the trail to find. With little heed

[255]{.float}his ruthless foe, secure and proud,

marched north away with blowing loud

of brazen horns their lord to greet,

trampling the earth with grinding feet.

Behind them bold but wary went

[260]{.float}now Beren, swift as hound on scent,

until beside a darkling well,

where Rivil rises from the fell

down into Serech's reeds to flow,

he found the slayers, found his foe.

[265]{.float}From hiding on the hillside near

he marked them all: though less than fear

too many for his sword and bow

[]{#calibre_link-148 .calibre3}to slay alone. Then, crawling low

as snake in heath, he nearer crept.

[270]{.float}There many weary with marching slept,

but captains, sprawling on the grass,

drank and from hand to hand let pass

their booty, grudging each small thing

raped from dead bodies. One a ring

[275]{.float}held up, and laughed: 'Now, mates,' he cried,

'here's mine! And I'll not be denied,

though few be like it in the land.

For I 'twas wrenched it from the hand

of that same Barahir I slew,

[280]{.float}the robber-knave. If tales be true,

he had it of some elvish lord,

for the rogue-service of his sword.

No help it gave him---he's dead.

They're parlous, elvish rings, 'tis said;

[285]{.float}still for the gold I'll keep it, yea

and so eke out my niggard pay.

Old Sauron bade me bring it back,

and yet, methinks, he has no lack

of weightier treasures in his hoard:

[290]{.float}the greater the greedier the lord!

So mark ye, mates, ye all shall swear

the hand of Barahir was bare!'

And as he spoke an arrow sped

from tree behind, and forward dead

[295]{.float}choking he fell with barb in throat;

with leering face the earth he smote.

Forth then as wolfhound grim there leapt

Beren among them. Two he swept

aside with sword; caught up the ring;

[300]{.float}slew one who grasped him; with a spring

back into shadow passed, and fled

before their yells of wrath and dread

of ambush in the valley rang.

Then after him like wolves they sprang,

[305]{.float}howling and cursing, gnashing teeth,

hewing and bursting through the heath,

shooting wild arrows, sheaf on sheaf,

at trembling shade or shaken leaf.

In fateful hour was Beren born:

[310]{.float}he laughed at dart and wailing horn;

fleetest of foot of living men,

tireless on fell and light on fen,

elf-wise in wood, he passed away,

defended by his hauberk grey,

[315]{.float}of dwarvish craft in Nogrod made,

where hammers rang in cavern's shade.

As fearless Beren was renowned:

when men most hardy upon ground

were reckoned folk would speak his name,

[320]{.float}foretelling that his after-name

would even golden Hador pass

or Barahir and Bregolas;

but sorrow now his heart had wrought

to fierce despair, no more he fought

[325]{.float}in hope of life or joy or praise,

but seeking so to use his days

only that Morgoth deep should feel

the sting of his avenging steel,

ere death he found and end of pain:

[330]{.float}his only fear was thraldom's chain.

Danger he sought and death pursued,

and thus escaped the doom he wooed,

and deeds of breathless daring wrought

alone, of which the rumour brought

[335]{.float}new hope to many a broken man.

They whispered 'Beren', and began

in secret swords to whet, and soft

by shrouded hearths at evening oft

songs they would sing of Beren's bow,

[340]{.float}of Dagmor his sword: how he would go

silent to camps and slay the chief,

or trapped in his hiding past belief

would slip away, and under night

by mist or moon, or by the light

[345]{.float}of open day would come again.

Of hunters hunted, slayers slain

they sang, of Gorgol the Butcher hewn,

of ambush in Ladros, fire in Drûn,

of thirty in one battle dead,

[350]{.float}of wolves that yelped like curs and fled,

yea, Sauron himself with wound in hand.

Thus one alone filled all that land

with fear and death for Morgoth's folk;

his comrades were the beech and oak

[355]{.float}who failed him not, and wary things

with fur and fell and feathered wings

that silent wander, or dwell alone

in hill and wild and waste of stone

watched o'er his ways, his faithful friends.

[360]{.float}Yet seldom well an outlaw ends;

and Morgoth was a king more strong

than all the world has since in song

recorded: dark athwart the land

reached out the shadow of his hand,

[365]{.float}at each recoil returned again;

two more were sent for one foe slain.

New hope was cowed, all rebels killed;

quenched were the fires, the songs were stilled,

tree felled, hearth burned, and through the waste

[370]{.float}marched the black host of Orcs in haste.

Almost they closed their ring of steel

round Beren; hard upon his heel

now trod their spies; within their hedge

of all aid shorn, upon the edge

[375]{.float}of death at bay he stood aghast

and knew that he must die at last,

or flee the land of Barahir,

his land beloved. Beside the mere

beneath a heap of nameless stones

[380]{.float}must crumble those once mighty bones,

forsaken by both son and kin,

bewailed by reeds of Aeluin.

In winter's night the houseless North

he left behind, and stealing forth

[385]{.float}the leaguer of his watchful foe

he passed---a shadow on the snow,

a swirl of wind, and he was gone,

the ruin of Dorthonion,

Tarn Aeluin and its water wan,

[390]{.float}never again to look upon.

No more shall hidden bowstring sing,

no more his shaven arrows wing,

no more his hunted head shall lie

upon the heath beneath the sky.

[395]{.float}The Northern stars, whose silver fire

of old Men named the Burning Briar,

were set behind his back, and shone

o'er land forsaken; he was gone.

Southward he turned, and south away

[400]{.float}his long and lonely journey lay,

while ever loomed before his path

the dreadful peaks of Gorgorath.

Never had foot of man most bold

yet trod those mountains steep and cold,

[405]{.float}nor climbed upon their sudden brink,

whence, sickened, eyes must turn and shrink

to see their southward cliffs fall sheer

in rocky pinnacle and pier

down into shadows that were laid

[410]{.float}before the sun and moon were made.

In valleys woven with deceit

and washed with waters bitter-sweet

dark magic lurked in gulf and glen;

but out away beyond the ken

[415]{.float}of mortal sight the eagle's eye

from dizzy towers that pierced the sky

might grey and gleaming see afar,

as sheen on water under star,

Beleriand, Beleriand,

[420]{.float}the borders of the Elven-land.
:::

::: centered-image
![Logo Missing](images/000025.jpg){.calibre45}
:::
::::::::

::: {#calibre_link-21 .calibre}
## FOOTNOTES {#footnotes .chapter-number}

### Preface {#preface-1 .chapter-subtitle}

^[\*](#calibre_link-79){#calibre_link-35 .calibre3}^ 'The Lost Tales' is
the name of the original versions of the legends of *The Silmarillion.*

### The Return of Beren and Lúthien According to the *Quenta Noldorinwa* {#the-return-of-beren-and-lúthien-according-to-the-quenta-noldorinwa-1 .chapter-subtitle}

^[\*](#calibre_link-80){#calibre_link-74 .calibre3}^ A later version of
the story concerning the Nauglamír told that it had been made by
craftsmen of the Dwarves long before for Felagund, and that it was the
sole treasure that Húrin brought from Nargothrond and gave to Thingol.
The task that Thingol then set the Dwarves was to *remake* the Nauglamír
and in it to set the Silmaril that was in his possession. This is the
form of the story in the published *Silmarillion.*

^[\*](#calibre_link-81){#calibre_link-75 .calibre3}^ The manner of
Lúthien's death is marked for correction; subsequently my father wrote
against it: 'Yet it hath been sung that Lúthien alone of Elves hath been
numbered among our race, and goeth whither we go to a fate beyond the
world.'

### Extract from the *Lost Tale* of the Nauglafring {#extract-from-the-lost-tale-of-the-nauglafring-1 .chapter-subtitle}

^[\*](#calibre_link-82){#calibre_link-76 .calibre3}^ Earlier in the
tale, when Naugladur was preparing to leave Menegroth, he declared that
Gwendelin the queen of Artanor (Melian) must go with him to Nogrod: to
which she replied: 'Thief and murderer, child of Melko, yet art thou a
fool, for thou canst not see what hangs over thine own head.'
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-22 .calibre}
## LIST OF NAMES IN THE ORIGINAL TEXTS {#list-of-names-in-the-original-texts .chapter-number}

I have made this *List of Names* (restricted to names that occur in the
passages of my father's writing), which is obviously not an index, with
two purposes in mind.

Neither of them is in any way essential to the book. In the first place,
it is intended to assist a reader who cannot recall, among the mass of
names (and forms of names), the reference of one that may be of
significance in the narrative. In the second place, certain names,
especially those that occur rarely or only once in the texts, are
provided with a slightly fuller explanation. For example, while this is
obviously of no significance in the tale, one may nonetheless want to
know why the Eldar would not touch spiders 'because of Ungweliantë' ([p.
41](#calibre_link-47){.calibre3}).

::: font
***Aeluin***    A lake in the northeast of Dorthonion where Barahir and
his companions made their lair.

***Aglon***    A narrow pass between Taur-na-Fuin and the Hill of
Himring, held by sons of Fëanor.

***Ainur***    (singular *Ainu*) 'The Holy Ones': the Valar and the
Maiar. \[The name *Maiar* was a late introduction of an earlier
conception: 'With the great ones came many lesser spirits, beings of
their ownkind but of smaller might' (such as Melian).\]

***Aman***    The Land in the West beyond the Great Sea in which the
Valar dwelt ('the Blessed Realm').

***Anfauglith***    'The Gasping Dust'. See
[*Dor-na-Fauglith*](#calibre_link-83){.calibre3}*, [The Thirsty
Plain](#calibre_link-84){.calibre3}.*

***Angainu***    The great chain, made by the Vala Aulë, in which
Morgoth was bound (later *Angainor*).

***Angamandi***    (plural) 'The Hells of Iron'. See
[*Angband*](#calibre_link-85){.calibre3}.

***Angband***    The great dungeon-fortress of Morgoth in the north-west
of Middle-earth.

***Angrim***    Father of Gorlim the Unhappy.

***Angrod***    Son of Finrod (later Finarfin).

***Arda***    The Earth.

***Artanor***    'The Land Beyond'; region subsequently named Doriath,
the kingdom of Tinwelint (Thingol).

***Aryador***    'Land of Shadow', a name of Hisilómë (Dor-lómin) among
Men. See [*Hisilómë*](#calibre_link-86){.calibre3}.

***Ascar***    River in Ossiriand, renamed *Rathlorion* 'Goldenbed' when
the treasure of Doriath was sunk in it.

***Aulë***    The great Vala known as Aulë the Smith; he is 'a master of
all crafts', and 'his lordship is over all the substances of which Arda
is made.'

***Ausir***    A name of Dior.

***Balrogs***    \[In the *Lost Tales* the Balrogs are conceived as
existing 'in hundreds'. They are called 'demons of power'; they wear
iron armour, and they have claws of steel and whips of flame.\]

***Barahir***    A chieftain of Men, the father of Beren.

***Bauglir***    'The Constrainer', a name of Morgoth among the Noldor.

***Beleg***    Elf of Doriath, a great archer, called *Cúthalion*,
'Strongbow'; close companion and friend of Túrin Turambar, by whom he
was tragically slain.

***Belegost***    One of the two great cities of the Dwarves in the Blue
Mountains.

***Beleriand***    (earlier name *Broseliand*) The great region of
Middle-earth, largely drowned and destroyed at the end of the First Age,
extending from the Blue Mountains in the East to the Mountains of Shadow
in the North (See [*Iron Mountains*](#calibre_link-87){.calibre3}) and
the western coasts.

***Bëor***    Leader of the first Men to enter Beleriand. See
[*Edain*](#calibre_link-88){.calibre3}.

***Bitter Hills***    See [*Iron
Mountains*](#calibre_link-87){.calibre3}.

***Blessed Realm***    See [*Aman*](#calibre_link-89){.calibre3}.

***Blue Mountains***    The great range forming the eastern bounds of
Beleriand.

***Boldog***    A captain of Orcs.

***Bregolas***    Brother of Barahir.

***Burning Briar***    The constellation of the Great Bear.

***Calacirya***    A pass in the Mountains of Valinor in which was the
city of the Elves.

***Carcharoth***    See [*Karkaras*](#calibre_link-90){.calibre3}.

***Celegorm***    Son of Fëanor, called 'the Fair'.

***Cranthir***    Son of Fëanor, called 'the Dark'.

***i-Cuilwarthon***    'The Dead that Live Again', Beren and Lúthien
after their return from Mandos; *Cuilwarthien*: The land where they
dwelt. (Later form *Guilwarthon*.)

***Cuiviénen***    The Water of Awakening: the lake in Middle-earth
where the Elves awoke.

***Cûm-nan-Arasaith***    The Mound of Avarice, raised over the slain in
Menegroth.

***Curufin***    Son of Fëanor, called 'the Crafty'.

***Dagmor***    Beren's sword.

***Dairon***    A minstrel of Artanor, numbered among 'the three most
magic players of the Elves'; originally the brother of Lúthien.

***Damrod and Díriel***    The youngest sons of Fëanor. (Later names
*Amrod* and *Amras*.)

***Deadly Nightshade***    A translation of Taur-na-Fuin; See
[*Mountains of Night*](#calibre_link-91){.calibre3}.

***Dior***    Son of Beren and Lúthien; father of Elwing, the mother of
Elrond and Elros.

***Doriath***    The later name of Artanor, the great forested region
ruled by Thingol (Tinwelint) and Melian (Gwendeling).

***Dor-lómin***    See [*Hisilómë*](#calibre_link-86){.calibre3}.

***Dor-na-Fauglith***    The great grassy plain of Ard-galen north of
the Mountains of Night (*Dorthonion*) that was transformed into a desert
(See [*Anfauglith*](#calibre_link-92){.calibre3}, [*The Thirsty
Plain*](#calibre_link-84){.calibre3}).

***Dorthonion***    'Land of Pines'; vast region of pinewoods on the
northern borders of Beleriand; afterwards called *Taur-na-Fuin*, 'the
Forest under Night'.

***Drûn***    A region to the north of Lake Aeluin; not named elsewhere.

***Draugluin***    Greatest of the werewolves of Thû (Sauron).

***Eärámë***    'Eagle's Pinion', Tuor's ship.

***Eärendel***    (later form *Eärendil*) Son of Tuor and Idril daughter
of Turgon King of Gondolin; wedded Elwing.

***Edain***    'The Second People', Men, but used chiefly of the three
Houses of the Elf-friends who came earliest to Beleriand.

***Egnor bo-Rimion***    'The huntsman of the Elves': the father of
Beren, replaced by Barahir.

***Egnor***    Son of Finrod (later Finarfin).

***Eilinel***    Wife of Gorlim.

***Elbereth***    'Queen of the Stars'; See
[*Varda*](#calibre_link-93){.calibre3}.

***Eldalië***    (The people of the Elves), the Eldar.

***Eldar***    The Elves of the Great Journey from the place of their
awakening; sometimes used in early texts to mean all Elves.

***Elfinesse***    An inclusive name for all the lands of the Elves.

***Elrond of Rivendell***    Son of Elwing and Eärendel.

***Elros***    Son of Elwing and Eärendel; first King of Númenor.

***Elwing***    Daughter of Dior, wedded Eärendel, mother of Elrond and
Elros.

***Eönwë***    Herald of Manwë.

***Erchamion***    'One-handed', name given to Beren; other forms
*Ermabwed, Elmavoitë*.

***Esgalduin***    River of Doriath, passing Menegroth (the halls of
Thingol), and flowing into Sirion.

***Fëanor***    Eldest son of Finwë; maker of the Silmarils.

***Felagund***    Noldorin Elf, founder of Nargothrond and sworn friend
of Barahir father of Beren. \[On the relation of the names *Felagund*
and *Finrod* see [p. 104](#calibre_link-41){.calibre3}.\]

***Fingolfin***    The second son of Finwë; slain in single combat with
Morgoth.

***Fingon***    Eldest son of Fingolfin; king of the Noldor after the
death of his father.

***Finrod***    The third son of Finwë. \[Name replaced by *Finarfin*,
when *Finrod* became the name of his son, *Finrod Felagund*.\]

***Finwë***    Leader of the second host of the Elves, the Noldor
(Noldoli), on the Great Journey.

***Foamriders***    The kindred of the Eldar named the *Solosimpi*,
later the *Teleri*; the third and last host on the Great Journey.

***Gaurhoth***    The werewolves of Thû (Sauron); *Gaurhoth Isle*, See
[*Tol-in-Gaurhoth*](#calibre_link-94){.calibre3}.

***Gelion***    The great river of East Beleriand fed by rivers flowing
from the Blue Mountains in the region of Ossiriand.

***Gilim***    A giant, named by Lúthien in her 'lengthening' spell sung
over her hair ([p. 55](#calibre_link-95){.calibre3}), unknown save for
the corresponding passage in *The Lay of Leithian*, where he is called
'the giant of Eruman' \[a region on the coast of Aman 'where the shadows
were deepest and thickest in the world'\].

***Gimli***    A very old and blind Noldorin Elf, long a captive slave
in the stronghold of Tevildo, possessed of an extraordinary power of
hearing. He plays no part in *The Tale of Tinúviel* or in any other
tale, and never reappears.

***Ginglith***    River flowing into the Narog above Nargothrond.

***Glómund*, *Glorund***    Earlier names of Glaurung, 'Father of
Dragons', the great dragon of Morgoth.

***Gnomes***    Early translation of *Noldoli, Noldor*: See [pp.
32--3](#calibre_link-96){.calibre3}.

***Gods***    See [*Valar*](#calibre_link-97){.calibre3}.

***Gondolin***    The hidden city founded by Turgon the second son of
Fingolfin.

***Gorgol***    *the Butcher* An Orc slain by Beren.

***Gorgorath***    (Also *Gorgoroth*) The Mountains of Terror; the
precipices in which Dorthonion fell southwards.

***Gorlim***    One of the companions of Barahir, the father of Beren;
he revealed their hiding place to Morgoth (later Sauron). Called *Gorlim
the Unhappy*.

***Great Lands***    The lands east of the Great Sea: Middle-earth \[a
term never used in the *Lost Tales*\].

***Great Sea of the West***    *Belegaer*, extending from Middle-earth
to Aman.

***Green Elves***    The Elves of Ossiriand, called *Laiquendi*.

***Grinding Ice***    *Helkaraxë*: the strait in the far North between
Middle-earth and the Western Land.

***Grond***    Weapon of Morgoth, a great club known as the Hammer of
the Underworld.

***Guarded Plain***    The great plain between the rivers Narog and
Teiglin, north of Nargothrond.

***Guilwarthon***    See [*i-Cuilwarthon*](#calibre_link-98){.calibre3}.

***Gwendeling***    Earlier name of Melian.

***Hador***    A great chieftain of Men, called 'the Goldenhaired',
grandfather of Húrin father of Túrin, and of Huor father of Tuor father
of Eärendel.

***Haven of the Swans***    See [*Notes on the Elder
Days*](#calibre_link-6){.calibre3}, [p.
23](#calibre_link-99){.calibre3}.

***Hills of the Hunters***    (also *The Hunters' Wold*) The highlands
west of the river Narog.

***Himling***    A great hill in the north of East Beleriand, a
stronghold of the sons of Fëanor.

***Hirilorn***    'Queen of Trees', a great beech-tree near Menegroth
(Thingol's halls); in its branches was the house in which Lúthien was
imprisoned.

***Hisilómë***    Hithlum. \[In a list of names of the period of the
*Lost Tales* it is said: '*Dor-lómin* or the "Land of Shadow" was that
region named of the Eldar *Hisilómë* (and this means "shadowy
twilights") . . . and it is so called by reason of the scanty sun which
peeps over the Iron Mountains to the east and south of it.'\]

***Hithlum***    See [*Hisilómë*](#calibre_link-86){.calibre3}.

***Huan***    The mighty wolfhound of Valinor, who became the friend and
saviour of Beren and Lúthien.

***Húrin***    Father of Túrin Turambar and Niënor.

***Idril***    Called *Celebrindal* 'Silverfoot', daughter of Turgon
King of Gondolin; wedded to Tuor, mother of Eärendel.

***Ilkorins*, *Ilkorind*i**    Elves not of Kôr, city of the Elves in
Aman (See [*Kôr*](#calibre_link-100){.calibre3}).

***Indravangs***    (also *Indrafangs*) 'Long Beards', the Dwarves of
Belegost.

***Ingwil***    River flowing into the Narog at Nargothrond (later form
*Ringwil*).

***Iron Mountains***    Also called the *Bitter Hills*. A great range
corresponding to the later *Ered Wethrin, the Mountains of Shadow*,
forming the southern and eastern borders of Hisilómë (Hithlum). See
[*Hisilómë*](#calibre_link-86){.calibre3}.

***Ivárë***    A renowned minstrel of the Elves, 'who plays beside the
sea'.

***Ivrin***    The lake below the Mountains of Shadow where the Narog
rose.

***Karkaras***    The huge wolf that guarded the gates of Angband (later
*Carcharoth*), its tail named in Lúthien's 'lengthening spell';
translated 'Knife-fang'.

***Kôr***    City of the Elves in Aman, and the hill on which it was
built; later the city became *Tûn* and the hill alone was *Kôr*.
\[Finally the city became *Tirion* and the hill *Túna*.\]

***Ladros***    A region to the northeast of Dorthonion.

***Lay of Leithian, The***    See [p. 88](#calibre_link-57){.calibre3}.

***Lonely Isle***    *Tol Eressëa*: a large island in the Great Sea near
the coasts of Aman; the most easterly of the Undying Lands, where many
Elves dwelt.

***Lórien***    The Valar Mandos and Lórien were called brothers, and
named the *Fanturi*: Mandos was *Néfantur* and Lórien was *Olofantur*.
In the words of the *Quenta* Lórien was the 'maker of visions and of
dreams; and his gardens in the land of the Gods were the fairest of all
places in the world and filled with many spirits of beauty and power.'

***Mablung***    'Heavy hand', Elf of Doriath, chief captain of Thingol;
present at the death of Beren in the hunt of Karkaras.

***Magic Isles***    Isles in the Great Sea.

***Maglor***    The second son of Fëanor, a celebrated singer and
minstrel.

***Maiar***    See [*Ainur*](#calibre_link-101){.calibre3}.

***Maidros***    Eldest son of Fëanor, called 'the Tall' (later form
*Maedhros*).

***Mandos***    A Vala of great power. He is the Judge; and he is the
keeper of the Houses of the Dead, and the summoner of the spirits of the
slain \[the *Quenta*\]. See [*Lórien*](#calibre_link-102){.calibre3}.

***Manwë***    The chief and most mighty of the Valar, the spouse of
Varda.

***Melian***    The Queen of Artanor (Doriath), earlier name
*Gwendeling*; a Maia, who came to Middle-earth from the realm of the
Vala Lórien.

***Melko***    The great evil Vala, Morgoth (later form *Melkor*).

***Menegroth***    See [*The Thousand
Caves*](#calibre_link-103){.calibre3}.

***Miaulë***    A cat, cook in the kitchen of Tevildo.

***Mîm***    A dwarf, who settled in Nargothrond after the departure of
the Dragon and laid a curse on the treasure.

***Mindeb***    A river flowing into Sirion in the region of Doriath.

***Mountains of Night***    The great heights (*Dorthonion*, 'Land of
Pines') that came to be called *The Forest of Night* (*Taurfuin,* later
*Taur-na-*\[*-nu-*\]*fuin*).

***Mountains of Shadow, Shadowy Mountains***    See [*Iron
Mountains*](#calibre_link-87){.calibre3}.

***Nan***    The only thing known of Nan seems to be the name of his
sword, *Glend*, named in Lúthien's 'lengthening spell' (See
[*Gilim*](#calibre_link-104){.calibre3}).

***Nan Dumgorthin***    'The land of the dark idols' where Huan came
upon Beren and Lúthien in their flight from Angband. In the alliterative
poem the *Lay of the Children of Húrin* (see [p.
78](#calibre_link-52){.calibre3}) occur these lines:

in Nan Dungorthin where nameless gods

have shrouded shrines in shadows secret,

more old than Morgoth or the ancient lords

the golden Gods of the guarded West.

***Nargothrond***    The great cavernous city and fortress founded by
Felagund on the river Narog in West Beleriand.

***Narog***    River in West Beleriand; See
[*Nargothrond*](#calibre_link-105){.calibre3}. Often used in the sense
'realm', i.e. 'of Nargothrond'.

***Naugladur***    Lord of the Dwarves of Nogrod.

***Nauglamír***    The Necklace of the Dwarves, in which was set the
Silmaril of Beren and Lúthien.

***Nessa***    The sister of Oromë and spouse of Tulkas. See
[*Valier*](#calibre_link-106){.calibre3}.

***Nogrod***    One of the two great cities of the Dwarves in the Blue
Mountains.

***Noldoli*, later *Noldor***    The second host of the Eldar on the
Great Journey, led by Finwë.

***Oikeroi***    A fierce warrior-cat in the service of Tevildo, slain
by Huan.

***Orodreth***    Brother of Felagund; King of Nargothrond after the
death of Felagund.

***Oromë***    The Vala called the Hunter; led on his horse the hosts of
the Eldar on the Great Journey.

***Ossiriand***    'The Land of Seven Rivers', Gelion and its
tributaries from the Blue Mountains.

***Outer Lands***    Middle-earth.

***Palisor***    The region of the Great Lands where the Elves awoke.

***Rathlorion***    River in Ossiriand. See
[*Ascar*](#calibre_link-107){.calibre3}.

***Ringil***    The sword of Fingolfin.

***Rivil***    River rising in the west of Dorthonion and flowing into
Sirion at the fens of Serech, north of Tol Sirion.

***Sarn Athrad***    The Ford of Stones, where the river Ascar in
Ossiriand was crossed by the road to the cities of the Dwarves in the
Blue Mountains.

***Serech***    Great fens where the Rivil flowed into the Sirion; See
[*Rivil*](#calibre_link-108){.calibre3}.

***Shadowy Mountains*, *Mountains of Shadow***    See [*Iron
Mountains*](#calibre_link-87){.calibre3}.

***Shadowy Seas***    A region of the Great Sea of the West.

***Sickle of the Gods***    The constellation of the Great Bear \[which
Varda set above the North as a threat to Morgoth and an omen of his
fall.\]

***Silmarils***    The three great jewels filled with the light of the
Two Trees of Valinor, made by Fëanor. See [pp.
36--7](#calibre_link-109){.calibre3}.

***Silpion***    The White Tree of Valinor, from whose flowers there
fell a dew of silver light; also called *Telperion*.

***Sirion***    The great river of Beleriand, rising in the Mountains of
Shadow and flowing southward, dividing East from West Beleriand.

***Taniquetil***    The highest Mountain of Aman, the abode of Manwë and
Varda.

***Taurfuin*, *Taur-na-fuin*,**    (later *-nu-*) The Forest of Night;
See [*Mountains of Night*](#calibre_link-91){.calibre3}.

***Tavros***    Gnomish name of the Vala Oromë: 'Lord of Forests'; later
form *Tauros*.

***Tevildo***    The Prince of Cats, mightiest of all cats, 'possessed
of an evil spirit' (see [pp. 49](#calibre_link-110){.calibre3},
[69](#calibre_link-51){.calibre3}); a close companion of Morgoth.

***Thangorodrim***    The mountains above Angband.

***Thingol***    King of Artanor (Doriath); earlier name *Tinwelint*.
\[His name was *Elwë*: he was a leader of the third host of the Eldar,
the Teleri, on the Great Journey, but in Beleriand he was known as
'Greycloak' (the meaning of *Thingol*).\]

***Thirsty Plain***    See
[*Dor-na-Fauglith*](#calibre_link-83){.calibre3}.

***Thorondor***    King of Eagles.

***Thousand Caves***    *Menegroth*: The hidden halls of Tinwelint
(Thingol) on the river Esgalduin in Artanor.

***Thû***    The Necromancer, greatest of the servants of Morgoth,
dwelling in the Elvish watchtower on Tol Sirion; later name *Sauron*.

***Thuringwethil***    Name taken by Lúthien in bat-form before Morgoth.

***Timbrenting***    Old English name of Taniquetil.

***Tinfang Warble***    A famous minstrel \[*Tinfang =* Quenya
*timpinen* 'fluter'.\]

***Tinúviel***    'Daughter of Twilight', nightingale: name given to
Lúthien by Beren.

***Tinwelint***    King of Artanor; See
[*Thingol*](#calibre_link-111){.calibre3}, the later name.

***Tirion***    City of the Elves in Aman; See
[*Kôr*](#calibre_link-100){.calibre3}.

***Tol-in-Gaurhoth***    Isle of Werewolves, the name of Tol Sirion
after its capture by Morgoth.

***Tol Sirion***    The island in the river Sirion on which there was an
Elvish fortress; See [*Tol-in-Gaurhoth*](#calibre_link-94){.calibre3}.

***Tulkas***    The Vala described in the *Quenta* as 'the strongest of
all the Gods in limb and greatest in all feats of valour and prowess'.

***Tuor***    Cousin of Túrin and father of Eärendil.

***Túrin***    Son of Húrin and Morwen; named *Turambar* 'Master of
Doom'.

***Uinen***    A Maia (See [*Ainur*](#calibre_link-101){.calibre3}).
'The Lady of the Seas', 'whose hair lies spread through all the waters
under sky'; named in Lúthien's 'lengthening spell'.

***Ulmo***    'Lord of Waters', the great Vala of the Seas.

***Umboth-Muilin***    The *Twilight Meres*, where Aros, the southern
river of Doriath, flowed into Sirion.

***Umuiyan***    An old cat, the doorkeeper of Tevildo.

***Ungweliantë***    The monstrous spider, dwelling in Eruman (See
[*Gilim*](#calibre_link-104){.calibre3}), who with Morgoth destroyed the
Two Trees of Valinor; (later form *Ungoliant*).

***Valar***    (singular Vala) 'The Powers'; in early texts referred to
as the *Gods*. They are the great beings who entered the World at the
beginning of Time. \[In the *Lost Tale of the Music of the Ainur* Eriol
said: 'I would fain know who be these Valar; are they the Gods?' He
received this reply: 'So be they, though concerning them Men tell many
strange and garbled tales that are far from the truth, and many strange
names they call them that you will not hear here.'\]

***Valier***    (singular *Valië*) The 'Queens of the Valar'; in this
book are named only Varda, Vána and Nessa.

***Valinor***    The land of the Valar in Aman.

***Valmar, Valimar***    City of the Valar in Valinor.

***Vána***    The spouse of Oromë. See
[*Valier*](#calibre_link-106){.calibre3}.

***Varda***    Greatest of the Valier; the spouse of Manwë; maker of the
stars \[hence her name *Elbereth,* 'Queen of the Stars'\].

***Vëannë***    The teller of *The Tale of Tinúviel*.

***Wingelot***    'Foamflower', Eärendel's ship.

***Wizard's Isle***    Tol Sirion.

***Wood-elves***    Elves of Artanor.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-23 .calibre}
## GLOSSARY {#glossary .chapter-number}

This glossary contains words (including forms and meanings of words
differing from modern usage) that seemed to me liable to give
difficulty. The content of such a list as this cannot of course be
systematic, deriving from some external standard.

::: font
**an**    if, [45](#calibre_link-112){.calibre3},
[52](#calibre_link-113){.calibre3}, [80](#calibre_link-114){.calibre3},
[82](#calibre_link-53){.calibre3}, etc.

**bent**    open place covered with grass,
[144](#calibre_link-115){.calibre3}

**bid**    offered, [241](#calibre_link-116){.calibre3}

**chase**    hunting ground, [181](#calibre_link-117){.calibre3}

**clomb**    old past tense of *climb*,
[202](#calibre_link-118){.calibre3}

**corse**    corpse, [193](#calibre_link-119){.calibre3}

**croft**    small plot of land, [122](#calibre_link-120){.calibre3}

**drouth**    dryness, [125](#calibre_link-121){.calibre3}

**entreat**    treat, [60](#calibre_link-122){.calibre3},
[65](#calibre_link-123){.calibre3}; \[modern sense\]
[61](#calibre_link-124){.calibre3}, [83](#calibre_link-125){.calibre3}

**envermined**    full of noxious creatures,
[186](#calibre_link-126){.calibre3}. This word seems not to be otherwise
recorded.

**fell**    hide, [72](#calibre_link-49){.calibre3},
[101](#calibre_link-127){.calibre3},
[146](#calibre_link-128){.calibre3},
[153--4](#calibre_link-129){.calibre3},
[185--8](#calibre_link-130){.calibre3}, etc.

**flittermouse**    bat, [210](#calibre_link-131){.calibre3}

**forhungered**    starved, [173](#calibre_link-132){.calibre3}

**frith**    wood, woodland, [143](#calibre_link-133){.calibre3}

**frore**    very cold, [113](#calibre_link-134){.calibre3}

**glamoury**    magic, enchantment, [125](#calibre_link-121){.calibre3}

**haggard**    (of hills) wild, [177](#calibre_link-135){.calibre3}

**haply**    perhaps, [45](#calibre_link-112){.calibre3},
[96](#calibre_link-136){.calibre3}, [118](#calibre_link-137){.calibre3}

**hem and hedge**     enclose and fence off,
[101](#calibre_link-127){.calibre3}

**howe**    burial mound, barrow, [234](#calibre_link-138){.calibre3}

**inane**    empty, [190](#calibre_link-139){.calibre3}

**lave**    wash, [55](#calibre_link-95){.calibre3}

**leeches**    physicians, [173](#calibre_link-132){.calibre3},
[176](#calibre_link-140){.calibre3}

**let**    hinder, [124](#calibre_link-141){.calibre3}: *their going
let* 'hinder their passing'

**like**    please, [88](#calibre_link-57){.calibre3} (in *doth it like
thee?*)

**limber**    supple, [143](#calibre_link-133){.calibre3}

**march**    borderland, [178](#calibre_link-142){.calibre3},
[195](#calibre_link-143){.calibre3}

**neb**    beak, bill, [97](#calibre_link-144){.calibre3},
[265--6](#calibre_link-145){.calibre3}

**nesh**    soft, tender, [215](#calibre_link-146){.calibre3}

**opes**    opens, [198](#calibre_link-147){.calibre3}

**parlous**    dangerous, [268](#calibre_link-148){.calibre3}

**pled**    old past tense of *plead*,
[170](#calibre_link-149){.calibre3}

**quook**    old past tense of *quake*,
[192](#calibre_link-150){.calibre3}

**rede**    counsel, [48](#calibre_link-151){.calibre3},
[59](#calibre_link-152){.calibre3}

**rove**    past tense of *rive* 'rend, tear apart, cleave',
[213](#calibre_link-153){.calibre3}

**ruel-bone**    ivory, [143](#calibre_link-133){.calibre3}

**runagate**    deserter, renegade, [48](#calibre_link-151){.calibre3}

**scullion**    kitchen drudge, [51](#calibre_link-154){.calibre3}

**shores**    supports, [203](#calibre_link-155){.calibre3}

**sigaldry**    sorcery, [125](#calibre_link-121){.calibre3}

**slot**    track of an animal, [83--4](#calibre_link-125){.calibre3}

**spoor**    the same as *slot*, [84](#calibre_link-156){.calibre3}

**sprite**    spirit, [49](#calibre_link-110){.calibre3}

**sylphine**    of the nature of a sylph (a spirit inhabiting the air),
[210](#calibre_link-131){.calibre3}. This adjective is not recorded.

**swath**    (space left after passage of a mower) track, trace,
[127](#calibre_link-157){.calibre3}

**tarn**    a small mountain lake, [258](#calibre_link-158){.calibre3}

**thews**    bodily strength, [76](#calibre_link-159){.calibre3}

**thrall**    a slave, one who is in bondage (thraldom),
[20](#calibre_link-160){.calibre3},
[47--9](#calibre_link-161){.calibre3},
[59](#calibre_link-152){.calibre3}, [69](#calibre_link-51){.calibre3},
[73](#calibre_link-162){.calibre3}, etc.

**trammelled**    hampered, impeded, [151](#calibre_link-69){.calibre3}

**unkempt**    uncombed, [51](#calibre_link-154){.calibre3}

**viol**    a stringed instrument played with a bow,
[158](#calibre_link-163){.calibre3}, [176](#calibre_link-140){.calibre3}

**weft**    woven fabric, [173](#calibre_link-132){.calibre3}

**weird**    fate, [144](#calibre_link-115){.calibre3},
[177](#calibre_link-135){.calibre3}

**weregild**    (Old English) the price set upon a man in accordance
with his rank, [258](#calibre_link-158){.calibre3}

**whin**    gorse, [259](#calibre_link-164){.calibre3}

**wolfhame**    wolfskin, [185](#calibre_link-130){.calibre3}

**woof**    woven fabric, [213](#calibre_link-153){.calibre3}

**would**    wished, [184--5](#calibre_link-165){.calibre3},
[205](#calibre_link-166){.calibre3}
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-24 .calibre}
### *Read More from J.R.R. Tolkien* {#read-more-from-j.r.r.-tolkien .books-by-head}

**Visit
[www.hmhco.com](http://www.hmhco.com/bookstore/authors/JRR-Tolkien/2236539){.calibre3}
to find more books by J.R.R. Tolkien, or click any of the links below to
see a specific title.**

[T[HE]{.mysmallcaps}
H[OBBIT]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/The-Hobbit/9780544115552){.calibre3}

[L[EAF BY]{.mysmallcaps}
N[IGGLE]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/Tales-from-the-Perilous-Realm/9780547952093){.calibre3}

[O[N]{.mysmallcaps}
F[AIRY]{.mysmallcaps}-S[TORIES]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/Tales-from-the-Perilous-Realm/9780547952093){.calibre3}

[F[ARMER]{.mysmallcaps} G[ILES OF]{.mysmallcaps}
H[AM]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/Farmer-Giles-of-Ham/9780618009367){.calibre3}

T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} H[OMECOMING OF]{.mysmallcaps}
B[EORHTNOTH]{.mysmallcaps}

[T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} L[ORD OF THE]{.mysmallcaps}
R[INGS]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/The-Lord-of-the-Rings/9780547951942){.calibre3}

[T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} A[DVENTURES OF]{.mysmallcaps} T[OM]{.mysmallcaps}
B[OMBADIL]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/Tales-from-the-Perilous-Realm/9780547952093){.calibre3}

T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} R[OAD]{.mysmallcaps} G[OES]{.mysmallcaps}
E[VER]{.mysmallcaps} O[N]{.mysmallcaps} ([WITH]{.mysmallcaps}
D[ONALD]{.mysmallcaps} S[WANN]{.mysmallcaps})

[S[MITH OF]{.mysmallcaps} W[OOTTON]{.mysmallcaps}
M[AJOR]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/Tales-from-the-Perilous-Realm/9780547952093){.calibre3}

*Works published posthumously*

S[IR]{.mysmallcaps} G[AWAIN AND THE]{.mysmallcaps} G[REEN]{.mysmallcaps}
K[NIGHT,]{.mysmallcaps} P[EARL AND]{.mysmallcaps} S[IR]{.mysmallcaps}
O[RFEO]{.mysmallcaps}^\*^

[T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} F[ATHER]{.mysmallcaps} C[HRISTMAS]{.mysmallcaps}
L[ETTERS]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/Letters-From-Father-Christmas/9780547951904){.calibre3}

[T[HE]{.mysmallcaps}
S[ILMARILLION]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/The-Silmarillion/9780547951980){.calibre3}^\*^

P[ICTURES BY]{.mysmallcaps} J.R.R. T[OLKIEN]{.mysmallcaps}^\*^

[U[NFINISHED]{.mysmallcaps}
T[ALES]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/Unfinished-Tales-of-Numenor-and-Middleearth/9780547951997){.calibre3}^\*^

[T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} L[ETTERS OF]{.mysmallcaps} J.R.R.
T[OLKIEN]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/The-Letters-of-JRR-Tolkien/9780544363793){.calibre3}^\*^

F[INN AND]{.mysmallcaps} H[ENGEST]{.mysmallcaps}

M[R]{.mysmallcaps} B[LISS]{.mysmallcaps}

T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} M[ONSTERS AND THE]{.mysmallcaps}
C[RITICS]{.mysmallcaps} & O[THER]{.mysmallcaps}
E[SSAYS]{.mysmallcaps}^\*^

[R[OVERANDOM]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/Tales-from-the-Perilous-Realm/9780547952093){.calibre3}

[T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} C[HILDREN OF]{.mysmallcaps}
H[ÚRIN]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/The-Children-of-Huacuterin/9780547952109){.calibre3}^\*^

[T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} L[EGEND OF]{.mysmallcaps} S[IGURD
AND]{.mysmallcaps}
G[UDRÚN]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/The-Legend-of-Sigurd-and-Gudruacuten/9780547504711){.calibre3}^\*^

[T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} F[ALL OF]{.mysmallcaps}
A[RTHUR]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/The-Fall-of-Arthur/9780544126060){.calibre3}^\*^

[B[EOWULF:]{.mysmallcaps} A T[RANSLATION AND]{.mysmallcaps}
C[OMMENTARY]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/Beowulf/9780544442795){.calibre3}^\*^

[T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} S[TORY OF]{.mysmallcaps}
K[ULLERVO]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/The-Story-of-Kullervo/9780544706323){.calibre3}

*The History of Middle-earth---by Christopher Tolkien*

[I T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} B[OOK OF]{.mysmallcaps} L[OST]{.mysmallcaps}
T[ALES,]{.mysmallcaps} P[ART]{.mysmallcaps}
O[NE]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/The-Book-of-Lost-Tales-Part-One/9780547952086){.calibre3}

[II T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} B[OOK OF]{.mysmallcaps} L[OST]{.mysmallcaps}
T[ALES,]{.mysmallcaps} P[ART]{.mysmallcaps}
T[WO]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/The-Book-of-Lost-Tales/9780395426401){.calibre3}

III T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} L[AYS OF]{.mysmallcaps}
B[ELERIAND]{.mysmallcaps}

IV T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} S[HAPING OF]{.mysmallcaps}
M[IDDLE-EARTH]{.mysmallcaps}

V T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} L[OST]{.mysmallcaps} R[OAD AND]{.mysmallcaps}
O[THER]{.mysmallcaps} W[RITINGS]{.mysmallcaps}

[VI T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} R[ETURN OF THE]{.mysmallcaps}
S[HADOW]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/The-Return-of-the-Shadow/9780618083572){.calibre3}

[VII T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} T[REASON OF]{.mysmallcaps}
I[SENGARD]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/The-Treason-of-Isengard/9780618083589){.calibre3}

[VIII T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} W[AR OF THE]{.mysmallcaps}
R[ING]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/The-War-of-the-Ring/9780618083596){.calibre3}

[IX S[AURON]{.mysmallcaps}
D[EFEATED]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/Sauron-Defeated-The-End-of-the-Third-Age/9780395606490){.calibre3}

X M[ORGOTH'S]{.mysmallcaps} R[ING]{.mysmallcaps}

XI T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} W[AR OF THE]{.mysmallcaps} J[EWELS]{.mysmallcaps}

[XII T[HE]{.mysmallcaps} P[EOPLES OF]{.mysmallcaps}
M[IDDLE-EARTH]{.mysmallcaps}](http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/The-Peoples-of-Middleearth/9780395827604){.calibre3}

^\*^ Edited by Christopher Tolkien
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-25 .calibre}
## ABOUT THE AUTHOR AND EDITOR {#about-the-author-and-editor .chapter-number2}

J.R.R. T[olkien]{.mysmallcaps} was born on January 3, 1892, in
Bloemfontein. After serving in the First World War, Tolkien embarked
upon a distinguished academic career and was recognized as one of the
finest philologists in the world. He is, however, best known as the
creator of Middle-earth and author of such classic and extraordinary
works of fiction as *The Hobbit*, *The Lord of the Rings*, and *The
Silmarillion*. His books have been translated into more than sixty
languages and have sold many millions of copies worldwide. He was
awarded a CBE, and an honorary doctorate of letters from Oxford
University in 1972. He died in 1973 at the age of eighty-one.

::: calibre6
 
:::

C[hristopher]{.mysmallcaps} T[olkien]{.mysmallcaps}, born on November
21, 1924, is the third son of J.R.R. Tolkien. Appointed by Tolkien to be
his literary executor, he has devoted himself since his father's death
to the editing and publication of unpublished writings, notably *The
Silmarillion* and the collections entitled *Unfinished Tales* and *The
History of Middle-earth*. He and his wife, Baillie, have lived in France
since 1975.
::::
