:::: {#calibre_link-0 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
::: section
[ ]{#calibre_link-110 .calibre_class_1}

*[The Tale of the Children of Húrin ]{#calibre_link-112
.calibre_class_2}*[]{#calibre_link-113 .calibre_class_2}

**[J.R.R. TOLKIEN ]{#calibre_link-115
.calibre_class_3}**[]{#calibre_link-116 .calibre_class_3}
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-1 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
**[PREFACE ]{#calibre_link-118 .calibre_class_2}**[]{#calibre_link-119
.calibre_class_2}

[It is undeniable that there are a very great many readers of *The Lord
of the Rings* for whom the legends of the Elder Days (as previously
published in varying forms in *The Silmarillion, Unfinished Tales,* and
*The History of Middle-earth)* are altogether unknown, unless by their
repute as strange and inaccessible in mode and manner. For this reason
it has seemed to me for a long time that there was a good case for
presenting my father\'s long version of the legend of the Children of
Húrin as an independent work, between its own covers, with a minimum of
editorial presence, and above all in continuous narrative without gaps
or interruptions, if this could be done without distortion or invention,
despite the unfinished state in which he left some parts of it.
]{#calibre_link-121 .calibre_class_4}

[I have thought that if the story of the fate of Túrin and Niënor, the
children of Húrin and Morwen, could be presented in this way, a window
might be opened onto a scene and a story set in an unknown Middle-earth
that are vivid and immediate, yet conceived as handed down from remote
ages: the drowned lands in the west beyond the Blue Mountains where
Treebeard walked in his youth, and the life of Túrin Turambar, in
Dor-lómin, Doriath, Nargothrond, and the Forest of Brethil.
]{#calibre_link-123 .calibre_class_4}

[This book is thus primarily addressed to such readers as may perhaps
recall that the hide of Shelob was so horrendously hard that it \'could
not be pierced by any strength of men, not though Elf or Dwarf should
forge the steel or the hand of Beren or of Túrin wield it\', or that
Elrond named Túrin to Frodo at Rivendell as one of \'the mighty
Elf-friends of old\'; but know no more of him. ]{#calibre_link-125
.calibre_class_4}

[When my father was a young man, during the years of the First World War
and long before there was any inkling of the tales that were to form the
narrative of *The Hobbit* or *The Lord of the Rings,* he began the
writing of a collection of stories that he called *The Book of Lost
Tales.* That was his first work of imaginative literature, and a
substantial one, for though it was left unfinished there are fourteen
completed tales. It was in *The Book of Lost Tales* that there first
appeared in narrative the Gods, or Valar; Elves and Men as the Children
of Ilúvatar (the Creator); Melkor-Morgoth the great Enemy; Balrogs and
Orcs; and the lands in which the Tales are set, Valinor \'land of the
Gods\' beyond the western ocean, and the \'Great Lands\' (afterwards
called \'Middle-earth\', between the seas of east and west).
]{#calibre_link-127 .calibre_class_4}

[Among the *Lost Tales* three were of much greater length and fullness,
and all three are concerned with Men as well as Elves: they are *The
Tale of Tinúviel* (which appears in brief form in *The Lord of the
Rings* as the story of Beren and Lúthien that Aragorn told to the
hobbits on Weathertop; this my father wrote in 1917), *Turambar and the
Foalókë* (Túrin Turambar and the Dragon, certainly in existence by 1919,
if not before), and *The Fall of Gondolin* (1916-17). In an often-quoted
passage of a long letter describing his work that my father wrote in
1951, three years before the publication of *The Fellowship of the
Ring,* he told of his early ambition: \'once upon a time (my crest has
long since fallen) I had a mind to make a body of more or less connected
legend, ranging from the large and cosmogonic, to the level of romantic
fairy-story - the larger founded on the lesser in contact with the
earth, the lesser drawing splendour from the vast backcloths... I would
draw some of the great tales in fullness, and leave many only placed in
the scheme, and sketched.\' ]{#calibre_link-129 .calibre_class_4}

[It is seen from this reminiscence that from far back it was a part of
his conception of what came to be called *The Silmarillion* that some of
the \'Tales\' should be told in much fuller form; and indeed in that
same letter of 1951 he referred expressly to the three stories which I
have mentioned above as being much the longest in *The Book of Lost
Tales.* Here he called the tale of Beren and Lúthien 'the chief of the
stories of *The Silmarillion*', and of it he said: \'the story is (I
think a beautiful and powerful) heroic-fairy-romance, receivable in
itself with only a very general vague knowledge of the background. But
it is also a fundamental link in the cycle, deprived of its full
significance out of its place therein.\' \'There are other stories
almost equally full in treatment,\' he went on, \'and equally
independent, and yet linked to the general history\': these are *The
Children of Húrin* and *The Fall of Gondolin.* ]{#calibre_link-131
.calibre_class_4}

[It thus seems unquestionable, from my father\'s own words, that if he
could achieve final and finished narratives on the scale he desired, he
saw the three \'Great Tales\' of the Elder Days (Beren and Lúthien, the
Children of Húrin, and the Fall of Gondolin) as works sufficiently
complete in themselves as not to demand knowledge of the great body of
legend known as *The Silmarillion.* On the other hand, as my father
observed in the same place, the tale of the Children of Húrin is
integral to the history of Elves and Men in the Elder Days, and there
are necessarily a good many references to events and circumstances in
that larger story. ]{#calibre_link-133 .calibre_class_4}

[It would be altogether contrary to the conception of this book to
burden its reading with an abundance of notes giving information about
persons and events that are in any case seldom of real importance to the
immediate narrative. However, it may be found helpful here and there if
some such assistance is provided, and I have accordingly given in the
Introduction a very brief sketch of Beleriand and its peoples near the
end of the Elder Days, when Túrin and Niënor were born; and, as well as
a map of Beleriand and the lands to the North, I have included a list of
all names occurring in the text with very concise indications concerning
each, and simplified genealogies. ]{#calibre_link-135 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-2 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[At the end of the book is an Appendix in two parts: the first concerned
with my father\'s attempts to achieve a final form for the three tales,
and the second with the composition of the text in this book, which
differs in many respects from that in *Unfinished Tales.*
]{#calibre_link-137 .calibre_class_4}

[I am very grateful to my son Adam Tolkien for his indispensable help in
the arrangement and presentation of the material in the Introduction and
Appendix, and for easing the book into the (to me) daunting world of
electronic transmission. ]{#calibre_link-139 .calibre_class_4}

[ ]{#calibre_link-140 .calibre_class_5}

**[INTRODUCTION ]{#calibre_link-142
.calibre_class_2}**[]{#calibre_link-143 .calibre_class_2}

*[Middle-earth in the Elder Days ]{#calibre_link-145
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-146 .calibre_class_4}

[The character of Túrin was of deep significance to my father, and in
dialogue of directness and immediacy he achieved a poignant portrait of
his boyhood, essential to the whole: his severity and lack of gaiety,
his sense of justice and his compassion; of Húrin also, quick, gay, and
sanguine, and of Morwen his mother, reserved, courageous, and proud; and
of the life of the household in the cold country of Dor-lómin during the
years, already full of fear, after Morgoth broke the Siege of Angband,
before Túrin was born. ]{#calibre_link-148 .calibre_class_4}

[But all this was in the Elder Days, the First Age of the world, in a
time unimaginably remote. The depth in time to which this story reaches
back was memorably conveyed in a passage in *The Lord of the Rings.* At
the great council in Rivendell Elrond spoke of the Last Alliance of
Elves and Men and the defeat of Sauron at the end of the Second Age,
more than three thousand years before:[ 
]{.calibre_class_6}]{#calibre_link-150 .calibre_class_4}

[Thereupon Elrond paused a while and sighed. \'I remember well the
splendour of their banners,\' he said. \'It recalled to me the glory of
the Elder Days and the hosts of Beleriand, so many great princes and
captains were assembled. And yet not so many, nor so fair, as when
Thangorodrim was broken, and the Elves deemed that evil was ended for
ever, and it was not so.\' ]{#calibre_link-152 .calibre_class_4}

[\'You remember?\' said Frodo, speaking his thought aloud in his
astonishment. \'But I thought,\' he stammered as Elrond turned towards
him, \'I thought that the fall of Gilgalad was a long age ago.\'
]{#calibre_link-154 .calibre_class_4}

[\'So it was indeed,\' answered Elrond gravely. \'But my memory reaches
back even to the Elder Days. Eärendil was my sire, who was born in
Gondolin before its fall; and my mother was Elwing, daughter of Dior,
son of Lúthien of Doriath. I have seen three ages in the West of the
world, and many defeats, and many fruitless victories.\'
]{#calibre_link-156 .calibre_class_4}

[Some six and a half thousand years before the Council of Elrond was
held in Rivendell, Túrin was born in Dor-lómin, \'in the winter of the
year,\' as is recorded in the *Annals of Beleriand,* \'with omens of
sorrow\'. ]{#calibre_link-158 .calibre_class_4}

[But the tragedy of his life is by no means comprehended solely in the
portrayal of character, for he was condemned to live trapped in a
malediction of huge and mysterious power, the curse of hatred set by
Morgoth upon Húrin and Morwen and their children, because Húrin defied
him, and refused his will. And Morgoth, the Black Enemy, as he came to
be called, was in his origin, as he declared to Húrin brought captive
before him, \'Melkor, first and mightiest of the Valar, who was before
the world.\' Now become permanently incarnate, in form a gigantic and
majestic, but terrible, King in the north-west of Middle-earth, he was
physically present in his huge fortress of Angband, the Hells of Iron:
the black reek that issued from the summits of Thangorodrim, the
mountains that he piled above Angband, could be seen far off staining
the northern sky. It is said in the *Annals of Beleriand* that \'the
gates of Morgoth were but one hundred and fifty leagues distant from the
bridge of Menegroth; far and yet all too near.\' These words refer to
the bridge leading to the dwellings of the Elvish king Thingol, who took
Túrin to be his fosterson: they were called Menegroth, the Thousand
Caves, far south and east of Dor-lómin. ]{#calibre_link-160
.calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-3 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[But being incarnate Morgoth was afraid. My father wrote of him: \'As he
grew in malice, and sent forth from himself the evil that he conceived
in lies and creatures of wickedness, his power passed into them and was
dispersed, and he himself became ever more earth-bound, unwilling to
issue from his dark strongholds.\' Thus when Fingolfin, High King of the
Noldorin Elves, rode alone to Angband to challenge Morgoth to combat, he
cried at the gate: \'Come forth, thou coward king, to fight with thine
own hand! Den-dweller, wielder of thralls, liar and lurker, foe of Gods
and Elves, come! For I would see thy craven face.\' Then (it is told)
\'Morgoth came. For he could not refuse such a challenge before the face
of his captains.\' He fought with the great hammer Grond, which at each
blow made a great pit, and he beat Fingolfin to the ground; but as he
died he pinned the great foot of Morgoth to the earth, \'and the black
blood gushed forth and filled the pits of Grond. Morgoth went ever halt
thereafter.\' So also, when Beren and Lúthien, in the shapes of a wolf
and a bat, made their way into the deepest hall in Angband, where
Morgoth sat, Lúthien cast a spell on him: and \'suddenly he fell, as a
hill sliding in avalanche, and hurled like thunder from his throne lay
prone upon the floors of hell. The iron crown rolled echoing from his
head.\' ]{#calibre_link-162 .calibre_class_4}

[The curse of such a being, who can claim that \'the shadow of my
purpose lies upon Arda \[the Earth\], and all that is in it bends slowly
and surely to my will\', is unlike the curses or imprecations of beings
of far less power. Morgoth is not \'invoking\' evil or calamity on Húrin
and his children, he is not \'calling on\' a higher power to be the
agent: for he, \'Master of the fates of Arda\' as he named himself to
Húrin, intends to bring about the ruin of his enemy by the force of his
own gigantic will. Thus he \'designs\' the future of those whom he
hates, and so he says to Húrin: \'Upon all whom you love *my thought*
shall weigh as *a cloud of Doom,* and it shall bring them down into
darkness and despair.\' ]{#calibre_link-164 .calibre_class_4}

[The torment that he devised for Húrin was \'to see with Morgoth\'s
eyes\'. My father gave a definition of what this meant: if one were
forced to look into Morgoth\'s eye he would \'see\' (or receive in his
mind from Morgoth\'s mind) a compellingly credible picture of events,
distorted by Morgoth\'s bottomless malice; and if indeed any could
refuse Morgoth\'s command, Húrin did not. This was in part, my father
said, because his love of his kin and his anguished anxiety for them
made him desire to learn all that he could of them, no matter what the
source; and in part from pride, believing that he had defeated Morgoth
in debate, and that he could \'outstare\' Morgoth, or at least retain
his critical reason and distinguish between fact and malice.
]{#calibre_link-166 .calibre_class_4}

[Throughout Túrin\'s life from the time of his departure from Dor-lómin,
and the life of his sister Niënor who never saw her father, this was the
fate of Húrin, seated immovably in a high place of Thangorodrim in
increasing bitterness inspired by his tormentor. ]{#calibre_link-168
.calibre_class_4}

[In the tale of Túrin, who named himself Turambar \'Master of Fate\',
the curse of Morgoth seems to be seen as power unleashed to work evil,
seeking out its victims; so the fallen Vala himself is said to fear that
Túrin \'would grow to such a power that the curse that he had laid upon
him would become void, and he would escape the doom that had been
designed for him\' (p. 44). And afterwards in Nargothrond Túrin
concealed his true name, so that when Gwindor revealed it he was
angered: \'You have done ill to me, friend, to betray my right name, and
call down my doom upon me, from which I would lie hid.\' It was Gwindor
who had told Túrin of the rumour that ran through Angband, where Gwindor
had been held prisoner, that Morgoth had laid a curse on Húrin and all
his kin. But now he replied to Túrin\'s wrath: \'the doom lies in
yourself, not in your name.\' ]{#calibre_link-170 .calibre_class_4}

[So essential is this complex conception in the story that my father
even proposed an alternative title to it: *Narn e-\'Rach Morgoth,* The
Tale of the Curse of Morgoth. And his view of it is seen in these words:
\'So ended the tale of Túrin the hapless; the worst of the works of
Morgoth among Men in the ancient world.\' ]{#calibre_link-172
.calibre_class_4}

[When Treebeard strode through the forest of Fangorn carrying Merry and
Pippin each in the crook of his arm he sang to them of places that he
had known in remote times, and of the trees that grew there:
]{#calibre_link-174 .calibre_class_4}

*[In the willow-meads of Tasarinan I walked in the Spring.
]{#calibre_link-176 .calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-177
.calibre_class_4}

*[Ah! the sight and the smell of the Spring in Nan-tasarion!
]{#calibre_link-179 .calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-180
.calibre_class_4}

*[And I said that was good. ]{#calibre_link-182
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-183 .calibre_class_4}

*[I wandered in Summer in the elm-woods of Ossiriand.
]{#calibre_link-185 .calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-186
.calibre_class_4}

*[Ah! the light and the music in the Summer by the Seven Rivers of
Ossir! ]{#calibre_link-188 .calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-189
.calibre_class_4}

*[And I thought that was best. ]{#calibre_link-191
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-192 .calibre_class_4}

*[To the beeches of Neldoreth I came in the Autumn. ]{#calibre_link-194
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-195 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-4 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
*[Ah! the gold and the red and the sighing of leaves in the Autumn in
Taur-na-Neldor! It was more than my desire. To the pine-trees upon the
highland of Dorthonion I climbed in the Winter. Ah! the wind and the
whiteness and the black branches of Winter upon Orod-na-Thôn! My voice
went up and sang in the sky. And now all those lands lie under the wave,
And I walk in Ambarona, in Tauremorna, in Aldalómë, In my own land, in
the country of Fangorn, Where the roots are long, And the years lie
thicker than the leaves In Tauremornalómë. ]{#calibre_link-197
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-198 .calibre_class_4}

[The memory of Treebeard, \'Ent the earthborn, old as mountains\', was
indeed long. He was remembering ancient forests in the great country of
Beleriand, which was destroyed in the tumults of the Great Battle at the
end of the Elder Days. The Great Sea poured in and drowned all the lands
west of the Blue Mountains, called Ered Luin and Ered Lindon: so that
the map accompanying *The Silmarillion* ends in the east with that
mountain-chain, whereas the map accompanying *The Lord of the Rings*
ends in the west with the same range; and the coastal lands beyond the
mountains named on that map Forlindon and Harlindon (North Lindon and
South Lindon) were all that remained in the Third Age of the country
called both Ossiriand, Land of Seven Rivers, and also Lindon, in whose
elm-woods Treebeard once walked. ]{#calibre_link-200 .calibre_class_4}

[He walked also among the great pine-trees on the highland of Dorthonion
(\'Land of Pines\'), which afterwards came to be called Taur-nu-Fuin,
\'the Forest under Night\', when Morgoth turned it into \'a region of
dread and dark enchantment, of wandering and despair\' (p. 46); and he
came to Neldoreth, the northern forest of Doriath, realm of Thingol.
]{#calibre_link-202 .calibre_class_4}

[It was in Beleriand and the lands to the north that Túrin\'s terrible
destiny was played out; and indeed both Dorthonion and Doriath where
Treebeard walked were crucial in his life. He was born into a world of
warfare, though he was still a child when the last and greatest battle
in the wars of Beleriand was fought. A very brief sketch of how this
came about will answer questions that arise and references that are made
in the course of the narrative. ]{#calibre_link-204 .calibre_class_4}

[In the north the boundaries of Beleriand seem to have been formed by
the Ered Wethrin, the Mountains of Shadow, beyond which lay Húrin\'s
country, Dor-lómin, a part of Hithlum; while in the east Beleriand
extended to the feet of the Blue Mountains. Further east lay lands that
scarcely appear in the history of the Elder Days; but the peoples that
shaped that history came out of the east by the passes of the Blue
Mountains. ]{#calibre_link-206 .calibre_class_4}

[The Elves appeared on earth far off in the distant east, beside a lake
that was named Cuiviénen, Water of Awakening; and thence they were
summoned by the Valar to leave Middle-earth, and passing over the Great
Sea to come to the \'Blessed Realm\' of Aman in the west of the world,
the land of the Gods. Those who accepted the summons were led on a great
march across Middle-earth from Cuiviénen by the Vala Orome, the Hunter,
and they are called the Eldar, the Elves of the Great Journey, the High
Elves: distinct from those who, refusing the summons, chose Middle-earth
for their land and their destiny. They are the \'lesser Elves\', called
Avari, the Unwilling. ]{#calibre_link-208 .calibre_class_4}

[But not all the Eldar, though they had crossed the Blue Mountains,
departed over the Sea; and those who remained in Beleriand are named the
Sindar, the Grey Elves. Their high king was Thingol (which means
\'Grey-cloak\'), who ruled from Menegroth, the Thousand Caves in
Doriath. And not all the Eldar who crossed the Great Sea remained in the
land of the Valar; for one of their great kindreds, the Noldor (the
\'Loremasters\'), returned to Middle-earth, and they are called the
Exiles. The prime mover in their rebellion against the Valar was Fëanor,
\'Spirit of Fire\': he was the eldest son of Finwë, who had led the host
of the Noldor from Cuiviénen, but was now dead. This cardinal event in
the history of the Elves was thus briefly conveyed by my father in
Appendix A to *The Lord of the Rings:* ]{#calibre_link-210
.calibre_class_4}

[Fëanor was the greatest of the Eldar in arts and lore, but also the
proudest and most selfwilled. He wrought the Three Jewels, the
*Silmarilli,* and filled them with the radiance of the Two Trees,
Telperion and Laurelin, that gave light to the land of the Valar. The
Jewels were coveted by Morgoth the Enemy, who stole them and, after
destroying the Trees, took them to Middle-earth, and guarded them in his
great fortress of Thangorodrim \[the mountains above Angband\]. Against
the will of the Valar Fëanor forsook the Blessed Realm and went in exile
to Middle-earth, leading with him a great part of his people; for in his
pride he purposed to recover the Jewels from Morgoth by force.
Thereafter followed the hopeless war of the Eldar and the Edain against
Thangorodrim, in which they were at last utterly defeated.
]{#calibre_link-212 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-5 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Fëanor was slain in battle soon after the return of the Noldor to
Middle-earth, and his seven sons held wide lands in the east of
Beleriand, between Dorthonion (Taur-nu-Fuin) and the Blue Mountains; but
their power was destroyed in the terrible Battle of Unnumbered Tears
which is described in *The Children of Húrin,* and thereafter \'the Sons
of Fëanor wandered as leaves before the wind\' (p. 12).
]{#calibre_link-214 .calibre_class_4}

[The second son of Finwë was Fingolfin (the half-brother of Fëanor), who
was held the overlord of all the Noldor; and he with his son Fingon
ruled Hithlum, which lay to the north and west of the great chain of
Ered Wethrin, the Mountains of Shadow. Fingolfin dwelt in Mithrim, by
the great lake of that name, while Fingon held Dor-lómin in the south of
Hithlum. Their chief fortress was Barad Eithel (the Tower of the Well)
at Eithel Sirion (Sirion\'s Well), where the river Sirion rose in the
east face of the Mountains of Shadow: Sador, the old crippled servant of
Húrin and Morwen, served as a soldier there for many years, as he told
Túrin (p. 4). After Fingolfin\'s death in single combat with Morgoth
Fingon became the High King of the Noldor in his stead. Túrin saw him
once, when he \'and many of his lords had ridden through Dor-lómin and
passed over the bridge of Nen Lalaith, glittering in silver and white\'
(p. 3). ]{#calibre_link-216 .calibre_class_4}

[The second son of Fingolfin was Turgon. He dwelt at first, after the
return of the Noldor, in the house named Vinyamar, beside the sea in the
region of Nevrast, west of Dor-lómin; but he built in secret the hidden
city of Gondolin, which stood on a hill in the midst of the plain called
Tumladen, wholly surrounded by the Encircling Mountains, east of the
river Sirion. When Gondolin was built, after many years of labour,
Turgon removed from Vinyamar and dwelt with his people, both Noldor and
Sindar, in Gondolin; and for centuries this Elvish redoubt of great
beauty was preserved in the most profound secrecy, its only entry
undiscoverable and heavily guarded, so that no stranger could ever pass
in; and Morgoth was unable to learn where it lay. Not until the Battle
of Unnumbered Tears, when more than three hundred and fifty years had
passed since he left Vinyamar, did Turgon emerge with his great army
from Gondolin. ]{#calibre_link-218 .calibre_class_4}

[The third son of Finwë, the brother of Fingolfin and half-brother of
Fëanor, was Finarfin. He did not return to Middle-earth, but his sons
and daughter came with the host of Fingolfin and his sons. The eldest
son of Finarfin was Finrod, who, inspired by the magnificence and beauty
of Menegroth in Doriath, founded the underground fortress-city of
Nargothrond, for which he was named Felagund, interpreted to mean \'Lord
of Caves\' or \'Cave-hewer\' in the tongue of the Dwarves. The doors of
Nargothrond opened onto the gorge of the river Narog in West Beleriand,
where that river passed through the high hills called Taur-en-Faroth, or
the High Faroth; but Finrod\'s realm extended far and wide, east to the
river Sirion, and west to the river Nenning that reached the sea at the
haven of Eglarest. But Finrod was slain in the dungeons of Sauron, chief
servant of Morgoth, and Orodreth, the second son of Finarfin, took the
crown of Nargothrond: this took place in the year following the birth of
Túrin in Dor-lómin. ]{#calibre_link-220 .calibre_class_4}

[The other sons of Finarfin, Angrod and Aegnor, vassals of their brother
Finrod, dwelt on Dorthonion, looking northwards over the vast plain of
Ard-galen. Galadriel, Finrod\'s sister, dwelt long in Doriath with
Melian the Queen. Melian was a Maia, a spirit of great power who took
human form and dwelt in the forests of Beleriand with King Thingol: she
was the mother of Lúthien, and the fore-mother of Elrond. Not long
before the return of the Noldor from Aman, when great armies out of
Angband came south into Beleriand, Melian (in the words of *The
Silmarillion)* \'put forth her power and fenced all that dominion \[the
forests of Neldoreth and Region\] round about with an unseen wall of
shadow and bewilderment: the Girdle of Melian, that none thereafter
could pass against her will or the will of King Thingol, unless one
should come with a power greater than that of Melian the Maia.\'
Thereafter the land was named Doriath, \'the Land of the Fence\'.
]{#calibre_link-222 .calibre_class_4}

[In the sixtieth year after the return of the Noldor, ending many years
of peace, a great host of Orcs came down from Angband, but was utterly
defeated and destroyed by the Noldor. This was called *Dagor Aglareb,*
the Glorious Battle; but the Elvish lords took warning from it, and set
the Siege of Angband, which lasted for almost four hundred years.
]{#calibre_link-224 .calibre_class_4}

[It was said that Men (whom the Elves called *Atani* \'the Second\', and
*Hildor* \'the Followers\') arose far off in the east of Middle-earth
towards the end of the Elder Days; but of their earliest history the Men
who entered Beleriand in the days of the Long Peace, when Angband was
besieged and its gates shut, would never speak. The leader of these
first Men to cross the Blue Mountains was named Bëor the Old; and to
Finrod Felagund, King of Nargothrond, who first encountered them Bëor
declared: \'A darkness lies behind us; and we have turned our backs on
it, and we do not desire to return thither even in thought. Westwards
our hearts have been turned, and we believe that there we shall find
Light.\' Sador, the old servant of Húrin, spoke in the same way to Túrin
in his boyhood (p. 43). But it was said afterwards that when Morgoth
learned of the arising of Men he left Angband for the last time and went
into the East; and that the first Men to enter Beleriand \'had repented
and rebelled against the Dark Power, and were cruelly hunted and
oppressed by those that worshipped it, and its servants\'.
]{#calibre_link-226 .calibre_class_4}
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-6 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[These Men belonged to three Houses, known as the House of Bëor, the
House of Hador, and the House of Haleth. Húrin\'s father Galdor the Tall
was of the House of Hador, being indeed his son; but his mother was of
the House of Haleth, while Morwen his wife was of the House of Bëor, and
related to Beren. ]{#calibre_link-228 .calibre_class_4}

[The people of the Three Houses were the *Edain* (the Sindarin form of
*Atani),* and they were called Elf-friends. Hador dwelt in Hithlum and
was given the lordship of Dor-lómin by King Fingolfin; the people of
Bëor settled in Dorthonion; and the people of Haleth at this time dwelt
in the Forest of Brethil. After the ending of the Siege of Angband Men
of a very different sort came over the mountains; they were commonly
referred to as Easterlings, and some of them played an important part in
the story of Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-230 .calibre_class_4}

[The Siege of Angband ended with a terrible suddenness (though long
prepared) on a night of midwinter, 395 years after it had begun. Morgoth
released rivers of fire that ran down from Thangorodrim, and the great
grassy plain of Ard-galen that lay to the north of the highland of
Dorthonion was transformed into a parched and arid waste, known
thereafter by a changed name, *Anfauglith,* the Gasping Dust.
]{#calibre_link-232 .calibre_class_4}

[This catastrophic assault was called *Dagor Bragollach,* the Battle of
Sudden Flame. Glaurung Father of Dragons emerged from Angband now for
the first time in his full might; vast armies of Orcs poured southwards;
the Elvish lords of Dorthonion were slain, and a great part of the
warriors of Bëor\'s people. King Fingolfin and his son Fingon were
driven back with the warriors of Hithlum to the fortress of Eithel
Sirion in the east face of the Mountains of Shadow, and in its defence
Hador Goldenhead was killed. Then Galdor, Húrin\'s father, became the
lord of Dorlómin; for the torrents of fire were stopped by the barrier
of the Mountains of Shadow, and Hithlum and Dor-lómin remained
unconquered. ]{#calibre_link-234 .calibre_class_4}

[It was in the year after the Bragollach that Fingolfin, in a fury of
despair, rode to Angband and challenged Morgoth. Two years later Húrin
and Huor went to Gondolin. After four more years, in a renewed assault
on Hithlum, Húrin\'s father Galdor was slain in the fortress of Eithel
Sirion: Sador was there, as he told Túrin (p. 4), and saw Húrin (then a
young man of twenty-one) \'take up his lordship and his command\'.
]{#calibre_link-236 .calibre_class_4}

[All these things were fresh in memory in Dor-lómin when Túrin was born,
nine years after the Battle of Sudden Flame. ]{#calibre_link-238
.calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-7 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000000.jpg){.calibre8
shapes="_x0000_i1027"}]{#calibre_link-240 .calibre_class_5}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-8 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000001.jpg){.calibre9
shapes="_x0000_i1028"}]{#calibre_link-242 .calibre_class_5}

[Hador Goldenhead was a lord of the Edain and well-beloved by the Eldar.
He dwelt while his days lasted under the lordship of Fingolfin, who gave
to him wide lands in that region of Hithlum which was called Dorlómin.
His daughter Glóredhel wedded Haldir son of Halmir, lord of the Men of
Brethil; and at the same feast his son Galdor the Tall wedded Hareth,
the daughter of Halmir. ]{#calibre_link-244 .calibre_class_4}

[Galdor and Hareth had two sons, Húrin and Huor. Húrin was by three
years the elder, but he was shorter in stature than other men of his
kin; in this he took after his mother\'s people, but in all else he was
like Hador, his grandfather, strong in body and fiery of mood. But the
fire in him burned steadily, and he had great endurance of will. Of all
Men of the North he knew most of the counsels of the Noldor. Huor his
brother was tall, the tallest of all the Edain save his own son Tuor
only, and a swift runner; but if the race were long and hard Húrin would
be the first home, for he ran as strongly at the end of the course as at
the beginning. There was great love between the brothers, and they were
seldom apart in their youth. ]{#calibre_link-246 .calibre_class_4}

[Húrin wedded Morwen, the daughter of Baragund son of Bregolas of the
House of Bëor; and she was thus of close kin to Beren One-hand. Morwen
was dark-haired and tall, and for the light of her glance and the beauty
of her face men called her Eledhwen, the elven-fair; but she was
somewhat stern of mood and proud. The sorrows of the House of Bëor
saddened her heart; for she came as an exile to Dor-lómin from
Dorthonion after the ruin of the Bragollach. ]{#calibre_link-248
.calibre_class_4}

[Túrin was the name of the eldest child of Húrin and Morwen, and he was
born in that year in which Beren came to Doriath and found Lúthien
Tinúviel, Thingol\'s daughter. Morwen bore a daughter also to Húrin, and
she was named Urwen; but she was called Lalaith, which is Laughter, by
all that knew her in her short life. ]{#calibre_link-250
.calibre_class_4}

[Huor wedded Rian, the cousin of Morwen; she was the daughter of
Belegund son of Bregolas. By hard fate was she born into such days, for
she was gentle of heart and loved neither hunting nor war. Her love was
given to trees and to the flowers of the wild, and she was a singer and
a maker of songs. Two months only had she been wedded to Huor when he
went with his brother to the Nirnaeth Arnoediad, and she never saw him
again. ]{#calibre_link-252 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-9 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[But now the tale returns to Húrin and Huor in the days of their youth.
It is said that for a while the sons of Galdor dwelt in Brethil as
foster-sons of Haldir their uncle, after the custom of Northern men in
those days. They often went to battle with the Men of Brethil against
the Orcs, who now harried the northern borders of their land; for Húrin,
though only seventeen years of age, was strong, and Huor the younger was
already as tall as most full-grown men of that people.
]{#calibre_link-254 .calibre_class_4}

[On a time Húrin and Huor went with a company of scouts, but they were
ambushed by the Orcs and scattered, and the brothers were pursued to the
ford of Brithiach. There they would have been taken or slain but for the
power of Ulmo that was still strong in the waters of Sirion; and it is
said that a mist arose from the river and hid them from their enemies,
and they escaped over the Brithiach into Dimbar. There they wandered in
great hardship among the hills beneath the sheer walls of the
Crissaegrim, until they were bewildered in the deceits of that land and
knew not the way to go on or to return. There Thorondor espied them, and
he sent two of his Eagles to their aid; and the Eagles bore them up and
brought them beyond the Encircling Mountains to the secret vale of
Tumladen and the hidden city of Gondolin, which no Man had yet seen.
]{#calibre_link-256 .calibre_class_4}

[There Turgon the King received them well, when he learned of their kin;
for Hador was an Elf-friend, and Ulmo, moreover, had counselled Turgon
to deal kindly with the sons of that House, from whom help should come
to him at need. Húrin and Huor dwelt as guests in the King\'s house for
well nigh a year; and it is said that in this time Húrin, whose mind was
swift and eager, gained much lore of the Elves, and learned also
something of the counsels and purposes of the King. For Turgon took
great liking for the sons of Galdor, and spoke much with them; and he
wished indeed to keep them in Gondolin out of love, and not only for his
law that no stranger, be he Elf or Man, who found the way to the secret
kingdom or looked upon the city should ever depart again, until the King
should open the leaguer, and the hidden people should come forth.
]{#calibre_link-258 .calibre_class_4}

[But Húrin and Huor desired to return to their own people and share in
the wars and griefs that now beset them. And Húrin said to Turgon:
\'Lord, we are but mortal Men, and unlike the Eldar. They may endure for
long years awaiting battle with their enemies in some far distant day;
but for us the time is short, and our hope and strength soon wither.
Moreover we did not find the road to Gondolin, and indeed we do not know
surely where this city stands; for we were brought in fear and wonder by
the high ways of the air, and in mercy our eyes were veiled.\' Then
Turgon granted his prayer, and he said: \'By the way that you came you
have leave to return, if Thorondor is willing. I grieve at this parting;
yet in a little while, as the Eldar account it, we may meet again.\'
]{#calibre_link-260 .calibre_class_4}

[But Maeglin, the King\'s sister-son, who was mighty in Gondolin,
grieved not at all at their going, though he begrudged them the favour
of the King, for he had no love for any of the kindred of Men; and he
said to Húrin: \'The King\'s grace is greater than you know, and some
might wonder wherefore the strict law is abated for two knave-children
of Men. It would be safer if they had no choice but to abide here as our
servants to their life\'s end.\' ]{#calibre_link-262 .calibre_class_4}

[\'The King\'s grace is great indeed,\' answered Húrin, \'but if our
word is not enough, then we will swear oaths to you.\' And the brothers
swore never to reveal the counsels of Turgon, and to keep secret all
that they had seen in his realm. Then they took their leave, and the
Eagles coming bore them away by night, and set them down in Dor-lómin
before the dawn. Their kinsfolk rejoiced to see them, for messengers
from Brethil had reported that they were lost; but they would not tell
even to their father where they had been, save that they were rescued in
the wilderness by the Eagles that brought them home. But Galdor said:
\'Did you then dwell a year in the wild? Or did the Eagles house you in
their eyries? But you found food and fine raiment, and return as young
princes, not as waifs of the wood.\' \'Be content, father,\' said Húrin,
\'that we have returned; for only under an oath of silence was this
permitted. That oath is still on us.\' Then Galdor questioned them no
more, but he and many others guessed at the truth. For both the oath of
silence and the Eagles pointed to Turgon, men thought.[ 
]{.calibre_class_6}]{#calibre_link-264 .calibre_class_4}

[So the days passed, and the shadow of the fear of Morgoth lengthened.
But in the four hundred and sixty-ninth year after the return of the
Noldor to Middle-earth there was a stirring of hope among Elves and Men;
for the rumour ran among them of the deeds of Beren and Lúthien, and the
putting to shame of Morgoth even upon his throne in Angband, and some
said that Beren and Lúthien yet lived, or had returned from the Dead. In
that year also the great counsels of Maedhros were almost complete, and
with the reviving strength of the Eldar and the Edain the advance of
Morgoth was stayed, and the Orcs were driven back from Beleriand. Then
some began to speak of victories to come, and of redressing the Battle
of the Bragollach, when Maedhros should lead forth the united hosts, and
drive Morgoth underground, and seal the Doors of Angband.
]{#calibre_link-266 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-10 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[But the wiser were uneasy still, fearing that Maedhros revealed his
growing strength too soon, and that Morgoth would be given time enough
to take counsel against him. \'Ever will some new evil be hatched in
Angband beyond the guess of Elves and Men,\' they said. And in the
autumn of that year, to point their words, there came an ill wind from
the North under leaden skies. The Evil Breath it was called, for it was
pestilent; and many sickened and died in the fall of the year in the
northern lands that bordered on the Anfauglith, and they were for the
most part the children or the rising youth in the houses of Men.
]{#calibre_link-268 .calibre_class_4}

[In that year Túrin son of Húrin was yet only five years old, and Urwen
his sister was three in the beginning of spring. Her hair was like the
yellow lilies in the grass as she ran in the fields, and her laughter
was like the sound of the merry stream that came singing out of the
hills past the walls of her father\'s house. Nen Lalaith it was named,
and after it all the people of the household called the child Lalaith,
and their hearts were glad while she was among them. ]{#calibre_link-270
.calibre_class_4}

[But Túrin was loved less than she. He was dark-haired as his mother,
and promised to be like her in mood also; for he was not merry, and
spoke little, though he learned to speak early and ever seemed older
than his years. Túrin was slow to forget injustice or mockery; but the
fire of his father was also in him, and he could be sudden and fierce.
Yet he was quick to pity, and the hurts or sadness of living things
might move him to tears; and he was like his father in this also, for
Morwen was stern with others as with herself. He loved his mother, for
her speech to him was forthright and plain; but his father he saw
little, for Húrin was often long away from home with the host of Fingon
that guarded Hithlum\'s eastern borders, and when he returned his quick
speech, full of strange words and jests and half-meanings, bewildered
Túrin and made him uneasy. At that time all the warmth of his heart was
for Lalaith his sister; but he played with her seldom, and liked better
to guard her unseen and to watch her going upon grass or under tree, as
she sang such songs as the children of the Edain made long ago when the
tongue of the Elves was still fresh upon their lips. ]{#calibre_link-272
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Fair as an Elf-child is Lalaith,\' said Húrin to Morwen; \'but
briefer, alas! And so fairer, maybe, or dearer.\' And Túrin hearing
these words pondered them, but could not understand them. For he had
seen no Elf-children. None of the Eldar at that time dwelt in his
father\'s lands, and once only had he seen them, when King Fingon and
many of his lords had ridden through Dor-lómin and passed over the
bridge of Nen Lalaith, glittering in silver and white.
]{#calibre_link-274 .calibre_class_4}

[But before the year was out the truth of his father\'s words was shown;
for the Evil Breath came to Dor-lómin, and Túrin took sick, and lay long
in a fever and dark dream. And when he was healed, for such was his fate
and the strength of life that was in him, he asked for Lalaith. But his
nurse answered: \'Speak no more of Lalaith, son of Húrin; but of your
sister Urwen you must ask tidings of your mother.\' ]{#calibre_link-276
.calibre_class_4}

[And when Morwen came to him, Túrin said to her: \'I am no longer sick,
and I wish to see Urwen; but why must I not say Lalaith any more?\'
]{#calibre_link-278 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Because Urwen is dead, and laughter is stilled in this house,\' she
answered. \'But you live, son of Morwen; and so does the Enemy who has
done this to us.\' ]{#calibre_link-280 .calibre_class_4}

[She did not seek to comfort him any more than herself; for she met her
grief in silence and coldness of heart. But Húrin mourned openly, and he
took up his harp and would make a song of lamentation; but he could not,
and he broke his harp, and going out he lifted up his hand towards the
North, crying: \'Marrer of Middle-earth, would that I might see you face
to face, and mar you as my lord Fingolfin did!\' ]{#calibre_link-282
.calibre_class_4}

[But Túrin wept bitterly at night alone, though to Morwen he never again
spoke the name of his sister. To one friend only he turned at that time,
and to him he spoke of his sorrow and the emptiness of the house. This
friend was named Sador, a house-man in the service of Húrin; he was
lame, and of small account. He had been a woodman, and by ill-luck or
the mishandling of his axe he had hewn his right foot, and the footless
leg had shrunken; and Túrin called him Labadal, which is \'Hopafoot\',
though the name did not displease Sador, for it was given in pity and
not in scorn. Sador worked in the outbuildings, to make or mend things
of little worth that were needed in the house, for he had some skill in
the working of wood; and Túrin would fetch him what he lacked, to spare
his leg, and sometimes he would carry off secretly some tool or piece of
timber that he found unwatched, if he thought his friend might use it.
Then Sador smiled, but bade him return the gifts to their places; \'Give
with a free hand, but give only your own,\' he said. He rewarded as he
could the kindness of the child, and carved for him the figures of men
and beasts; but Túrin delighted most in Sador\'s tales, for he had been
a young man in the days of the Bragollach, and loved now to dwell upon
the short days of his full manhood before his maiming.
]{#calibre_link-284 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-11 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'That was a great battle, they say, son of Húrin. I was called from my
tasks in the wood in the need of that year; but I was not in the
Bragollach, or I might have got my hurt with more honour. For we came
too late, save to bear back the bier of the old lord, Hador, who fell in
the guard of King Fingolfin. I went for a soldier after that, and I was
in Eithel Sirion, the great fort of the Elf-kings, for many years; or so
it seems now, and the dull years since have little to mark them. In
Eithel Sirion I was when the Black King assailed it, and Galdor your
father\'s father was the captain there in the King\'s stead. He was
slain in that assault; and I saw your father take up his lordship and
his command, though but new come to manhood. There was a fire in him
that made the sword hot in his hand, they said. Behind him we drove the
Orcs into the sand; and they have not dared to come within sight of the
walls since that day. But alas! my love of battle was sated, for I had
seen spilled blood and wounds enough; and I got leave to come back to
the woods that I yearned for. And there I got my hurt; for a man that
flies from his fear may find that he has only taken a short cut to meet
it.\' ]{#calibre_link-286 .calibre_class_4}

[In this way Sador would speak to Túrin as he grew older; and Túrin
began to ask many questions that Sador found hard to answer, thinking
that others nearer akin should have had the teaching. And one day Túrin
said to him: \'Was Lalaith indeed like an Elf-child, as my father said?
And what did he mean, when he said that she was briefer?\'
]{#calibre_link-288 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Very like,\' said Sador; \'for in their first youth the children of
Men and Elves seem close akin. But the children of Men grow more
swiftly, and their youth passes soon; such is our fate.\'
]{#calibre_link-290 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin asked him: \'What is fate?\' ]{#calibre_link-292
.calibre_class_4}

[\'As to the fate of Men,\' said Sador, \'you must ask those that are
wiser than Labadal. But as all can see, we weary soon and die; and by
mischance many meet death even sooner. But the Elves do not weary, and
they do not die save by great hurt. From wounds and griefs that would
slay Men they may be healed; and even when their bodies are marred they
return again, some say. It is not so with us.\' ]{#calibre_link-294
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Then Lalaith will not come back?\' said Túrin. \'Where has she
gone?\' ]{#calibre_link-296 .calibre_class_4}

[\'She will not come back,\' said Sador. \'But where she has gone no man
knows; or I do not.\' ]{#calibre_link-298 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Has it always been so? Or do we suffer some curse of the wicked King,
perhaps, like the Evil Breath?\' ]{#calibre_link-300 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I do not know. A darkness lies behind us, and out of it few tales
have come. The fathers of our fathers may have had things to tell, but
they did not tell them. Even their names are forgotten. The Mountains
stand between us and the life that they came from, flying from no man
now knows what.\' ]{#calibre_link-302 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Were they afraid?\' said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-304 .calibre_class_4}

[\'It may be,\' said Sador. \'It may be that we fled from the fear of
the Dark, only to find it here before us, and nowhere else to fly to but
the Sea.\' ]{#calibre_link-306 .calibre_class_4}

[\'We are not afraid any longer,\' said Túrin, \'not all of us. My
father is not afraid, and I will not be; or at least, as my mother, I
will be afraid and not show it.\' ]{#calibre_link-308 .calibre_class_4}

[It seemed then to Sador that Túrin\'s eyes were not the eyes of a
child, and he thought: \'Grief is a hone to a hard mind.\' But aloud he
said: \'Son of Húrin and Morwen, how it will be with your heart Labadal
cannot guess; but seldom and to few will you show what is in it.\'
]{#calibre_link-310 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin said: \'Perhaps it is better not to tell what you wish, if
you cannot have it. But I wish, Labadal, that I were one of the Eldar.
Then Lalaith might come back, and I should still be here, even if she
were long away. I shall go as a soldier with an Elf-king as soon as I am
able, as you did, Labadal.\' ]{#calibre_link-312 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-12 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'You may learn much of them,\' said Sador, and he sighed. \'They are a
fair folk and wonderful, and they have a power over the hearts of Men.
And yet I think sometimes that it might have been better if we had never
met them, but had walked in lowlier ways. For already they are ancient
in knowledge; and they are proud and enduring. In their light we are
dimmed, or we burn with too quick a flame, and the weight of our doom
lies the heavier on us.\' ]{#calibre_link-314 .calibre_class_4}

[\'But my father loves them,\' said Túrin, \'and he is not happy without
them. He says that we have learned nearly all that we know from them,
and have been made a nobler people; and he says that the Men that have
lately come over the Mountains are hardly better than Orcs.\'
]{#calibre_link-316 .calibre_class_4}

[\'That is true,\' answered Sador; \'true at least of some of us. But
the up-climbing is painful, and from high places it is easy to fall
low.\' ]{#calibre_link-318 .calibre_class_4}

[At this time Túrin was almost eight years old, in the month of Gwaeron
in the reckoning of the Edain, in the year that cannot be forgotten.
Already there were rumours among his elders of a great mustering and
gathering of arms, of which Túrin heard nothing; though he marked that
his father often looked steadfastly at him, as a man might look at
something dear that he must part from. ]{#calibre_link-320
.calibre_class_4}

[Now Húrin, knowing her courage and her guarded tongue, often spoke with
Morwen of the designs of the Elven-kings, and of what might befall, if
they went well or ill. His heart was high with hope, and he had little
fear for the outcome of the battle; for it did not seem to him that any
strength in Middle-earth could overthrow the might and splendour of the
Eldar. \'They have seen the Light in the West,\' he said, \'and in the
end Darkness must flee from their faces.\' Morwen did not gainsay him;
for in Húrin\'s company the hopeful ever seemed the more likely. But
there was knowledge of Elven-lore in her kindred also, and to herself
she said: \'And yet did they not leave the Light, and are they not now
shut out from it? It may be that the Lords of the West have put them out
of their thought; and how then can even the Elder Children overcome one
of the Powers?\' ]{#calibre_link-322 .calibre_class_4}

[No shadow of such doubt seemed to lie on Húrin Thalion; yet one morning
in the spring of that year he awoke heavy as after unquiet sleep, and a
cloud lay on his brightness that day; and in the evening he said
suddenly: \'When I am summoned, Morwen Eledhwen, I shall leave in your
keeping the heir of the House of Hador. The lives of Men are short, and
in them there are many ill chances, even in time of peace.\'
]{#calibre_link-324 .calibre_class_4}

[\'That has ever been so,\' she answered. \'But what lies under your
words?\' ]{#calibre_link-326 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Prudence, not doubt,\' said Húrin; yet he looked troubled. \'But one
who looks forward must see this: that things will not remain as they
were. This will be a great throw, and one side must fall lower than it
now stands. If it be the Elven-kings that fall, then it must go evilly
with the Edain; and we dwell nearest to the Enemy. This land might pass
into his dominion. But if things do go ill, I will not say to you: *Do
not be afraid!* For you fear what should be feared, and that only; and
fear does not dismay you. But I say: *Do not wait!* I shall return to
you as I may, but do not wait! Go south as swiftly as you can - if I
live I shall follow, and I shall find you, though I have to search
through all Beleriand.\' ]{#calibre_link-328 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Beleriand is wide, and houseless for exiles,\' said Morwen. \'Whither
should I flee, with few or with many?\' ]{#calibre_link-330
.calibre_class_4}

[Then Húrin thought for a while in silence. \'There is my mother\'s kin
in Brethil,\' he said. \'That is some thirty leagues, as the eagle
flies.\' ]{#calibre_link-332 .calibre_class_4}

[\'If such an evil time should indeed come, what help would there be in
Men?\' said Morwen. \'The House of Bëor has fallen. If the great House
of Hador falls, in what holes shall the little Folk of Haleth creep?\'
]{#calibre_link-334 .calibre_class_4}

[\'In such as they can find,\' said Húrin. \'But do not doubt their
valour, though they are few and unlearned. Where else is hope?\'
]{#calibre_link-336 .calibre_class_4}

[\'You do not speak of Gondolin,\' said Morwen. ]{#calibre_link-338
.calibre_class_4}

[\'No, for that name has never passed my lips,\' said Húrin. \'Yet the
word is true that you have heard: I have been there. But I tell you now
truly, as I have told no other, and will not: I do not know where it
stands.\' ]{#calibre_link-340 .calibre_class_4}

[\'But you guess, and guess near, I think,\' said Morwen.
]{#calibre_link-342 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-13 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'It may be so,\' said Húrin. \'But unless Turgon himself released me
from my oath, I could not tell that guess, even to you; and therefore
your search would be vain. But were I to speak, to my shame, you would
at best but come at a shut gate; for unless Turgon comes out to war (and
of that no word has been heard, and it is not hoped) no one will come
in.\' ]{#calibre_link-344 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Then if your kin are not hopeful, and your friends deny you,\' said
Morwen, \'I must take counsel for myself; and to me now comes the
thought of Doriath.\' ]{#calibre_link-346 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Ever your aim is high,\' said Húrin. ]{#calibre_link-348
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Over-high, you would say?\' said Morwen. \'But last of all defences
will the Girdle of Melian be broken, I think; and the House of Bëor will
not be despised in Doriath. Am I not now kin of the king? For Beren son
of Barahir was grandson of Bregor, as was my father also.\'
]{#calibre_link-350 .calibre_class_4}

[\'My heart does not lean to Thingol,\' said Húrin. \'No help will come
from him to King Fingon; and I know not what shadow falls on my spirit
when Doriath is named.\' ]{#calibre_link-352 .calibre_class_4}

[\'At the name of Brethil my heart also is darkened,\' said Morwen.
]{#calibre_link-354 .calibre_class_4}

[Then suddenly Húrin laughed, and he said: \'Here we sit debating things
beyond our reach, and shadows that come out of dream. Things will not go
so ill; but if they do, then to your courage and counsel all is
committed. Do then what your heart bids you; but do it swiftly. And if
we gain our ends, then the Elven-kings are resolved to restore all the
fiefs of Bëor\'s house to his heir; and that is you, Morwen daughter of
Baragund. Wide lordships we should then wield, and a high inheritance
come to our son. Without the malice in the North he should come to great
wealth, and be a king among Men.\' ]{#calibre_link-356 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Húrin Thalion,\' said Morwen, \'this I judge truer to say: that you
look high, but I fear to fall low.\' ]{#calibre_link-358
.calibre_class_4}

[\'That at the worst you need not fear,\' said Húrin.
]{#calibre_link-360 .calibre_class_4}

[That night Túrin half-woke, and it seemed to him that his father and
mother stood beside his bed, and looked down on him in the light of the
candles that they held; but he could not see their faces.
]{#calibre_link-362 .calibre_class_4}

[On the morning of Túrin\'s birthday Húrin gave his son a gift, an
Elf-wrought knife, and the hilt and the sheath were silver and black;
and he said: \'Heir of the House bf Hador, here is a gift for the day.
But have a care! It is a bitter blade, and steel serves only those that
can wield it. It will cut your hand as willingly as aught else.\' And
setting Túrin on a table he kissed his son, and said: \'You overtop me
already, son of Morwen; soon you will be as high on your own feet. In
that day many may fear your blade.\' ]{#calibre_link-364
.calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin ran from the room and went away alone, and in his heart was
a warmth like the warmth of the sun upon the cold earth that sets growth
astir. He repeated to himself his father\'s words, Heir of the House of
Hador; but other words came also to his mind: Give with a free hand, but
give of your own. And he went to Sador and cried: \'Labadal, it is my
birthday, the birthday of the heir of the House of Hador! And I have
brought you a gift to mark the day. Here is a knife, just such as you
need; it will cut anything that you wish, as fine as a hair.\'
]{#calibre_link-366 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Sador was troubled, for he knew well that Túrin had himself
received the knife that day; but men held it a grievous thing to refuse
a free-given gift from any hand. He spoke then to him gravely: \'You
come of a generous kin, Túrin son of Húrin. I have done nothing to equal
your gift, and I cannot hope to do better in the days that are left to
me; but what I can do, I will.\' And when Sador drew the knife from the
sheath he said: \'This is a gift indeed: a blade of elven steel. Long
have I missed the feel of it.\' ]{#calibre_link-368 .calibre_class_4}

[Húrin soon marked that Túrin did not wear the knife, and he asked him
whether his warning had made him fear it. Then Túrin answered: \'No; but
I gave the knife to Sador the woodwright.\' ]{#calibre_link-370
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Do you then scorn your father\'s gift?\' said Morwen; and again Túrin
answered: \'No; but I love Sador, and I am sorry for him.\'
]{#calibre_link-372 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Húrin said: \'All three gifts were your own to give, Túrin: love,
pity, and the knife the least.\' ]{#calibre_link-374 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Yet I doubt if Sador deserves them,\' said Morwen. \'He is
self-maimed by his own want of skill, and he is slow with his tasks, for
he spends much time on trifles unbidden.\' ]{#calibre_link-376
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Give him pity nonetheless,\' said Húrin. \'An honest hand and a true
heart may hew amiss; and the harm may be harder to bear than the work of
a foe.\' ]{#calibre_link-378 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::::: {#calibre_link-14 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'But you must wait now for another blade,\' said Morwen. \'Thus the
gift shall be a true gift and at your ]{#calibre_link-380
.calibre_class_3}

[own cost.\' ]{#calibre_link-382 .calibre_class_4}

[Nonetheless Túrin marked that Sador was treated more kindly thereafter,
and was set now to the making of a great chair for the lord to sit on in
his hall. ]{#calibre_link-384 .calibre_class_4}

[There came a bright morning in the month of Lothron when Túrin was
roused by sudden trumpets; and running to the doors he saw in the court
a great press of men on foot and on horse, and all fully armed as for
war. There also stood Húrin, and he spoke to the men and gave commands;
and Túrin learned that they were setting out that day for Barad Eithel.
These were Húrin\'s guards and household men; but all the men of his
land that could be spared were summoned. Some had gone already with Huor
his father\'s brother; and many others would join the Lord of Dor-lómin
on the road, and go behind his banner to the great muster of the King.
]{#calibre_link-386 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Morwen bade farewell to Húrin without tears; and she said: \'I
will guard what you leave in my keeping, both what is and what shall
be.\' ]{#calibre_link-388 .calibre_class_4}

[And Húrin answered her: \'Farewell, Lady of Dor-lómin; we ride now with
greater hope than ever we have known before. Let us think that at this
midwinter the feast shall be merrier than in all our years yet, with a
fearless spring to follow after!\' Then he lifted Túrin to his shoulder,
and cried to his men: \'Let the heir of the House of Hador see the light
of your swords!\' And the sun glittered on fifty blades as they leaped
forth, and the court rang with the battle-cry of the Edain of the North:
*Lacho calad! Drego morn!* Flame Light! Flee Night! ]{#calibre_link-390
.calibre_class_4}

[Then at last Húrin sprang into his saddle, and his golden banner was
unfurled, and the trumpets sang again in the morning; and thus Húrin
Thalion rode away to the Nirnaeth Arnoediad. ]{#calibre_link-392
.calibre_class_4}

[But Morwen and Túrin stood still by the doors, until far away they
heard the faint call of a single horn on the wind: Húrin had passed over
the shoulder of the hill, beyond which he could see his house no more.
]{#calibre_link-394 .calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  [![](images/000002.jpg){.calibre10 shapes="_x0000_i1029"}]{#calibre_link-396 .calibre_class_5}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
:::::

::: {#calibre_link-15 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000003.jpg){.calibre11
shapes="_x0000_i1030"}]{#calibre_link-398 .calibre_class_5}

[Many songs are yet sung and many tales are yet told by the Elves of the
Nirnaeth Arnoediad, the Battle of Unnumbered Tears, in which Fingon fell
and the flower of the Eldar withered. If all were now retold a man\'s
life would not suffice for the hearing. Here then shall be recounted
only those deeds which bear upon the fate of the House of Hador and the
children of Húrin the Steadfast. ]{#calibre_link-400 .calibre_class_4}

[Having gathered at length all the strength that he could Maedhros
appointed a day, the morning of Midsummer. On that day the trumpets of
the Eldar greeted the rising of the Sun, and in the east was raised the
standard of the sons of Fëanor; and in the west the standard of Fingon,
King of the Noldor. ]{#calibre_link-402 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Fingon looked out from the walls of Eithel Sirion, and his host
was arrayed in the valleys and woods upon the east of Ered Wethrin, well
hid from the eyes of the Enemy; but he knew that it was very great. For
there all the Noldor of Hithlum were assembled, and to them were
gathered many Elves of the Falas and of Nargothrond; and he had great
strength of Men. Upon the right were stationed the host of Dorlómin and
all the valour of Húrin and Huor his brother, and to them had come
Haldir of Brethil, their kinsman, with many men of the woods.
]{#calibre_link-404 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Fingon looked east and his elven-sight saw far off a dust and the
glint of steel like stars in a mist, and he knew that Maedhros had set
forth; and he rejoiced. Then he looked towards Thangorodrim, and there
was a dark cloud about it and a black smoke went up; and he knew that
the wrath of Morgoth was kindled and that their challenge would be
accepted, and a shadow of doubt fell upon his heart. But at that moment
a cry went up, passing on the wind from the south from vale to vale, and
Elves and Men lifted up their voices in wonder and joy. For unsummoned
and unlooked-for Turgon had opened the leaguer of Gondolin, and was come
with an army, ten thousand strong, with bright mail and long swords and
spears like a forest. Then when Fingon heard afar the great trumpet of
Turgon, the shadow passed and his heart was uplifted, and he shouted
aloud: *\'Utúlie\'n aurë! Aiya Eldalië ar Atanatarni, utúlie\'n aurë!*
The day has come! ]{#calibre_link-406 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-16 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Behold, people of the Eldar and Fathers of Men, the day has come!\' And
all those who heard his great voice echo in the hills answered crying:
*\'Auta i lómë!* The night is passing!\' ]{#calibre_link-408
.calibre_class_4}

[It was not long before the great battle was joined. For Morgoth knew
much of what was done and designed by his foes and had laid his plans
against the hour of their assault. Already a great force out of Angband
was drawing near to Hithlum, while another and greater went to meet
Maedhros to prevent the union of the powers of the kings. And those that
came against Fingon were clad all in dun raiment and showed no naked
steel, and thus were already far over the sands of Anfauglith before
their approach became known. ]{#calibre_link-410 .calibre_class_4}

[Then the hearts of the Noldor grew hot, and their captains wished to
assail their foes on the plain; but Fingon spoke against this.
]{#calibre_link-412 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Beware of the guile of Morgoth, lords!\' he said. \'Ever his strength
is more than it seems, and his purpose other than he reveals. Do not
reveal your own strength, but let the enemy spend his first in assault
on the hills.\' For it was the design of the kings that Maedhros should
march openly over the Anfauglith with all his strength, of Elves and of
Men and of Dwarves; and when he had drawn forth, as he hoped, the main
armies of Morgoth in answer, then Fingon should come on from the West,
and so the might of Morgoth should be taken as between hammer and anvil
and be broken to pieces; and the signal for this was to be the firing of
a great beacon in Dorthonion. ]{#calibre_link-414 .calibre_class_4}

[But the Captain of Morgoth in the west had been commanded to draw out
Fingon from his hills by whatever means he could. He marched on,
therefore, until the front of his battle was drawn up before the stream
of Sirion, from the walls of the Barad Eithel to the Fen of Serech; and
the outposts of Fingon could see the eyes of their enemies. But there
was no answer to his challenge, and the taunts of his Orcs faltered as
they looked upon the silent walls and the hidden threat of the hills.
]{#calibre_link-416 .calibre_class_4}

[Then the Captain of Morgoth sent out riders with tokens of parley, and
they rode up before the very walls of the outworks of the Barad Eithel.
With them they brought Gelmir son of Guilin, a lord of Nargothrond, whom
they had captured in the Bragollach, and had blinded; and their heralds
showed him forth crying: \'We have many more such at home, but you must
make haste if you would find them. For we shall deal with them all when
we return, even so.\' And they hewed off Gelmir\'s arms and legs, and
left him. ]{#calibre_link-418 .calibre_class_4}

[By ill chance at that point in the outposts stood Gwindor son of Guilin
with many folk of Nargothrond; and indeed he had marched to war with
such strength as he could gather because of his grief for the taking of
his brother. Now his wrath was like a flame, and he leapt forth upon
horse-back, and many riders with him, and they pursued the heralds of
Angband and slew them; and all the folk of Nargothrond followed after,
and they drove on deep into the ranks of Angband. And seeing this the
host of the Noldor was set on fire, and Fingon put on his white helm,
and sounded his trumpets, and all his host leapt forth from the hills in
sudden onslaught. ]{#calibre_link-420 .calibre_class_4}

[The light of the drawing of the swords of the Noldor was like a fire in
a field of reeds; and so fell and swift was their onset that almost the
designs of Morgoth went astray. Before the decoying army that he had
sent west could be strengthened it was swept away and destroyed, and the
banners of Fingon passed over the Anfauglith and were raised before the
walls of Angband. ]{#calibre_link-422 .calibre_class_4}

[Ever in the forefront of that battle went Gwindor and the folk of
Nargothrond, and even now they could not be restrained; and they burst
through the outer gates and slew the guards within the very courts of
Angband; and Morgoth trembled upon his deep throne, hearing them beat
upon his doors. But Gwindor was trapped there and taken alive and his
folk slain ; for Fingon could not come to his aid. By many secret doors
in Thangorodrim Morgoth let forth his main strength that he had held in
waiting, and Fingon was beaten back with great loss from the walls of
Angband. ]{#calibre_link-424 .calibre_class_4}

[Then in the plain of the Anfauglith, on the fourth day of the war,
there began the Nirnaeth Arnoediad, all the sorrow of which no tale can
contain. Of all that befell in the eastward battle: of the routing of
Glaurung the Dragon by the Dwarves of Belegost; of the treachery of the
Easterlings and the overthrow of the host of Maedhros and the flight of
the sons of Fëanor, no more is here said. In the west the host of Fingon
retreated over the sands, and there fell Haldir son of Halmir and most
of the Men of Brethil. But on the fifth day as night fell, and they were
still far from Ered Wethrin, the armies of Angband surrounded the army
of Fingon, and they fought until day, pressed ever closer. In the
morning came hope, for the horns of Turgon were heard, as he marched up
with the main host of Gondolin; for Turgon had been stationed southward
guarding the passes of Sirion, and he had restrained most of his folk
from the rash onslaught. Now he hastened to the aid of his brother; and
the Noldor of Gondolin were strong and their rinks shone like a river of
steel in the sun, for the sword and harness of the least of the warriors
of Turgon was worth more than the ransom of any king among Men.
]{#calibre_link-426 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-17 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Now the phalanx of the guard of the King broke through the ranks of the
Orcs, and Turgon hewed his way to the side of his brother. And it is
said that the meeting of Turgon with Húrin who stood beside Fingon was
glad in the midst of the battle. For a while then the hosts of Angband
were driven back, and Fingon again began his retreat. But having routed
Maedhros in the east Morgoth had now great forces to spare, and before
Fingon and Turgon could come to the shelter of the hills they were
assailed by a tide of foes thrice greater than all the force that was
left to them. Gothmog, high-captain of Angband, was come; and he drove a
dark wedge between the Elven-hosts, surrounding King Fingon, and
thrusting Turgon and Húrin aside towards the Fen of Serech. Then he
turned upon Fingon. That was a grim meeting. At last Fingon stood alone
with his guard dead about him, and he fought with Gothmog, until a
Balrog came behind him and cast a thong of steel round him. Then Gothmog
hewed him with his black axe, and a white flame sprang up from the helm
of Fingon as it was cloven. Thus fell the King of the Noldor; and they
beat him into the dust with their maces, and his banner, blue and
silver, they trod into the mire of his blood. ]{#calibre_link-428
.calibre_class_4}

[The field was lost; but still Húrin and Huor and the remnant of the
House of Hador stood firm with Turgon of Gondolin; and the hosts of
Morgoth could not yet win the passes of Sirion. Then Húrin spoke to
Turgon, saying: \'Go now, lord, while time is! For you are the last of
the House of Fingolfin, and in you lives the last hope of the Eldar.
While Gondolin stands Morgoth shall still know fear in his heart.\'
]{#calibre_link-430 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Not long now can Gondolin remain hidden, and being discovered it must
fall,\' said Turgon. ]{#calibre_link-432 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Yet if it stands only a little while,\' said Huor, \'then out of your
house shall come the hope of Elves and Men. This I say to you, lord,
with the eyes of death: though we part here for ever, and I shall not
look on your white walls again, from you and from me a new star shall
arise. Farewell!\' ]{#calibre_link-434 .calibre_class_4}

[Maeglin, Turgon\'s sister-son, who stood by, heard these words and did
not forget them. ]{#calibre_link-436 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Turgon took the counsel of Húrin and Huor, and he gave orders that
his host should begin a retreat into the passes of Sirion; and his
captains Ecthelion and Glorfindel guarded the flanks to right and left
so that none of the enemy should pass them by, for the only road in that
region was narrow and ran near the west bank of the growing stream of
Sirion. But the Men of Dor-lómin held the rearguard, as Húrin and Huor
desired; for they did not wish in their hearts to escape from the
Northlands; and if they could not win back to their homes, there they
would stand to the end. So it was that Turgon fought his way southward,
until coming behind the guard of Húrin and Huor, he passed down Sirion
and escaped; and he vanished into the mountains and was hidden from the
eyes of Morgoth. But the brothers drew the remnant of the mighty men of
the House of Hador about them, and foot by foot they withdrew, until
they came behind the Fen of Serech, and had the stream of Rivil before
them. There they stood and gave way no more. ]{#calibre_link-438
.calibre_class_4}

[Then all the hosts of Angband swarmed against them, and they bridged
the stream with their dead, and encircled the remnant of Hithlum as a
gathering tide about a rock. There, as the Sun westered and the shadows
of the Ered Wethrin grew dark, Huor fell pierced with a venomed arrow in
the eye, and all the valiant men of Hador were slain about him in a
heap; and the Orcs hewed their heads and piled them as a mound of gold
in the sunset. ]{#calibre_link-440 .calibre_class_4}

[Last of all Húrin stood alone. Then he cast aside his shield, and
seized the axe of an orc-captain and wielded it two-handed; and it is
sung that the axe smoked in the black blood of the troll-guard of
Gothmog until it withered, and each time that he slew Húrin cried aloud:
*\'Aure entuluva!* ]{#calibre_link-442 .calibre_class_4}

[Day shall come again!\' Seventy times he uttered that cry; but they
took him at last alive, by the command of Morgoth, who thought thus to
do him more evil than by death. Therefore the Orcs grappled Húrin with
their hands, which clung to him still, though he hewed off their arms;
and ever their numbers were renewed, till he fell buried beneath them.
Then Gothmog bound him and dragged him to Angband with mockery.
]{#calibre_link-444 .calibre_class_4}
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-18 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Thus ended the Nirnaeth Arnoediad, as the Sun went down beyond the Sea.
Night fell in Hithlum, and ]{#calibre_link-446 .calibre_class_3}

[there came a great storm of wind out of the West. ]{#calibre_link-448
.calibre_class_4}

[Great was the triumph of Morgoth, though all the purposes of his malice
were not yet accomplished. One thought troubled him deeply and marred
his victory with unquiet: Turgon had escaped his net, of all his foes
the one whom he had most desired to take or destroy. For Turgon of the
great House of Fingolfin was now by right King of all the Noldor; and
Morgoth feared and hated the House of Fingolfin, because they had
scorned him in Valinor and had the friendship of Ulmo his foe; and
because of the wounds that Fingolfin gave him in battle. And most of all
Morgoth feared Turgon, for of old in Valinor his eye had lighted on him,
and whenever he drew near a dark shadow had fallen on his spirit,
foreboding that in some time that yet lay hidden in doom, from Turgon
ruin should come to him. ]{#calibre_link-450 .calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-19 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000004.jpg){.calibre12
shapes="_x0000_i1031"}]{#calibre_link-452 .calibre_class_5}

[Now by the command of Morgoth the Orcs with great labour gathered all
the bodies of their enemies, and all their harness and weapons, and
piled them in a mound in the midst of the plain of Anfauglith, and it
was like a great hill that could be seen from afar, and the Eldar named
it Haudh-en-Nirnaeth. But grass came there and grew again long and green
upon that hill alone in all the desert; and no servant of Morgoth
thereafter trod upon the earth beneath which the swords of the Eldar and
the Edain crumbled into rust. The realm of Fingon was no more, and the
Sons of Fëanor wandered as leaves before the wind. To Hithlum none of
the Men of Hador\'s House returned, nor any tidings of the battle and
the fate of their lords. But Morgoth sent thither Men who were under his
dominion, swarthy Easterlings; and he shut them in that land and forbade
them to leave it. This was all that he gave them of the rich rewards
that he had promised them for their treachery to Maedhros: to plunder
and harass the old and the children and womenfolk of Hador\'s people.
The remnant of the Eldar of Hithlum, all those who did not escape into
the wilds and the mountains, he took to the mines of Angband and they
became his thralls. But the Orcs went freely through all the North and
pressed ever southward into Beleriand. There Doriath yet remained, and
Nargothrond; but Morgoth gave little heed to them, either because he
knew little of them, or because their hour was not yet come in the
designs of his malice. But his thought ever returned to Turgon.
]{#calibre_link-454 .calibre_class_3}

[Therefore Húrin was brought before Morgoth, for Morgoth knew by his
arts and his spies that Húrin had the friendship of the King; and he
sought to daunt him with his eyes. But Húrin could not yet be daunted,
and he defied Morgoth. Therefore Morgoth had him chained and set in slow
torment; but after a while he came to him, and offered him his choice to
go free whither he would, or to receive power and rank as the greatest
of Morgoth\'s captains, if he would but reveal where Turgon had his
stronghold, and aught else that he knew of the King\'s counsels. But
Húrin the Steadfast mocked him, saying: \'Blind you are, Morgoth
Bauglir, and blind shall ever be, seeing only the dark. You know not
what rules the hearts of Men, and if you knew you could not give it. But
a fool is he who accepts what Morgoth offers. You will take first the
price and then withhold the promise; and I should get only death, if I
told you what you ask.\' ]{#calibre_link-456 .calibre_class_3}
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-20 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Then Morgoth laughed, and he said: \'Death you may yet crave of me as a
boon.\' Then he took Húrin to the Haudh-en-Nirnaeth, and it was then
new-built and the reek of death was upon it; and Morgoth set Húrin upon
its top and bade him look west towards Hithlum, and think of his wife
and his son and other kin. \'For they dwell now in my realm,\' said
Morgoth, \'and they are at my mercy.\' ]{#calibre_link-458
.calibre_class_4}

[\'You have none,\' answered Húrin. \'But you will not come at Turgon
through them; for they do not know his secrets.\' ]{#calibre_link-460
.calibre_class_4}

[Then wrath mastered Morgoth, and he said: \'Yet I may come at you, and
all your accursed house; and you shall be broken on my will, though you
all were made of steel.\' And he took up a long sword that lay there and
broke it before the eyes of Húrin, and a splinter wounded his face; but
Húrin did not blench. Then Morgoth stretching out his long arm towards
Dor-lómin cursed Húrin and Morwen and their offspring, saying: \'Behold!
The shadow of my thought shall lie upon them wherever they go, and my
hate shall pursue them to the ends of the world.\' ]{#calibre_link-462
.calibre_class_4}

[But Húrin said: \'You speak in vain. For you cannot see them, nor
govern them from afar: ndt while you keep this shape, and desire still
to be a King visible on earth.\' ]{#calibre_link-464 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Morgoth turned upon Húrin, and he said: \'Fool, little among Men,
and they are the least of all that speak! Have you seen the Valar, or
measured the power of Manwë and Varda? Do you know the reach of their
thought? Or do you think, perhaps, that their thought is upon you, and
that they may shield you from afar?\' ]{#calibre_link-466
.calibre_class_4}

[\'I know not,\' said Húrin. \'Yet so it might be, if they willed. For
the Elder King shall not be dethroned while Arda endures.\'
]{#calibre_link-468 .calibre_class_4}

[\'You say it,\' said Morgoth. \'I am the Elder King: Melkor, first and
mightiest of all the Valar, who was before the world, and made it. The
shadow of my purpose lies upon Arda, and all that is in it bends slowly
and surely to my will. But upon all whom you love my thought shall weigh
as a cloud of Doom, and it shall bring them down into darkness and
despair. Wherever they go, evil shall arise. Whenever they speak, their
words shall bring ill counsel. Whatsoever they do shall turn against
them. They shall die without hope, cursing both life and death.\'
]{#calibre_link-470 .calibre_class_4}

[But Húrin answered: \'Do you forget to whom you speak? Such things you
spoke long ago to our fathers; but we escaped from your shadow. And now
we have knowledge of you, for we have looked on the faces that have seen
the Light, and heard the voices that have spoken with Manwë. Before Arda
you were, but others also; and you did not make it. Neither are you the
most mighty; for you have spent your strength upon yourself and wasted
it in your own emptiness. No more are you now than an escaped thrall of
the Valar, and their chain still awaits you.\' ]{#calibre_link-472
.calibre_class_4}

[\'You have learned the lessons of your masters by rote,\' said Morgoth.
\'But such childish lore will not help you, now they are all fled
away.\' ]{#calibre_link-474 .calibre_class_4}

[\'This last then I will say to you, thrall Morgoth,\' said Húrin, \'and
it comes not from the lore of the Eldar, but is put into my heart in
this hour. You; are not the Lord of Men, and shall not be, though all
Aida and Menel fall in your dominion. Beyond the Circles of the World
you shall not pursue those who refuse you.\' ]{#calibre_link-476
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Beyond the Circles of the World I will not pursue them,\' said
Morgoth. \'For beyond the Circles of the World there is Nothing. But
within them they shall not escape me, until they enter into Nothing.\'
]{#calibre_link-478 .calibre_class_4}

[\'You lie,\' said Húrin. ]{#calibre_link-480 .calibre_class_4}

[\'You shall see and you shall confess that I do not lie,\' said
Morgoth. And taking Húrin back to Angband he set him in a chair of stone
upon a high place of Thangorodrim, from which he could see afar the land
of Hithlum in the west and the lands of Beleriand in the south. There he
was bound by the power of Morgoth; and Morgoth standing beside him
cursed him again and set his power upon him, so that he could not move
from that place, nor die, until Morgoth should release him.
]{#calibre_link-482 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Sit now there,\' said Morgoth, \'and look out upon the lands where
evil and despair shall come upon those whom you have delivered to me.
For you have dared to mock me, and have questioned the power of Melkor,
Master of the fates of Arda. Therefore with my eyes you shall see, and
with my ears you shall hear, and nothing shall be hidden from you.\'
]{#calibre_link-484 .calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-21 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000005.jpg){.calibre8
shapes="_x0000_i1032"}]{#calibre_link-486 .calibre_class_5}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-22 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000006.jpg){.calibre13
shapes="_x0000_i1033"}]{#calibre_link-488 .calibre_class_5}

[To Brethil three men only found their way back at last through
Taur-nu-Fuin, an evil road; and when Glóredhel Hador\'s daughter learned
of the fall of Haldir she grieved and died. ]{#calibre_link-490
.calibre_class_3}

[To Dor-lómin no tidings came. Rían wife of Huor fled into the wild
distraught; but she was aided by the Grey-elves of Mithrim, and when her
child, Tuor, was born they fostered him. But Rían went to the
Haudh-en-Nirnaeth, and laid herself down there, and died.
]{#calibre_link-492 .calibre_class_4}

[Morwen Eledhwen remained in Hithlum, silent in grief. Her son Túrin was
only in his ninth year, and she was again with child. Her days were
evil. The Easterlings came into the land in great numbers and they dealt
cruelly with the people of Hador, and robbed them of all that they
possessed and enslaved them. All the people of Húrin\'s homelands that
could work or serve any purpose they took away, even young girls and
boys, and the old they killed or drove out to starve. But they dared not
yet lay hands on the Lady of Dorlómin, or thrust her from her house; for
the word ran among them that she was perilous, and a witch who had
dealings with the white-fiends: for so they named the Elves, hating
them, but fearing them more. For this reason they also feared and
avoided the mountains, in which many of the Eldar had taken refuge,
especially in the south of the land; and after plundering and harrying
the Easterlings drew back northwards. For Húrin\'s house stood in the
south-east of Dor-lómin, and the mountains were near; Nen Lalaith indeed
came down from a spring under the shadow of Amon Darthir, over whose
shoulder there was a steep pass. By this the hardy could cross Ered
Wethrin and come down by the wells of Glithui into Beleriand. But this
was not known to the Easterüngs, nor to Morgoth yet; for all that
country, while the House of Fingolfin stood, was secure from him, and
none of his servants had ever come there. He trusted that Ered Wethrin
was a wall insurmountable, both against escape from the north and
against assault from the south; and there was indeed no other pass, for
the unwinged, between Serech and far westward where Dor-lómin marched
with Nevrast. ]{#calibre_link-494 .calibre_class_4}

[Thus it came to pass that after the first inroads Morwen was let be,
though there were men that lurked in the woods about and it was perilous
to stir far abroad. There still remained under Mprwen\'s shelter Sador
the woodwright and a few old men and women, and Túrin, whom she kept
close within the garth. But the homestead of Húrin soon fell into decay,
and though Morwen laboured hard she was poor, and would have gone hungry
but for the help that was sent to her secretly by Aerin, Húrin\'s
kinswoman; for a certain Brodda, one of the Easterlings, had taken her
by force to be his wife. Alms were bitter to Morwen; but she took this
aid for the sake of Túrin and her unborn child, and because, as she
said, it came of her own. For it was this Brodda who had seized the
people, the goods, and the cattle of Húrin\'s homelands, and carried
them off to his own dwellings. He was a bold man, but of small account
among his own people before they came to Hithlum; and so, seeking
wealth, he was ready to hold lands that others of his sort did not
covet. Morwen he had seen once, when he rode to her house on a foray;
but a great dread of her had seized him. He thought that he had looked
in the fell eyes of a white-fiend, and he was filled with a mortal fear
lest some evil should overtake him; and he did not ransack her house,
nor discover Túrin, else the life of the heir of the true lord would
have been short. ]{#calibre_link-496 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-23 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Brodda made thralls of the Strawheads, as he named the people of Hador,
and set them to build him a wooden hall in the land to the northward of
Húrin\'s house; and within a stockade his slaves were herded like cattle
in a byre, but ill guarded. Among them some could still be found uncowed
and ready to help the Lady of Dor-lómin, even at their peril; and from
them came secretly tidings of the land to Morwen, though there was
little hope in the news they brought. But Brodda took Aerin as a wife
and not a slave, for there were few women amongst his own following, and
none to compare with the daughters of the Edain; and he hoped to make
himself a lordship in that country, and have an heir to hold it after
him. ]{#calibre_link-498 .calibre_class_4}

[Of what had happened and of what might happen in the days to come
Morwen said little to Túrin; and he feared to break her silence with
questions. When the East-erlings first came into Dor-lómin he said to
his mother: \'When will my father come back, to cast out these ugly
thieves? Why does he not come?\' ]{#calibre_link-500 .calibre_class_4}

[Morwen answered: \'I do not know. It may be that he was slain, or that
he is held captive; or again it may be that he was driven far away, and
cannot yet return through the foes that surround us.\'
]{#calibre_link-502 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Then I think that he is dead,\' said Túrin, and before his mother he
restrained his tears; \'for no one could keep him from coming back to
help us, i he were alive.\' ]{#calibre_link-504 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I do not think that either of those things are true, my son,\' said
Morwen. ]{#calibre_link-506 .calibre_class_4}

[As the time lengthened the heart of Morwen grew darker for her son
Túrin, heir of Dor-lómin and Ladros; for she could see no hope for him
better than to become a slave of the Easterling men, before he was much
older. Therefore she remembered her words with Húrin, and her thought
turned again to Doriath; and she resolved at last to send Túrin away in
secret, if she could, and to beg King Thingol to harbour him. And as she
sat and pondered how this might be done, she heard clearly in her
thought the voice of Húrin saying to her: *Go swiftly! Do not wait for
me!* But the birth of her child was drawing near, and the road would be
hard and perilous; the more that went the less hope of escape. And her
heart still cheated her with hope unadmitted; her inmost thought
foreboded that Húrin was not dead, and she listened for his footfall in
the sleepless watches of the night, or would wake thinking that she had
heard in the courtyard the neigh of Arroch his horse. Moreover, though
she was willing that her son should be fostered in the halls of another,
after the manner of that time, she would not yet humble her pride to be
an alms-guest, not even of a king. Therefore the voice of Húrin, or the
memory of his voice, was denied, and the first strand of the fate of
Túrin was woven. ]{#calibre_link-508 .calibre_class_4}

[Autumn of the Year of Lamentation was drawing on before Morwen came to
this resolve, and then she was in haste; for the time for journeying was
short, but she dreaded that Túrin would be taken, if she waited over
winter. Easterlings were prowling round the garth and spying on the
house. Therefore she said suddenly to Túrin: \'Your father does not
come. So you must go, and soon. It is as he would wish.\'
]{#calibre_link-510 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Go?\' cried Túrin. \'Whither shall we go? Over the Mountains?\'
]{#calibre_link-512 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Yes,\' said Morwen, \'over the Mountains, away south. South - that
way some hope may lie. But I did not say *we,* my son. You must go, but
I must stay.\' ]{#calibre_link-514 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I cannot go alone!\' said Túrin. \'I will not leave you. Why should
we not go together?\' ]{#calibre_link-516 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-24 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'I cannot go,\' said Morwen. \'But you will not go alone. I shall send
Gethron with you, and Grithnir too, perhaps.\' ]{#calibre_link-518
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Will you not send Labadal?\' said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-520
.calibre_class_4}

[\'No, for Sador is lame,\' said Morwen, \'and it will be a hard road.
And since you are my son and the days are grim, I will not speak softly:
you may die on that road. The year is getting late. But if you stay, you
will come to a worse end: to be a thrall. If you wish to be a man, when
you come to a man\'s age, you will do as I bid, bravely.\'
]{#calibre_link-522 .calibre_class_4}

[\'But I shall leave you only with Sador, and blind Ragnir, and the old
women,\' said Túrin. \'Did not my father say that I am the heir of
Hador? The heir should stay in Hador\'s house to defend it. Now I wish
that I still had my knife!\' ]{#calibre_link-524 .calibre_class_4}

[\'The heir should stay, but he cannot,\' said Morwen. \'But he may
return one day. Now take heart! I will follow you, if things grow worse;
if I can.\' ]{#calibre_link-526 .calibre_class_4}

[\'But how will you find me, lost in the wild? said Túrin; and suddenly
his heart failed him, and he wept openly. ]{#calibre_link-528
.calibre_class_4}

[\'If you wail, other things will\* find you first,\' said Morwen. \'But
I know whither you are going, and if you come there, and if you remain
there, there I will find you, if I can. For I am sending you to King
Thingol in Doriath. Would you not rather be a king\'s guest than a
thrall?\' ]{#calibre_link-530 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I do not know,\' said Túrin. \'I do not know what a thrall is.\'
]{#calibre_link-532 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I am sending you away so that you need not learn it,\' Morwen
answered. Then she set Túrin before her and looked into his eyes, as if
she were trying to read some riddle there. \'It is hard, Túrin, my
son,\' she said at length. \'Not hard for you only. It is heavy on me in
evil days to judge what is best to do. But I do as I think right; for
why else should I part with the thing most dear that is left to me?\'
]{#calibre_link-534 .calibre_class_4}

[They spoke no more of this together, and Túrin was grieved and
bewildered. In the morning he went to find Sador, who had been hewing
sticks for firing, of which they had little, for they dared not stray
out in the woods; and now he leant on his crutch and looked at the great
chair of Húrin, which had been thrust unfinished in a corner. \'It must
go,\' he said, \'for only bare needs can be served in these days.\'
]{#calibre_link-536 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Do not break it yet,\' said Túrin. \'Maybe he will come home, and
then it will please him to see what you have done for him while he was
away.\' ]{#calibre_link-538 .calibre_class_4}

[\'False hopes are more dangerous than fears,\' said Sador, \'and they
will not keep us warm this winter.\' He fingered the carving on the
chair, and sighed. \'I wasted my time,\' he said, \'though the hours
seemed pleasant. But all such things are short-lived; and the joy in the
making is their only true end, I guess. And now I might as well give you
back your gift.\' ]{#calibre_link-540 .calibre_class_4}

[Túrin put out his hand, and quickly withdrew it. \'A man does not take
back his gifts,\' he said. ]{#calibre_link-542 .calibre_class_4}

[\'But if it is my own, may I not give it as I will?\' said Sador.
]{#calibre_link-544 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Yes,\' said Túrin, \'to any man but me. But why should you wish to
give it?\' ]{#calibre_link-546 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I have no hope of using it for worthy tasks,\' Sador said. \'There
will be no work for Labadal in days to come but thrall-work.\'
]{#calibre_link-548 .calibre_class_4}

[\'What is a thrall?\' said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-550 .calibre_class_4}

[\'A man who was a man but is treated as a beast,\' Sador answered.
\'Fed only to keep alive, kept alive only to toil, toiling only for fear
of pain or death. And from these robbers he may get pain or death just
for their sport. I hear that they pick some of the fleet-footed and hunt
them with hounds. They have learned quicker from the Orcs than we learnt
from the Fair Folk.\' ]{#calibre_link-552 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Now I understand things better,\' said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-554
.calibre_class_4}

[\'It is a shame that you should have to understand such things so
soon,\' said Sador; then seeing the strange look on Túrin\'s face:
\'What do you understand now?\' ]{#calibre_link-556 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Why my mother is sending me away,\' said Túrin, and tears filled his
eyes. ]{#calibre_link-558 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Ah!\' said Sador, and he muttered to himself: \'But why so long
delayed?\' Then turning to Túrin he said: \'That does not seem news for
tears to me. But you should not speak your mother\'s counsels aloud to
Labadal, or to anyone. All walls and fences have ears these days, ears
that do not grow on fair heads.\' ]{#calibre_link-560 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-25 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'But I must speak with someone!\' said Túrin. \'I have always told
things to you. I do not want to leave you, Labadal. I do not want to
leave this house or my mother.\' ]{#calibre_link-562 .calibre_class_4}

[\'But if you do not,\' said Sador, \'soon there will be an end of the
House of Hador for ever, as you must understand now. Labadal does not
want you to go; but Sador servant of Húrin will be happier when Húrin\'s
son is out of the reach of the Easterlings. Well, well, it cannot be
helped: we must say farewell. Now will you not take my knife as a
parting gift?\' ]{#calibre_link-564 .calibre_class_4}

[\'No!\' said Túrin. \'I am going to the Elves, to the King of Doriath,
my mother says. There I may get other things like it. But I shall not be
able to send you any gifts, Labadal. I shall be far away and all
alone.\' Then Túrin wept; but Sador said to him: \'Hey now! Where is
Húrin\'s son? For I heard him say, not long ago: *I shall go as a
soldier with an Elf-king, as soon as I am able.\'* ]{#calibre_link-566
.calibre_class_3}

[Then Túrin stayed his tears, and he said: \'Very well: if those were
the words of the son of Húrin, he must keep them, and go. But whenever I
say that I will do this or that, it looks very different when the time
comes. Now I am unwilling. I must take care not to say such things
again.\' ]{#calibre_link-568 .calibre_class_4}

[\'It would be best indeed,\' said Sador. \'So most men teach, and few
men learn. Let the unseen days be. Today is more than enough.\'
]{#calibre_link-570 .calibre_class_4}

[Now Túrin was made ready for the journey, and he bade farewell to his
mother, and departed in secret with his two companions. But when they
bade Túrin turn and look back upon the house of his father, then the
anguish of parting smote him like a sword, and he cried: \'Morwen,
Morwen, when shall I see you again?\' But Morwen standing on her
threshold heard the echo of that cry in the wooded hills, and she
clutched the post of the door so that her fingers were torn. This was
the first of the sorrows of Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-572 .calibre_class_4}

[Early in the year after Túrin was gone Morwen gave birth to her child,
and she named her Niënor, which is Mourning; but Túrin was already far
away when she was born. Long and evil was his road, for the power of
Morgoth was ranging far abroad; but he had as guides Gethron and
Grithnir, who had been young in the days of Hador, and though they were
now aged they were valiant, and they knew well the lands, for they had
journeyed often through Beleriand in former times. Thus by fate and
courage they passed over the Shadowy Mountains, and coming down into the
Vale of Sirion they passed into the Forest of Brethil; and at last,
weary and haggard, they reached the confines of Doriath. But there they
became bewildered, and were enmeshed in the mazes of the Queen, and
wandered lost amid the pathless trees, until all their food was spent.
There they came near to death, for winter came cold from the North; but
not so light was Túrin\'s doom. Even as they lay in despair they heard a
horn sounded. Beleg the Strong-bow was hunting in that region, for he
dwelt ever on the marches of Doriath, and he was the greatest woodsman
of those days. He heard their cries and came to them, and when he had
given them food and drink he learned their names and whence they came,
and he was filled with wonder and pity. And he looked with liking upon
Túrin, for he had the beauty of his mother and the eyes of his father,
and he was sturdy and strong. ]{#calibre_link-574 .calibre_class_4}

[\'What boon would you have of King Thingol?\' said Beleg to the boy.
]{#calibre_link-576 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I would be one of his knights, to ride against Morgoth, and avenge my
father,\' said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-578 .calibre_class_4}

[\'That may well be, when the years have increased you,\' said Beleg.
\'For though you are yet small you have the makings of a valiant man,
worthy to be a son of Húrin the Steadfast, if that were possible.\' For
the name of Húrin was held in honour in all the lands of the Elves.
Therefore Beleg gladly became the guide of the wanderers, and he led
them to a lodge where he dwelt at that time with other hunters, and
there they were housed while a messenger went to Menegroth. And when
word came back that Thingol and Melian would receive the son of Húrin
and his guardians, Beleg led them by secret ways into the Hidden
Kingdom. ]{#calibre_link-580 .calibre_class_4}

[Thus Túrin came to the great bridge over the Esgalduin, and passed the
gates of Thingol\'s halls; and as a child he gazed upon the marvels of
Menegroth, which no mortal Man before had seen, save Beren only. Then
Gethron spoke the message of Morwen before Thingol and Melian; and
Thingol received them kindly, and set Túrin upon his knee in honour of
Húrin, mightiest of Men, and of Beren his kinsman. And those that saw
this marvelled, for it was a sign that Thingol took Túrin as his
foster-son; and that was not at that time done by kings, nor ever again
by Elf-lord to a Man. Then Thingol said to him: \'Here, son of Húrin,
shall your home be; and in all your life you shall be held as my son,
Man though you be. Wisdom shall be given you beyond the measure of
mortal Men, and the weapons of the Elves shall be set in your hands.
Perhaps the time may come when you shall regain the lands of your father
in Hithlum; but dwell now here in love.\' ]{#calibre_link-582
.calibre_class_4}
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-26 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Thus began the sojourn of Túrin in Doriath. With him remained for a
while Gethron and Grithnir his guardians, though they yearned to return
again to their lady in Dor-lómin. Then age and sickness came upon
Grithnir, and he stayed beside Túrin until he died; but Gethron
departed, and Thingol sent with him an escort to guide him and guard
him, and they brought words from Thingol to Morwen. They came at last to
Húrin\'s house, and when Morwen learned that Túrin was received with
honour in the halls of Thingol her grief was lightened; and the Elves
brought also rich gifts from Melian, and a message bidding her return
with Thingol\'s folk to Doriath. For Melian was wise and foresighted,
and she hoped thus to avert the evil that was prepared in the thought of
Morgoth. But Morwen would not depart from her house, for her heart was
yet unchanged and her pride still high; moreover Niënor was a babe in
arms. Therefore she dismissed the Elves of Doriath with her thanks, and
gave them in gift the last small things of gold that remained to her,
concealing her poverty; and she bade them take back to Thingol the Helm
of Hador. But Túrin watched ever for the return of Thingol\'s
messengers; and when they came back alone he fled into the woods and
wept, for he knew of Melian\'s bidding and he had hoped that Morwen
would come. This was the second sorrow of Túrin. When the messengers
spoke Morwen\'s answer, Melian was moved with pity, perceiving her mind;
and she saw that the fate which she foreboded could not lightly be set
aside. ]{#calibre_link-584 .calibre_class_4}

[The Helm of Hador was given into Thingol\'s hands. That helm was made
of grey steel adorned with gold, and on it were graven runes of victory.
A power was in it that guarded any who wore it from wound or death, for
the sword that hewed it was broken, and the dart that smote it sprang
aside. It was wrought by Telchar, the smith of Nogrod, whose works were
renowned. It had a visor (after the manner of those that the Dwarves
used in their forges for the shielding of their eyes), and the face of
one that wore it struck fear into the hearts of all beholders, but was
itself guarded from dart and fire. Upon its crest was set in defiance a
gilded image of Glaurung the dragon; for it had been made soon after he
first issued from the gates of Morgoth. Often Hador, and Galdor after
him, had borne it in war; and the hearts of the host of Hithlum were
uplifted when they saw it towering high amid the battle, and they cried:
\'Of more worth is the Dragon of Dorlómin than the gold-worm of
Angband!\' But Húrin did not wear the Dragon-helm with ease, and in any
case he would not use it, for he said: \'I would rather look on my foes
with my true face.\' Nonetheless he accounted the helm among the
greatest heirlooms of his house. ]{#calibre_link-586 .calibre_class_4}

[Now Thingol had in Menegroth deep armouries filled with great wealth of
weapons: metal wrought like fishes\' mail and shining like water in the
moon; swords and axes, shields and helms, wrought by Telchar himself or
by his master Gamil Zirak the old, or by elven-wrights more skilful
still. For some things he had received in gift that came out of Valinor
and were wrought by Fëanor in his mastery, than whom no craftsman was
greater in all the days of the world. Yet Thingol handled the Helm of
Hador as though his hoard were scanty, and he spoke courteous words,
saying: \'Proud were the head that bore this helm, which the sires of
Húrin bore.\' ]{#calibre_link-588 .calibre_class_4}

[Then a thought came to him, and he summoned Túrin, and told him that
Morwen had sent to her son a mighty thing, the heirloom of his fathers.
\'Take now the Dragonhead of the North,\' he said, \'and when the time
comes wear it well.\' But Túrin was yet too young to lift the helm, and
he heeded it not because of the sorrow of his heart. ]{#calibre_link-590
.calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-27 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000007.jpg){.calibre14
shapes="_x0000_i1034"}]{#calibre_link-592 .calibre_class_5}

[In the years of his childhood in the kingdom of Doriath Túrin was
watched over by Melian, though he saw her seldom. But there was a maiden
named Nellas, who lived in the woods; and at Melian\'s bidding she would
follow Túrin if he strayed in the forest, and often she met him there,
as it were by chance. Then they played together, or walked hand in hand;
for he grew swiftly, whereas she seemed no more than a maiden of his own
age, and was so in heart for all her elven-years. From Nellas Túrin
learned much concerning the ways and the wild things of Doriath, and she
taught him to speak the Sindarin tongue after the manner of the ancient
realm, older, and more courteous, and richer in beautiful words. Thus
for a little while his mood was lightened, until he fell again under
shadow, and that friendship passed like a morning of spring. For Nellas
did not go to Menegroth, and was unwilling ever to walk under roofs of
stone; so that as Túrin\'s boyhood passed and he turned his thoughts to
deeds of men, he saw her less and less often, and at last called for her
no more. But she watched over him still, though now she remained
hidden.  ]{#calibre_link-594 .calibre_class_3}

[Nine years Túrin dwelt in the halls of Menegroth. His heart and thought
turned ever to his own kin, and at times he had tidings of them for his
own comfort. For Thingol sent messengers to Morwen as often as he might,
and she sent back words for her son; thus Túrin heard that Morwen\'s
plight was eased, and that his sister Niënor grew in beauty, a flower in
the grey North. And Túrin grew in stature until he became tall among Men
and surpassed that of the Elves of Doriath, and his strength and
hardihood were renowned in the realm of Thingol. In those years he
learned much lore, hearing eagerly the histories of ancient days and
great deeds of old, and he became thoughtful, and sparing in speech.
Often Beleg Strongbow came to Menegroth to seek him, and led him far
afield, teaching him woodcraft and archery and (which he liked more) the
handling of swords; but in crafts of making he had less skill, for he
was slow to learn his own strength, and often marred what he made with
some sudden stroke. In other matters also it seemed that fortune was
unfriendly to him, so that often what he designed went awry, and what he
desired he did not gain; neither did he win friendship easily, for he
was not merry, and laughed seldom, and a shadow lay on his youth.
Nonetheless he was held in love and esteem by those who knew him well,
and he had honour as the fosterling of the King. ]{#calibre_link-596
.calibre_class_3}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-28 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Yet there was one in Doriath that begrudged him this, and ever the more
as Túrin drew nearer to manhood: Saeros was his name. He was proud,
dealing haughtily with those whom he deemed of lesser state and worth
than himself. He became a friend of Daeron the minstrel, for he also was
skilled in song; and he had no love for Men, and least of all for any
kinsman of Beren One-hand. \'Is it not strange,\' said he, \'that this
land should be opened to yet another of this unhappy race? Did not the
other do harm enough in Doriath?\' Therefore he looked askance at Túrin
and on all that he did, saying what ill he could of it; but his words
were cunning and his malice veiled. If he met with Túrin alone, he spoke
haughtily to him and showed plain his contempt; and Túrin grew weary of
him, though for long he returned ill words with silence, for Saeros was
great among the people of Doriath and a counsellor of the King. But the
silence of Túrin displeased Saeros as much as his words.
]{#calibre_link-598 .calibre_class_4}

[In the year that Túrin was seventeen years old, his grief was renewed;
for all tidings from his home ceased at that time. The power of Morgoth
had grown yearly, and all Hithlum was now under his shadow. Doubtless he
knew much of the doings of Húrin\'s people and kin, and had not molested
them for a while, so that his design might be fulfilled; but now in
pursuit of this purpose he set a close watch on all the passed of the
Shadowy Mountains, so that none might come out of Hithlum nor enter it,
save at great peril, and the Orcs swarmed about the sources of Narog and
Teiglin and the upper waters of Sirion. Thus there came a time when the
messengers of Thingol did not return, and he would send no more. He was
ever loath to let any stray beyond the guarded borders, and in nothing
had he shown greater good will to Húrin and his kin than in sending his
people on the dangerous roads to Morwen in Dor-lómin.
]{#calibre_link-600 .calibre_class_4}

[Now Túrin grew heavy-hearted, not knowing what new evil was afoot, and
fearing that an ill fate had befallen Morwen and Niënor; and for many
days he sat silent, brooding on the downfall of the House of Hador and
the Men of the North. Then he rose up and went to seek Thingol; and he
found him sitting with Melian under Hirilorn, the great beech of
Menegroth. ]{#calibre_link-602 .calibre_class_4}

[Thingol looked on Túrin in wonder, seeing suddenly before him in the
place of his fosterling a Man and a stranger, tall, dark-haired, looking
at him with deep eyes in a white face, stern and proud; but he did not
speak. ]{#calibre_link-604 .calibre_class_4}

[\'What do you desire, foster-son?\' said Thingol, and guessed that he
would ask for nothing small. ]{#calibre_link-606 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Mail, sword, and shield of my stature, lord,\' answered Túrin. \'Also
by your leave I will now reclaim the Dragon-helm of my sires.\'
]{#calibre_link-608 .calibre_class_4}

[\'These you shall have,\' said Thingol. \'But what need have you yet of
such arms?\' ]{#calibre_link-610 .calibre_class_4}

[\'The need of a man,\' said Túrin; \'and of a son who has kin to
remember. And I need also companions valiant in arms.\'
]{#calibre_link-612 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I will appoint you a place among my knights of the sword, for the
sword will ever be your weapon,\' said Thingol. \'With them you may make
trial of war upon the marches, if that is your desire.\'
]{#calibre_link-614 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Beyond the marches of Doriath my heart urges me,\' said Túrin. \'For
onset against our foe I long, rather than defence.\' ]{#calibre_link-616
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Then you must go alone,\' said Thingol. \'The part of my people in
the war with Angband I rule according to my wisdom, Túrin son of Húrin.
No force of the arms of Doriath will I send out at this time; nor at any
time that I can yet foresee.\' ]{#calibre_link-618 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Yet you are free to go as you will, son of Morwen,\' said Melian.
\'The Girdle of Melian does not hinder the going of those that passed in
with our leave.\' ]{#calibre_link-620 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Unless wise counsel will restrain you,\' said Thingol.
]{#calibre_link-622 .calibre_class_4}

[\'What is your counsel, lord?\' said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-624
.calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-29 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'A Man you seem in stature, and indeed more than many already,\'
Thingol answered; \'but nonetheless you have not come to the fullness of
your manhood that shall be. Until that is achieved, you should be
patient, testing and training your strength. Then, maybe, you can
remember your kin; but there is little hope that one Man alone can do
more against the Dark Lord than to aid the Elf-lords in their defence,
as long as that may last.\' ]{#calibre_link-626 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin said: \'Beren my kinsman did more.\' ]{#calibre_link-628
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Beren, and Lúthien,\' said Melian. \'But you are overbold to speak so
to the father of Lúthien. Not so high is your destiny, I think, Túrin
son of Morwen, though greatness is in you, and your fate is twined with
that of the Elven-folk, for good or for ill. Beware of yourself, lest it
be ill.\' Then after a silence she spoke to him again, saying: \'Go now,
fosterson; and take the advice of the King. That will ever be wiser than
your own counsel. Yet I do not think that you will long abide with us in
Doriath beyond the coming of manhood. If in days to come you remember
the words of Melian, it will be for your good: fear both the heat and
the cold of your heart, and strive for patience, if you can.\'
]{#calibre_link-630 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin bowed before them, and took his leave. And soon after he put
on the Dragon-helm, and took arms, and went away to the north-marches,
and was joined to the elven-warriors who there waged unceasing war upon
the Orcs and all servants and creatures of Morgoth. Thus while yet
scarcely out of his boyhood his strength and courage were proved; and
remembering the wrongs of his kin he was ever forward in deeds of
daring, and he received many wounds by spear or arrow or the crooked
blades of the Orcs. ]{#calibre_link-632 .calibre_class_4}

[But his doom delivered him from death; and word ran through the woods,
and was heard far beyond Doriath, that the Dragon-helm of Dor-lómin was
seen again. Then many wondered, saying: \'Can the spirit of any man
return from death; or has Húrin of Hithlum escaped indeed from the pits
of Hell?\' ]{#calibre_link-634 .calibre_class_4}

[One only was mightier in arms among the march-wardens of Thingol at
that time than Túrin, and that was Beleg Strongbow; and Beleg and Túrin
were companions in every peril, and walked far and wide in the wild
woods together. ]{#calibre_link-636 .calibre_class_4}

[Thus three years passed, and in that time Túrin came seldom to
Thingol\'s halls; and he cared no longer for his looks or his attire,
but his hair was unkempt, and his mail covered with a grey cloak stained
with the weather. But it chanced in the third summer after Túrin\'s
departure, when he was twenty years old, that desiring rest and needing
smithwork for the repair of his arms he came unlooked for to Menegroth,
and went one evening into the hall. Thingol was not there, for he was
abroad in the greenwood with Melian, as was his delight at times in the
high summer. Túrin took a seat without heed, for he was wayworn, and
filled with thought; and by ill-luck he set himself at a board among the
elders of the realm, and in that place where Saeros was accustomed to
sit. Saeros, entering late, was angered, believing that Túrin had done
this in pride, and with intent to affront him; and his anger was not
lessened to find that Túrin was not rebuked by those that sat there, but
was welcomed as one worthy to sit among them. ]{#calibre_link-638
.calibre_class_4}

[For a while therefore Saeros feigned to be of like mind, and took
another seat, facing Túrin across the board. ]{#calibre_link-640
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Seldom does the march-warden favour us with his company,\' he said;
\'and I gladly yield my accustomed seat for the chance of speech with
him.\' But Túrin, who was in converse with Mablung the Hunter, did not
rise, and said only a curt \'I thank you\'. ]{#calibre_link-642
.calibre_class_4}

[Saeros then plied him with questions, concerning the news from the
borders, and his deeds in the wild; but though his words seemed fair,
the mockery in his voice could not be mistaken. Then Túrin became weary,
and he looked about him, and knew the bitterness of exile; and for all
the light and laughter of the Elven-halls his thought turned to Beleg
and their life in the woods, and thence far away, to Morwen in Dorlómin
in the house of his father; and he frowned, because of the darkness of
his thoughts, and made no answer to Saeros. At this, believing the frown
aimed at himself, Saeros restrained his anger no longer; and he took out
a golden comb, and cast it on the board before Túrin, crying:
\'Doubtless, Man of Hithlum, you came in haste to this table, and may be
excused your ragged cloak; but there is no need to leave your head
untended as a thicket of brambles. And maybe if your ears were uncovered
you would heed better what is said to you.\' ]{#calibre_link-644
.calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-30 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Túrin said nothing, but turned his eyes upon Saeros, and there was a
glint in their darkness. But Saeros did not heed the warning, and
returned the gaze with scorn, saying for all to hear: \'If the Men of
Hithlum are so wild and fell, of what sort are the women of that land?
Do they run like the deer clad only in their hair?\' ]{#calibre_link-646
.calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin took up a drinking-vessel and cast it in Saeros\' face, and
he fell backward with great hurt; and Túrin drew his sword and would
have run at him, but Mablung restrained him. Then Saeros rising spat
blood upon the board, and spoke as best he could with a broken mouth:
\'How long shall we harbour this woodwose? Who rules here tonight? The
King\'s law is heavy upon those who hurt his lieges in the hall; and for
those who draw blades there outlawry is the least doom. Outside the hall
I could answer you, Woodwose!\' ]{#calibre_link-648 .calibre_class_4}

[But when Túrin saw the blood upon the table his mood became cold; and
with a shrug he released himself from Mablung and left the hall without
a word. ]{#calibre_link-650 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Mablung said to Saeros: \'What ails you tonight? For this evil I
hold you to blame; and maybe the King\'s law will judge a broken mouth a
just return for your taunting.\' ]{#calibre_link-652 .calibre_class_4}

[\'If the cub has a grievance, let him bring it to the King\'s
judgement,\' answered Saeros. \'But the drawing of swords here is not to
be excused for any such cause. Outside the hall, if the woodwose draws
on me, I shall kill him.\' ]{#calibre_link-654 .calibre_class_4}

[\'It might well go otherwise,\' said Mablung. \'But if either be slain
it will be an evil deed, more fit for Angband than Doriath, and more
evil will come of it. Indeed I feel that some shadow of the North has
reached out to touch us tonight. Take heed, Saeros, lest you do the will
of Morgoth in your pride, and remember that you are of the Eldar.\'
]{#calibre_link-656 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I do not forget it,\' said Saeros; but he did not abate his wrath,
and through the night his malice grew, nursing his injury.
]{#calibre_link-658 .calibre_class_4}

[In the morning he waylaid Túrin, as he set off early from Menegroth,
intending to go back to the marches. Túrin had gone only a little way
when Saeros ran out upon him from behind with drawn sword and shield on
arm. But Túrin, trained in the wild to wariness, saw him from the corner
of his eye, and leaping aside he drew swiftly and turned upon his foe.
\'Morwen!\' he cried, \'now your mocker shall pay for his scorn!\' And
he clove Saeros\' shield, and then they fought together with swift
blades. But Túrin had been long in a hard school, and had grown as agile
as any Elf, but stronger. He soon had the mastery, and wounding Saeros\'
sword-arm he had him at his mercy. Then he set his foot on the sword
that Saeros had let fall. \'Saeros,\' he said, \'there is a long race
before you, and clothes will be a hindrance; hair must suffice.\' And
suddenly throwing him to the ground he stripped him, and Saeros felt
Túrin\'s great strength, and was afraid. But Túrin let him up, and then
\'Run, run, mocker of women!\' he cried. \'Run! And unless you go swift
as the deer I shall prick you on from behind.\' Then he set the point of
the sword in Saeros\' buttock; and he fled into the wood, crying wildly
for help in his terror; but Túrin came after him like a hound, and
however he ran, or swerved, still the sword was behind him to egg him
on. ]{#calibre_link-660 .calibre_class_4}

[The cries of Saeros brought many others to the chase, and they followed
after, but only the swiftest could keep up with the runners. Mablung was
in the forefront of these, and he was troubled in mind, for though the
taunting had seemed evil to him, \'malice that wakes in the morning is
the mirth of Morgoth ere night\'; and it was held moreover a grievous
thing to put any of the Elven-folk to shame, self-willed, without the
matter being brought to judgement. None knew at that time that Túrin had
been assailed first by Saeros, who would have slain him.
]{#calibre_link-662 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Hold, hold, Túrin!\' he cried. \'This is Orc-work in the woods!\'
\'Ore-work there was; this is only Orc-play,\' Túrin called back. Before
Mablung spoke he had been on the point of releasing Saeros, but now with
a shout he sprang after him again; and Saeros, despairing at last of aid
and thinking his death close behind, ran wildly on, until he came
suddenly to a brink where a stream that fed Esgalduin flowed in a deep
cleft through high rocks, and it was wide for a deer-leap. In his terror
Saeros attempted the leap; but he failed of his footing on the far side
and fell back with a cry, and was broken on a great stone in the water.
So he ended his life in Doriath; and long would Mandos hold him.
]{#calibre_link-664 .calibre_class_4}

[Túrin looked down on his body lying in the stream, and he thought:
\'Unhappy fool! From here I would have let him walk back to Menegroth.
Now he has laid a guilt upon me undeserved.\' And he turned and looked
darkly on Mablung and his companions, who now came up and stood near him
on the brink. Then after a silence Mablung said gravely: \'Alas! But
come back now with us, Túrin, for the King must judge these deeds.\'
]{#calibre_link-666 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-31 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[But Túrin said: \'If the King were just, he would judge me guiltless.
But was not this one of his counsellors? Why should a just king choose a
heart of malice for his friend? I abjure his law and his judgement.\'
]{#calibre_link-668 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Your words are too proud,\' said Mablung, though he pitied the young
man. \'Learn wisdom! You shall not turn runagate. I bid you return with
me, as a friend. And there are other witnesses. When the King learns the
truth you may hope for his pardon.\' ]{#calibre_link-670
.calibre_class_4}

[But Túrin was weary of the Elven-halls, and he feared lest he be held
captive; and he said to Mablung: \'I refuse your bidding. I will not
seek King Thingol\'s pardon for nothing; and I will go now where his
doom cannot find me. You have but two choices: to let me go free, or to
slay me, if that would fit your law. For you are too few to take me
alive.\' ]{#calibre_link-672 .calibre_class_4}

[They saw by the fire in his eyes that this was true, and they let him
pass. \'One death is enough,\' said Mablung. ]{#calibre_link-674
.calibre_class_4}

[\'I did not will it, but I do not mourn it,\' said Túrin. \'May Mandos
judge him justly; and if ever he return to the lands of the living, may
he prove wiser. Farewell!\' ]{#calibre_link-676 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Fare free!\' said Mablung; \'for that is your wish. To say *well*
would be vain, if you go in this way. A shadow is over you. When we meet
again, may it be no darker.\' ]{#calibre_link-678 .calibre_class_4}

[To that Túrin made no answer, but left them, and went swiftly away,
alone, none knew whither. ]{#calibre_link-680 .calibre_class_4}

[It is told that when Túrin did not return to the north-marches of
Doriath and no tidings could be heard of him, ]{#calibre_link-682
.calibre_class_4}

[Beleg Strongbow came himself to Menegroth to seek him; and with heavy
heart he gathered news of Túrin\'s deeds and flight. Soon afterwards
Thingol and Melian came back to their halls, for the summer was waning;
and when the King heard report of what had passed he said: \'This is a
grievous matter, which I must hear in full. Though Saeros, my
counsellor, is slain, and Túrin my foster-son has fled, tomorrow I will
sit in the seat of judgement, and hear again all in due order, before I
speak my doom.\' ]{#calibre_link-684 .calibre_class_4}

[Next day the King sat upon his throne in his court, and about him were
all the chiefs and elders of Doriath. Then many witnesses were heard,
and of these Mablung spoke most and clearest. And as he told of the
quarrel at table, it seemed to the King that Mablung\'s heart leaned to
Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-686 .calibre_class_4}

[\'You speak as a friend of Túrin son of Húrin?\' said Thingol. \'I was,
but I have loved truth more and longer,\' Mablung answered. \'Hear me to
the end, lord!\' ]{#calibre_link-688 .calibre_class_4}

[When all was told, even to the parting words of Túrin, Thingol sighed;
and he looked on those that sat before him, and he said: \'Alas! I see a
shadow on your faces. How has it stolen into my realm? Malice is at work
here. Saeros I accounted faithful and wise; but if he lived he would
feel my anger, for his taunting was evil, and I hold him to blame for
all that chanced in the hall. So far Túrin has my pardon. But I cannot
pass over his later deeds, when wrath should have cooled. The shaming of
Saeros and the hounding of him to his death were wrongs greater than the
offence. They show a heart hard and proud.\' ]{#calibre_link-690
.calibre_class_4}

[Then Thingol sat for a while in thought, and spoke sadly at last.
\'This is an ungrateful foster-son, and in truth a man too proud for his
state. How can I still harbour one who scorns me and my law, or pardon
one who will not repent? This must be my doom. I will banish Túrin from
Doriath. If he seeks entry he shall be brought to judgement before me;
and until he sues for pardon at my feet he is my son no longer. If any
here accounts this unjust, let him speak now!\' ]{#calibre_link-692
.calibre_class_4}

[Then there was silence in the hall, and Thingol lifted up his hand to
pronounce his doom. But at that moment Beleg entered in haste, and
cried: \'Lord, may I yet speak?\' ]{#calibre_link-694 .calibre_class_4}

[\'You come late,\' said Thingol. \'Were you not bidden with the
others?\' ]{#calibre_link-696 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Truly, lord,\' answered Beleg, \'but I was delayed; I sought for one
whom I knew. Now I bring at last a witness who should be heard, ere your
doom falls.\' ]{#calibre_link-698 .calibre_class_4}

[\'AH were summoned who had aught to tell,\' said the King. \'What can
he tell now of more weight than those to whom I have listened?\'
]{#calibre_link-700 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-32 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'You shall judge when you have heard,\' said Beleg. \'Grant this to
me, if I have ever deserved your grace.\' ]{#calibre_link-702
.calibre_class_4}

[\'To you I grant it,\' said Thingol. Then Beleg went out, and led in by
the hand the maiden Nellas, who dwelt in the woods, and came never into
Menegroth; and she was afraid, as much of the great pillared hall and
the roof of stone as of the company of many eyes that watched her. And
when Thingol bade her speak, she said: \'Lord, I was sitting in a
tree\'; but then she faltered in awe of the King, and could say no more.
]{#calibre_link-704 .calibre_class_4}

[At that the King smiled, and said: \'Others have done this also, but
have felt no need to tell me of it.\' ]{#calibre_link-706
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Others indeed,\' said she, taking courage from his smile. \'Even
Lúthien! And of her I was thinking that morning, and of Beren the Man.\'
]{#calibre_link-708 .calibre_class_4}

[To that Thingol said nothing, and he smiled no longer, but waited until
Nellas should speak again. ]{#calibre_link-710 .calibre_class_4}

[\'For Túrin reminded me of Beren,\' she said at last. \'They are akin,
I am told, and their kinship can be seen by some: by some that look
close.\' ]{#calibre_link-712 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Thingol grew impatient. \'That may be,\' he said. \'But Túrin son
of Húrin is gone in scorn of me, and you will see him no more to read
his kindred. For now I will speak my judgement.\' ]{#calibre_link-714
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Lord King!\' she cried then. \'Bear with me, and let me speak first.
I sat in a tree to look on Túrin as he went away; and I saw Saeros come
out from the wood with sword and shield, and spring on Túrin at
unawares.\' ]{#calibre_link-716 .calibre_class_4}

[At that there was a murmur in the hall; and the King lifted his hand,
saying: \'You bring graver news to my ear than seemed likely. Take heed
now to all that you say; for this is a court of doom.\'
]{#calibre_link-718 .calibre_class_4}

[\'So Beleg has told me,\' she answered, \'and only for that have I
dared to come here, so that Túrin shall not be ill judged. He is
valiant, but he is merciful. They fought, lord, these two, until Túrin
had bereft Saeros of both shield and sword; but he did not slay him.
Therefore I do not believe that he willed his death in the end. If
Saeros were put to shame, it was shame that he had earned.\'
]{#calibre_link-720 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Judgement is mine,\' said Thingol. \'But what you have told shall
govern it.\' Then he questioned Nellas closely; and at last he turned to
Mablung, saying: \'It is strange to me that Túrin said nothing of this
to you.\' ]{#calibre_link-722 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Yet he did not,\' said Mablung, \'or I should have recounted it. And
otherwise should I have spoken to him at our parting.\'
]{#calibre_link-724 .calibre_class_4}

[\'And otherwise shall my doom now be,\' said Thingol. \'Hear me! Such
fault as can be found in Túrin I now pardon, holding him wronged and
provoked. And since it was indeed, as he said, one of my council who so
misused him, he shall not seek for this pardon, but I will send it to
him, wherever he may be found; and I will recall him in honour to my
halls.\' ]{#calibre_link-726 .calibre_class_4}

[But when the doom was pronounced, suddenly Nellas wept. \'Where can he
be found?\' she said. \'He has left our land, and the world is wide.\'
]{#calibre_link-728 .calibre_class_4}

[\'He shall be sought,\' said Thingol. Then he rose, and Beleg led
Nellas forth from Menegroth; and he said to her: \'Do not weep; for if
Túrin lives or walks still abroad, I shall find him, though all others
fail.\' ]{#calibre_link-730 .calibre_class_4}

[On the next day Beleg came before Thingol and Melian, and the King said
to him: \'Counsel me, Beleg; for ]{#calibre_link-732 .calibre_class_4}

[I am grieved. I took Húrin\'s son as my son, and so he shall remain,
unless Húrin himself should return out of the shadows to claim his own.
I would not have any say that Túrin was driven forth unjustly into the
wild, and gladly would I welcome him back; for I loved him well.\'
]{#calibre_link-734 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Give me leave, lord,\' said Beleg, \'and on your behalf I will
redress this evil, if I can. For such manhood as he promised should not
run to nothing in the wild. Doriath has need of him, and the need will
grow more. And I love him also.\' ]{#calibre_link-736 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Thingol said to Beleg: \'Now I have hope in the quest! Go with my
good will, and if you find him, guard him and guide him as you may.
Beleg Cúthalion, long have you been foremost in the defence of Doriath,
and for many deeds of valour and wisdom have earned my thanks. Greatest
of all I shall hold the finding of Túrin. At this parting ask for any
gift, and I will not deny it to you.\' ]{#calibre_link-738
.calibre_class_4}

[\'I ask then for a sword of worth,\' said Beleg; \'for the Orcs come
now too thick and close for a bow only, and such blade as I have is no
match for their armour.\' ]{#calibre_link-740 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Choose from all that I have,\' said Thingol, \'save only Aranrúth, my
own.\' ]{#calibre_link-742 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::::: {#calibre_link-33 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Then Beleg chose Anglachel; and that was a sword of great fame, and it
was so named because it was made of iron that fell from heaven as a
blazing star; it would cleave all earth-dolven iron. One other sword
only in Middle-earth was like to it. That sword does not enter into this
tale, though it was made of the same ore by the same smith; and that
smith was Eöl the Dark Elf, who took Aredhel Turgon\'s sister to wife.
He gave Anglachel to Thingol as fee, which he begrudged, for leave to
dwell in Nan Elmoth; but the other sword, Anguirel, its mate, he kept,
until it was stolen from him by Maeglin, his son. ]{#calibre_link-744
.calibre_class_4}

[But as Thingol turned the hilt of Anglachel towards Beleg, Melian
looked at the blade; and she said: \'There is malice in this sword. The
heart of the smith still dwells in it, and that heart was dark. It will
not love the hand that it serves; neither will it abide with you long.\'
]{#calibre_link-746 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Nonetheless I will wield it while I may,\' said Beleg; and thanking
the king he took the sword and departed. Far across Beleriand he sought
in vain for tidings of Túrin, through many perils; and that winter
passed away, and the spring after. ]{#calibre_link-748 .calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  [![](images/000008.jpg){.calibre15 shapes="_x0000_i1035"}]{#calibre_link-750 .calibre_class_5}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
:::::

:::: {#calibre_link-34 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000009.jpg){.calibre8
shapes="_x0000_i1036"}]{#calibre_link-752 .calibre_class_5}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-35 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000010.jpg){.calibre16
shapes="_x0000_i1037"}]{#calibre_link-754 .calibre_class_5}

[Now the tale turns again to Túrin. He, believing himself an outlaw whom
the King would pursue, did not return to Beleg on the north-marches of
Doriath, but went away westward, and passing secretly out of the Guarded
Realm came into the woodlands south of Teiglin. There before the
Nirnaeth many men had dwelt in scattered homesteads; they were of
Haleth\'s folk for the most part, but owned no lord, and they lived both
by hunting and husbandry, keeping swine in the mast-lands, and tilling
clearings in the forest which were fenced from the wild. But most were
now destroyed, or had fled into Brethil, and all that region lay under
the fear of Orcs, and of outlaws. For in that time of ruin houseless and
desperate men went astray: remnants of battle and defeat, and lands laid
waste; and some were men driven into the wild for evil deeds. They
hunted and gathered such food as they could; but many took to robbery
and became cruel, when hunger or other need drove them. In winter they
were most to be feared, like wolves; and Gaurwaith, wolf-men, they were
called by those who still defended their homes. Some sixty of these men
had joined in one band, wandering in the woods beyond the western
marches of Doriath; and they were hated scarcely less than Orcs, for
there were among them outcasts hard of heart, bearing a grudge against
their own kind. ]{#calibre_link-756 .calibre_class_4}

[The hardest of heart was one named Andróg, who had been hunted from
Dor-lómin for the slaying of a woman; and others also came from that
land: old Algund, the oldest of the fellowship, who had fled from the
Nirnaeth, and Forweg, as he named himself, a man with fair hair and
unsteady glittering eyes, big and bold, but far fallen from the ways of
the Edain of the people of Hador. Yet he could still be wise and
generous at times; and he was the captain of the fellowship. They had
dwindled now to some fifty men, by deaths in hardship or affrays; and
they were become wary, and set scouts or a watch about them, whether
moving or at rest. Thus they were soon aware of Túrin when he strayed
into their haunts. They trailed him, and they drew a ring about him, so
that suddenly, as he came out into a glade beside a stream, he found
himself within a circle of men with bent bows and drawn swords.
]{#calibre_link-758 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin halted, but he showed no fear. \'Who are you?\' he said. \'I
thought that only Orcs waylaid men; but I see that I am mistaken.\'
]{#calibre_link-760 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-36 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'You may rue the mistake,\' said Forweg, \'for these are our haunts,
and my men do not allow other men to walk in them. We take their lives
as forfeit, unless they can ransom them.\' ]{#calibre_link-762
.calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin laughed grimly: \'You will get no ransom from me, an outcast
and an outlaw. You may search me when I am dead, but it may cost you
dearly to prove my words true. Many of you are likely to die first.\'
]{#calibre_link-764 .calibre_class_4}

[Nonetheless his death seemed near, for many arrows were notched to the
string, waiting for the word of the captain, and though Túrin wore
elven-mail under his grey tunic and cloak, some would find a deadly
mark. None of his enemies stood within reach of a leap with drawn sword.
But suddenly Túrin stooped, for he had espied some stones at the
stream\'s edge before his feet. At that moment an outlaw, angered by his
proud words, let fly a shaft aimed at his face; but it passed over him,
and he sprang up again like a bowstring released and cast a stone at the
bowman with great force and true aim; and he fell to the ground with
broken skull. ]{#calibre_link-766 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I might be of more service to you alive, in the place of that
luckless man,\' said Túrin; and turning to Forweg he said: \'If you are
the captain here, you should not allow your men to shoot without
command.\' ]{#calibre_link-768 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I do not,\' said Forweg; \'but he has been rebuked swiftly enough. I
will take you in his stead, if you will heed my words better.\'
]{#calibre_link-770 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I will,\' said Túrin, \'as long as you are captain, and in all that
belongs to a captain. But the choice of a new man to a fellowship is not
his alone, I judge. All voices should be heard. Are there any here who
do not welcome me?\' ]{#calibre_link-772 .calibre_class_4}

[Then two of the outlaws cried out against him; and one was a friend of
the fallen man. Ulrad was his name. \'A strange way to gain entry to a
fellowship,\' he said, \'the slaying of one of our best men!\'
]{#calibre_link-774 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Not unchallenged,\' said Túrin. \'But come then! I will endure you
both together, with weapons or with strength alone. Then you shall see
if I am fit to replace one of your best men. But if there are bows in
this test, I must have one too.\' Then he strode towards them; but Ulrad
gave back and would not fight. The other threw down his bow and walked
up to meet Túrin. This man was Andróg of Dor-lómin. He stood before
Túrin and looked him up and down. ]{#calibre_link-776 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Nay,\' he said at length, shaking his head. \'I am not a
chicken-heart, as men know; but I am not your match. There is none here,
I think. You may join us, for my part. But there is a strange light in
your eyes; you are a dangerous man. What is your name?\'
]{#calibre_link-778 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Neithan, the Wronged, I call myself,\' said Túrin, and Neithan he was
afterwards called by the outlaws; but though he claimed to have suffered
injustice (and to any who claimed the like he ever lent too ready an
ear), no more would he reveal concerning his life or his home. Yet they
saw that he had fallen from high state, and that though he had nothing
but his arms, those were made by elven-smiths. He soon won their praise,
for he was strong and valiant, and had more skill in the woods than
they, and they trusted him, for he was not greedy, and took little
thought for himself; but they feared him, because of his sudden angers,
which they seldom understood. ]{#calibre_link-780 .calibre_class_4}

[To Doriath Túrin could not, or in pride would not, return; to
Nargothrond since the fall of Felagund none were admitted. To the lesser
folk of Haleth in Brethil he did not deign to go; and to Dor-lómin he
did not dare, for it was closely beset, and one man alone could not hope
at that time, as he thought, to come through the passes of the Mountains
of Shadow. Therefore Túrin abode with the outlaws, since the company of
any men made the hardship of the wild more easy to endure; and because
he wished to live and could not be ever at strife with them, he did
little to restrain their evil deeds. Thus he soon became hardened to a
mean and often cruel life, and yet at times pity and disgust would wake
in him, and then he was perilous in his anger. In this evil and
dangerous way Túrin lived to that year\'s end and through the need and
hunger of winter, until stirring came and then a fair spring.
]{#calibre_link-782 .calibre_class_4}

[Now in the woods of Teiglin, as has been told, there were still some
homesteads of Men, hardy and wary, though now few in number. Though they
loved them not at all and pitied them little, they would in bitter
winter put out such food as they could well spare where the Gaur-waith
might find it; and so they hoped to avoid the banded attack of the
famished. But they earned less gratitude so from the outlaws than from
beasts and birds, and they were saved rather by their dogs and their
fences. For each homestead had great hedges about its cleared land, and
about the houses was a ditch and a stockade; and there were paths from
stead to stead, and men could summon help at need by horn-calls.
]{#calibre_link-784 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-37 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[But when spring was come it was perilous for the Gaurwaith to linger so
near to the houses of the woodmen, who might gather and hunt them down;
and Túrin wondered therefore that Forweg did not lead them away. There
was more food and game, and less peril, away south where no Men
remained. Then one day Túrin missed Forweg, and also Andróg his friend;
and he asked where they were, but his companions laughed.
]{#calibre_link-786 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Away on business of their own, I guess,\' said Ulrad. \'They will be
back before long, and then we shall move. In haste, maybe; for we shall
be lucky if they do not bring the hive-bees after them.\'
]{#calibre_link-788 .calibre_class_4}

[The sun shone and the young leaves were green, and Túrin was irked by
the squalid camp of the outlaws, and he wandered away alone far into the
forest. Against his will he remembered the Hidden Kingdom, and he seemed
to hear the names of the flowers of Doriath as echoes of an old tongue
almost forgotten. But on a sudden he heard cries, and from a
hazel-thicket a young woman ran out; her clothes were rent by thorns,
and she was in great fear, and stumbling she fell gasping to the ground.
Then Túrin springing towards the thicket with drawn sword hewed down a
man that burst from the hazels in pursuit; and he saw only in the very
stroke that it was Forweg. ]{#calibre_link-790 .calibre_class_4}

[But as he stood looking down in amaze at the blood upon the grass,
Andróg came out, and halted also astounded. \'Evil work, Neithan!\' he
cried, and drew his sword; but Túrin\'s mood ran cold, and he said to
Andróg: \'Where are the Orcs, then? Have you outrun them to help her?\'
]{#calibre_link-792 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Ores?\' said Andróg. \'Fool! You call yourself an outlaw. Outlaws
know no law but their needs. Look to your own, Neithan, and leave us to
mind ours.\' ]{#calibre_link-794 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I will do so,\' said Túrin. \'But today our paths have crossed. You
will leave the woman to me, or you will join Forweg.\'
]{#calibre_link-796 .calibre_class_4}

[Andróg laughed. \'If that is the way of it, have your will,\' he said.
\'I make no claim to match you, alone; but our fellows may take this
slaying ill.\' ]{#calibre_link-798 .calibre_class_4}

[Then the woman rose to her feet and laid her hand on Túrin\'s arm. She
looked at the blood and she looked at Túrin, and there was delight in
her eyes. \'Kill him, lord!\' she said. \'Kill him too! And then come
with me. If you bring their heads, Larnach my father will not be
displeased. For two \"wolf-heads\" he has rewarded men well.\'
]{#calibre_link-800 .calibre_class_4}

[But Túrin said to Andróg: \'Is it far to her home?\'
]{#calibre_link-802 .calibre_class_4}

[\'A mile or so,\' he answered, \'in a fenced homestead yonder. She was
straying outside.\' \'Go then quickly,\' said Túrin, turning back to the
woman. \'Tell your father to keep you better. But I will not cut off the
heads of my fellows to buy his favour, or aught else.\'
]{#calibre_link-804 .calibre_class_4}

[Then he put up his sword. \'Come!\' he said to Andróg. \'We will
return. But if you wish to bury your captain, you must do so yourself.
Make haste, for a hue and cry may be raised. Bring his weapons!\'
]{#calibre_link-806 .calibre_class_4}

[The woman went off through the woods, and she looked back many times
before the trees hid her. Then Túrin went on his way without more words,
and Andróg watched him go, and he frowned as one pondering a riddle.
]{#calibre_link-808 .calibre_class_4}

[When Túrin came back to the camp of the outlaws he found them restless
and ill at ease; for they had stayed too long already in one place, near
to homesteads well-guarded, and they murmured against Forweg. \'He runs
hazards to our cost\', they said; \'and others may have to pay for his
pleasures.\' ]{#calibre_link-810 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Then choose a new captain!\' said Túrin, standing before them.
\'Forweg can lead you no longer; for he is dead.\' ]{#calibre_link-812
.calibre_class_4}

[\'How do you know that?\' said Ulrad. \'Did you seek honey from the
same hive? Did the bees sting him?\' ]{#calibre_link-814
.calibre_class_4}

[\'No,\' said Túrin. \'One sting was enough. I slew him. But I spared
Andróg, and he will soon return.\' Then he told all that was done,
rebuking those that did such deeds; and while he yet spoke Andróg
returned bearing Forweg\'s weapons. \'See, Neithan!\' he cried. \'No
alarm has been raised. Maybe she hopes to meet with you again.\'
]{#calibre_link-816 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-38 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'If you jest with me,\' said Túrin, \'I shall regret that I grudged
her your head. Now tell your tale, and be brief.\' ]{#calibre_link-818
.calibre_class_4}

[Then Andróg told truly enough all that had befallen. \'What business
Neithan had there I now wonder,\' he said. \'Not ours, it seems. For
when I came up, he had already slain Forweg. The woman liked that well,
and offered to go with him, begging our heads as a bride-price. But he
did not want her, and sped her off; so what grudge he had against the
captain I cannot guess. He left my head on my shoulders, for which I am
grateful, though much puzzled.\' ]{#calibre_link-820 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Then I deny your claim to come of the People of Hador,\' said Túrin.
\'To Uldor the Accursed you belong rather, and should seek service with
Angband. But hear me now!\' he cried to them all. \'These choices I give
you. You must take me as your captain in Forweg\'s place, or else let me
go. I will govern this fellowship now, or leave it. But if you wish to
kill me, set to! I will fight you all until I am dead - or you.\'
]{#calibre_link-822 .calibre_class_4}

[Then many men seized their weapons, but Andróg cried out: \'Nay! The
head that he spared is not witless. If we fight, more than one will die
needlessly, before we kill the best man among us.\' Then he laughed.
\'As it was when he joined us, so it is again. He kills to make room. If
it proved well before, so may it again; and he may lead us to better
fortune than prowling about other men\'s middens.\' ]{#calibre_link-824
.calibre_class_4}

[And old Algund said: \'The best man among us. Time was when we would
have done the same, if we dared; but we have forgotten much. He may
bring us home in the end.\' ]{#calibre_link-826 .calibre_class_4}

[At that the thought came to Túrin that from this small band he might
rise to build himself a free lordship of his own. But he looked at
Algund and Andróg, and he said: \'Home, do you say? Tall and cold stand
the Mountains of Shadow between. Behind them are the people of Uldor,
and about them the legions of Angband. If such things do not daunt you,
seven times seven men, then I may lead you homewards. But how far,
before we die?\' ]{#calibre_link-828 .calibre_class_4}

[All were silent. Then Túrin spoke again. \'Do you take me to be your
captain? Then I will lead you first away into the wild, far from the
homes of Men. There we may find better fortune, or not; but at the least
we shall earn less hatred of our own kind.\' ]{#calibre_link-830
.calibre_class_4}

[Then all those that were of the People of Hador gathered to him, and
took him as their captain; and the others with less good will agreed.
And at once he led them away out of that country. ]{#calibre_link-832
.calibre_class_4}

[Many messengers had been sent out by Thingol to seek Túrin within
Doriath and in the lands near its borders; but in the year of his flight
they searched for him in vain, for none knew or could guess that he was
with the outlaws and enemies of Men. When winter came on they returned
to the King, save Beleg only. After all others had departed still he
went on alone. ]{#calibre_link-834 .calibre_class_4}

[But in Dimbar and along the north-marches of Doriath things had gone
ill. The Dragon-helm was seen there in battle no longer, and the
Strongbow also was missed; and the servants of Morgoth were heartened
and increased ever in numbers and in daring. Winter came and passed, and
with Spring their assault was renewed: Dimbar was overrun, and the Men
of Brethil were afraid, for evil roamed now upon all their borders, save
in the south. ]{#calibre_link-836 .calibre_class_4}

[It was now almost a year since Túrin had fled, and still Beleg sought
for him, with ever lessening hope. He passed northwards in his
wanderings to the Crossings of Teiglin, and there, hearing ill news of a
new inroad of Orcs out of Taur-nu-Fuin, he turned back, and came as it
chanced to the homes of the Woodmen soon after Túrin had left that
region. There he heard a strange tale that went among them. A tall and
lordly Man, or an Elf-warrior, some said, had appeared in the woods, and
had slain one of the Gaurwaith, and rescued the daughter of Larnach whom
they were pursuing. \'Very proud he was,\' said Larnach\'s daughter to
Beleg, \'with bright eyes that scarcely deigned to look at me. Yet he
called the Wolf-men his fellows, and would not slay another that stood
by, and knew his name. Neithan, he called him.\' ]{#calibre_link-838
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Can you read this riddle?\' asked Larnach of the Elf.
]{#calibre_link-840 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I can, alas,\' said Beleg. \'The Man that you tell of is one whom I
seek.\' No more of Túrin did he tell the Woodmen; but he warned them of
evil gathering northward. \'Soon the Orcs will come ravening in this
country in strength too great for you to withstand,\' he said. \'This
year at last you must give up your freedom or your lives. Go to Brethil
while there is time!\' ]{#calibre_link-842 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-39 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Then Beleg went on his way in haste, and sought for the lairs of the
outlaws, and such signs as might show him whither they had gone. These
he soon found; but Túrin was now several days ahead, and moved swiftly,
fearing the pursuit of the Woodmen, and he had used all the arts that he
knew to defeat or mislead any that tried to follow him. He led his men
westward, away from the Woodmen and from the borders of Doriath, until
they came to the northern end of the great highlands that rose between
the Vales of Sirion and Narog. There the land was drier, and the forest
ceased suddenly on the brink of a ridge. Below it could be seen the
ancient South Road, climbing up from the Crossings of Teiglin to pass
along the western feet of the moorlands on its way to Nargothrond. There
for a time the outlaws lived warily, remaining seldom two nights in one
camp, and leaving little trace of their going or staying. So it was that
even Beleg hunted them in vain. Led by signs that he could read, or by
the rumour of the passing of Men among the wild things with whom he
could speak, he came often near, but always their lair was deserted when
he came to it; for they kept a watch about them by day and night, and at
any rumour of approach they were swiftly up and away. \'Alas!\' he
cried. \'Too well did I teach this child of Men craft in wood and field!
An Elvish band almost one might think this to be.\' But they for their
part became aware that they were trailed by some tireless pursuer, whom
they could not see, and yet could not shake off; and they grew uneasy.
]{#calibre_link-844 .calibre_class_4}

[Not long afterwards, as Beleg had feared, the Orcs came across the
Brithiach, and being resisted with all the force that he could muster by
Handir of Brethil, they passed south over the Crossings of Teiglin in
search of plunder. Many of the Woodmen had taken Beleg\'s counsel and
sent their woman and children to ask for refuge in Brethil. These and
their escort escaped, passing over the Crossings in time; but the armed
men that came behind were met by the Orcs, and the men were worsted. A
few fought their way through and came to Brethil, but many were slain or
captured; and the Orcs passed on to the homesteads, and sacked them and
burned them. Then at once they turned back westwards, seeking the Road,
for they wished now to return back north as swiftly as they could with
their booty and their captives. ]{#calibre_link-846 .calibre_class_4}

[But the scouts of the outlaws were soon aware of them; and though they
cared little enough for the captives, the plunder of the Woodmen aroused
their greed. To Túrin it seemed perilous to reveal themselves to the
Orcs, until their numbers were known; but the outlaws would not heed
him, for they had need of many things in the wild, and already some
began to regret his leading. Therefore taking one Orleg as his only
companion Túrin went forth to spy upon the Orcs; and giving command of
the band to Andróg he charged him to lie close and well hid while they
were gone. ]{#calibre_link-848 .calibre_class_4}

[Now the Orc-host was far greater than the band of outlaws, but they
were in lands to which Orcs had seldom dared to come, and they knew also
that beyond the Road lay the Talath Dirnen, the Guarded Plain, upon
which the scouts and spies of Nargothrond kept watch; and fearing danger
they were wary, and their scouts went creeping through the trees on
either side of the marching lines. Thus it was that Túrin and Orleg were
discovered, for three scouts stumbled upon them as they lay hid; and
though they slew two the third escaped, crying as he ran *Golug! Golug!*
Now that was a name which they had for the Noldor. At once the forest
was filled with Orcs, scattering silently and hunting far and wide. Then
Túrin, seeing that there was small hope of escape, thought at least to
deceive them and to lead them away from the hiding-place of his men; and
perceiving from the cry of *Golug!* that they feared the spies of
Nargothrond, he fled with Orleg westward. The pursuit came swiftly after
them, until turn and dodge as they would they were driven at last out of
the forest; and then they were espied, and as they sought to cross the
Road Orleg was shot down by many arrows. But Túrin was saved by his
elven-mail, and escaped alone into the wilds beyond; and by speed and
craft he eluded his enemies, fleeing far into lands that were strange to
him. Then the Orcs, fearing that the Elves of Nargothrond might be
aroused, slew their captives and made haste away into the North.
]{#calibre_link-850 .calibre_class_4}

[Now when three days had passed, and yet Túrin and Orleg did not return,
some of the outlaws wished to depart from the cave where they lay hid;
but Andróg spoke against it. And while they were in the midst of this
debate, suddenly a grey figure stood before them. Beleg had found them
at last. He came forward with no weapon in his hands, and held the palms
turned towards them; but they leapt up in fear and Andróg coming behind
cast a noose over him, and drew it so that it pinioned his arms.
]{#calibre_link-852 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-40 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'If you do not wish for guests, you should keep better watch,\' said
Beleg. \'Why do you welcome me thus? I come as a friend, and seek only a
friend. Neithan, I hear that you call him.\' ]{#calibre_link-854
.calibre_class_4}

[\'He is not here,\' said Ulrad. \'But unless you have long spied on us,
how know you that name?\' ]{#calibre_link-856 .calibre_class_4}

[\'He has long spied on us,\' said Andróg. \'This is the shadow that has
dogged us. Now perhaps we shall learn his true purpose.\' Then he bade
them tie Beleg to a tree beside the cave; and when he was hard bound
hand and foot they questioned him. But to all their questions Beleg
would give one answer only: \'A friend I have been to this Neithan since
I first met him in the woods, and he was then but a child. I seek him
only in love, and to bring him good tidings.\' ]{#calibre_link-858
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Let us slay him, and be rid of his spying,\' said Andróg in wrath;
and he looked on the great bow of Beleg and coveted it, for he was an
archer. But some of better heart spoke against him, and Algund said to
him: \'The captain may return yet; and then you will rue it, if he
learns that he has been robbed at once of a friend and of good
tidings.\' ]{#calibre_link-860 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I do not believe the tale of this Elf,\' said Andróg. \'He is a spy
of the King of Doriath. But if he has indeed any tidings, he shall tell
them to us; and we shall judge if they give us reason to let him live.\'
]{#calibre_link-862 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I shall wait for your captain,\' said Beleg. ]{#calibre_link-864
.calibre_class_4}

[\'You shall stand there until you speak,\' said Andróg.
]{#calibre_link-866 .calibre_class_4}

[Then at the egging of Andróg they left Beleg tied to the tree without
food or water, and they sat near eating and drinking; but he said no
more to them. When two days and nights had passed in this way they
became angry and fearful, and were eager to be gone; and most were now
ready to slay the Elf. As night drew down they were all gathered about
him, and Ulrad brought a brand from the little fire that was lit in the
cave-mouth. But at that moment Túrin returned. Coming silently, as was
his custom, he stood in the shadows beyond the ring of men, and he saw
the haggard face of Beleg in the light of the brand. ]{#calibre_link-868
.calibre_class_4}

[Then he was stricken as with a shaft, and as if at the sudden melting
of a frost tears long unshed filled his eyes. He sprang out and ran to
the tree. \'Beleg! Beleg!\' he cried. \'How have you come hither? And
why do you stand so?\' At once he cut the bonds from his friend, and
Beleg fell forward into his arms. ]{#calibre_link-870 .calibre_class_4}

[When Túrin heard all that the men would tell, he was angry and grieved;
but at first he gave heed only to Beleg. While he tended him with what
skill he had, he thought of his life in the woods, and his anger turned
upon himself. For often strangers had been slain, when caught near the
lairs of the outlaws, or waylaid by them, and he had not hindered it;
and often he himself had spoken ill of King Thingol and of the
Grey-elves, so that he must share the blame, if they were treated as
foes. Then with bitterness he turned to the men. \'You were cruel,\' he
said, \'and cruel without need. Never until now have we tormented a
prisoner; but to this Orc-work such a life as we lead has brought us.
Lawless and fruitless all our deeds have been, serving only ourselves,
and feeding hate in our hearts.\' ]{#calibre_link-872 .calibre_class_4}

[But Andróg said: \'But whom shall we serve, if not ourselves? Whom
shall we love, when all hate us?\' ]{#calibre_link-874 .calibre_class_4}

[\'At least my hands shall not again be raised against Elves or Men,\'
said Túrin. \'Angband has servants enough. If others will not take this
vow with me, I will walk alone.\' ]{#calibre_link-876 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Beleg opened his eyes and raised his head. \'Not alone!\' he said.
\'Now at last I can tell my tidings. You are no outlaw, and Neithan is a
name unfit. Such fault as was found in you is pardoned. For a year you
have been sought, to recall you to honour and to the service of the
King. The Dragon-helm has been missed too long.\' ]{#calibre_link-878
.calibre_class_4}

[But Túrin showed no joy in this news, and sat long in silence; for at
Beleg\'s words a shadow fell upon him again. \'Let this night pass,\' he
said at length. \'Then I will choose. However it goes, we must leave
this lair tomorrow; for not all who seek us wish us well.\'
]{#calibre_link-880 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Nay, none,\' said Andróg, and he cast an evil look at Beleg.
]{#calibre_link-882 .calibre_class_4}

[In the morning Beleg, being swiftly healed of his pains, after the
manner of the Elven-folk of old, spoke to Túrin apart.
]{#calibre_link-884 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I looked for more joy at my tidings,\' he said. \'Surely you will
return now to Doriath?\' And he begged Túrin to do this in all ways that
he could; but the more he urged it, the more Túrin hung back.
Nonetheless he questioned Beleg closely concerning the judgement of
Thingol. Then Beleg told him all that he knew, and at the last Túrin
said: \'Then Mablung proved my friend, as he once seemed?\'
]{#calibre_link-886 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-41 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'The friend of truth, rather,\' said Beleg, \'and that was best, in
the end; though the doom would have been less just, were it not for the
witness of Nellas. Why, why, Túrin, did you not speak of Saeros\'
assault to Mablung? All otherwise might things have gone. And,\' he
said, looking at the men sprawled near the mouth of the cave, \'you
might have held your helm still high, and not fallen to this.\'
]{#calibre_link-888 .calibre_class_4}

[\'That may be, if fall you call it,\' said Túrin. \'That may be. But so
it went; and words stuck in my throat. There was reproof in his eyes,
without question asked of me, for a deed I had not done. My Man\'s heart
was proud, as the Elf-king said. And so it still is, Beleg Cúthalion.
Not yet will it suffer me to go back to Menegroth and bear looks of pity
and pardon, as for a wayward boy amended. I should give pardon, not
receive it. And I am a boy no longer, but a man, according to my kind;
and a hard man by my fate.\' ]{#calibre_link-890 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Beleg was troubled. \'What will you do, then?\' he asked.
]{#calibre_link-892 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Fare free,\' said Túrin. \'That wish Mablung gave me at our parting.
The grace of Thingol will not stretch to receive these companions of my
fall, I think; but I will not part with them now, if they do not wish to
part with me. I love them in my way, even the worst a little. They are
of my own kind, and there is some good in each that might grow. I think
that they will stand by me.\' ]{#calibre_link-894 .calibre_class_4}

[\'You see with other eyes than mine,\' said Beleg. \'If you try to wean
them from evil, they will fail you. I doubt them, and one most of all.\'
]{#calibre_link-896 .calibre_class_4}

[\'How shall an Elf judge of Men?\' said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-898
.calibre_class_4}

[\'As he judges of all deeds, by whomsoever done,\' answered Beleg, but
he said no more, and did not speak of Andróg\'s malice, to which his
evil handling had been chiefly due; for perceiving Túrin\'s mood he
feared to be disbelieved and to hurt their old friendship, driving Túrin
back to his evil ways. ]{#calibre_link-900 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Fare free, you say, Túrin, my friend,\' he said. \'What is your
meaning?\' ]{#calibre_link-902 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I would lead my own men, and make war in my own way,\' Túrin
answered. \'But in this at least my heart is changed: I repent every
stroke save those dealt against the Enemy of Men and Elves. And above
all else I would have you beside me. Stay with me!\' ]{#calibre_link-904
.calibre_class_4}

[\'If I stayed beside you, love would lead me, not wisdom,\' said Beleg.
\'My heart warns me that we should return to Doriath. Elsewhere a shadow
lies before us.\' ]{#calibre_link-906 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Nonetheless, I will not go there,\' said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-908
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Alas!\' said Beleg. \'But as a fond father who grants his son\'s
desire against his own foresight, I yield to your will. At your asking,
I will stay.\' ]{#calibre_link-910 .calibre_class_4}

[\'That is well indeed!\' said Túrin. Then all at once he fell silent,
as if he himself were aware of the shadow, and strove with his pride,
which would not let him turn back. For a long while he sat, brooding on
the years that lay behind. ]{#calibre_link-912 .calibre_class_4}

[Coming suddenly out of thought he looked at Beleg, and said: \'The
elf-maiden that you named, though I forget how: I owe her well for her
timely witness; yet I cannot recall her. Why did she watch my ways?\'
Then Beleg looked strangely at him. \'Why indeed?\' he said. \'Túrin,
have you lived always with your heart and half your mind far away? As a
boy you used to walk with Nellas in the woods.\' ]{#calibre_link-914
.calibre_class_4}

[\'That must have been long ago,\' said Túrin. \'Or so my childhood now
seems, and a mist is over it - save only the memory of my father\'s
house in Dor-lómin. Why would I walk with an elf-maiden?\'
]{#calibre_link-916 .calibre_class_4}

[\'To learn what she could teach, maybe,\' said Beleg, \'if no more than
a few elven-words of the names of woodland flowers. Their names at least
you have not forgotten. Alas! child of Men, there are other griefs in
Middle-earth than yours, and wounds made by no weapon. Indeed I begin to
think that Elves and Men should not meet or meddle.\'
]{#calibre_link-918 .calibre_class_4}

[Túrin said nothing, but looked long in Beleg\'s face, as if he would
read in it the riddle of his words. Nellas of Doriath never saw him
again, and his shadow passed from her. Now Beleg and Túrin turned to
other matters, debating where they should dwell. \'Let us return to
Dimbar, on the north-marches, where once we walked together!\' said
Beleg eagerly. \'We are needed there. For of late the Orcs have found a
way down out of Taur-nu-Fuin, making a road through the Pass of Anach.\'
]{#calibre_link-920 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I do not remember it,\' said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-922
.calibre_class_4}
:::

::::: {#calibre_link-42 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'No, we never went so far from the borders,\' said Beleg. \'But you
have seen the peaks of the Crissaegrim far off, and to their east the
dark walls of the Gorgoroth. Anach lies between them, above the high
springs of Mindeb. A hard and dangerous way; and yet many come by it
now, and Dimbar which used to lie in peace is falling under the Dark
Hand, and the Men of Brethil are troubled. To Dimbar I call you!\'
]{#calibre_link-924 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Nay, I will not walk backward in life,\' said Túrin. \'Nor can I come
easily to Dimbar now. Sirion lies between, unbridged and unforded below
the Brithiach far northward; it is perilous to cross. Save in Doriath.
But I will not pass into Doriath, and make use of Thingol\'s leave and
pardon.\' ]{#calibre_link-926 .calibre_class_4}

[\'A hard man you have called yourself, Túrin. Truly, if by that you
meant stubborn. Now the turn is mine. I will go, by your leave, as soon
as I may, and bid you farewell. If you wish indeed to have the Strongbow
beside you, look for me in Dimbar.\' At that time Túrin said no more.
]{#calibre_link-928 .calibre_class_4}

[The next day Beleg set out, and Túrin went with him a bowshot from the
camp, but said nothing. \'Is it farewell, then, son of Húrin?\' said
Beleg. ]{#calibre_link-930 .calibre_class_4}

[\'If you wish indeed to keep your word and stay beside me,\' answered
Túrin, \'then look for me on Amon Rûdh!\' Thus he spoke, being fey and
unwitting of what lay before him. \'Else, this is our last farewell.\'
]{#calibre_link-932 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Maybe that is best,\' said Beleg, and went his way.
]{#calibre_link-934 .calibre_class_4}

[It is said that Beleg went back to Menegroth, and came before Thingol
and Melian and told them of all that had happened, save only his evil
handling by Túrin\'s companions. Then Thingol sighed, and he said: \'I
took up the fathering of the son of Húrin, and that cannot be laid down
for love or hate, unless Húrin the Valiant himself should return. What
more would he have me do?\' ]{#calibre_link-936 .calibre_class_4}

[But Melian said: \'A gift you shall now have of me, Cúthalion, for your
help, and your honour, for I have none worthier to give.\' And she gave
him a store of *lembas,* the waybread of the Elves, wrapped in leaves of
silver; and the threads that bound it were sealed at the knots with the
seal of the Queen, a wafer of white wax shaped as a single flower of
Telperion. For according to the customs of the Eldalië the keeping and
the giving of this food belonged to the Queen alone. \'This waybread,
Beleg,\' she said, \'shall be your help in the wild and the winter, and
the help also of those whom you choose. For I commit this now to you, to
apportion as you will in my stead.\' In nothing did Melian show greater
favour to Túrin than in this gift; for the Eldar had never before
allowed Men to use this waybread, and seldom did so again.
]{#calibre_link-938 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Beleg departed from Menegroth and went back to the north-marches,
where he had his lodges, and many friends; but when winter came, and war
was stilled, suddenly his companions missed Beleg, and he returned to
them no more. ]{#calibre_link-940 .calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  [![](images/000011.jpg){.calibre17 shapes="_x0000_i1038"}]{#calibre_link-942 .calibre_class_5}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
:::::

::: {#calibre_link-43 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000012.jpg){.calibre18
shapes="_x0000_i1039"}]{#calibre_link-944 .calibre_class_5}

[Now the tale turns to Mîm the Petty-dwarf. The Petty-dwarves are long
out of mind, for Mîm was the last. Little was known of them even in days
of old. The Nibin-nogrim the Elves of Beleriand called them long ago,
but they did not love them; and the Petty-dwarves loved none but
themselves. If they hated and feared the Orcs, they hated also the
Eldar, and the Exiles most of all; for the Noldor, they said, had stolen
their lands and their homes. Nargothrond was first found and its delving
begun by the Petty-dwarves, long before Finrod Felagund came over the
Sea. ]{#calibre_link-946 .calibre_class_4}

[They came, some said, of Dwarves that had been banished from the
Dwarf-cities of the east in ancient days. Long before the return of
Morgoth they had wandered westward. Being masterless and few in number,
they found it hard to come by the ore of metals, and their smith-craft
and store of weapons dwindled; and they took to lives of stealth, and
became somewhat smaller in stature than their eastern kin, walking with
bent shoulders and quick, furtive steps. Nonetheless, as all the
Dwarf-kind, they were far stronger than their stature promised, and they
could cling to life in great hardship. But now at last they had dwindled
and died out of Middle-earth, all save Mîm and his two sons; and Mîm was
old even in the reckoning of Dwarves, old and forgotten.
]{#calibre_link-948 .calibre_class_4}

[After the departure of Beleg (and that was in the second summer after
the flight of Túrin from Doriath) things went ill for the outlaws. There
were rains out of season, and Orcs in greater numbers than before came
down from the North and along the old South Road over Teiglin, troubling
all the woods on the west borders of Doriath. There was little safety or
rest, and the company were more often hunted than hunters.
]{#calibre_link-950 .calibre_class_4}

[One night as they lay lurking in the fireless dark, Túrin looked on his
life, and it seemed to him\'that it might well be bettered. \'I must
find some secure refuge,\' he thought, \'and make provision against
winter and hunger.\' But he did not know whither to turn.
]{#calibre_link-952 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-44 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Next day he led his men away southward, further than they had yet come
from the Teiglin and the marches of Doriath; and after three days\'
journeying they halted at the western edge of the woods of Sirion\'s
Vale. There the land was drier and barer, as it began to climb up into
the moorlands. ]{#calibre_link-954 .calibre_class_4}

[Soon after, it chanced that as the grey light of a day of rain was
failing Túrin and his men were sheltering in a holly-thicket; and beyond
it was a treeless space, in which there were many great stones, leaning
or tumbled together. All was still, save for the drip of rain from the
leaves. ]{#calibre_link-956 .calibre_class_4}

[Suddenly a watchman gave a call, and leaping up they saw three hooded
shapes, grey-clad, going stealthily among the stones. They were burdened
each with a great sack, but they went swiftly for all that. Túrin cried
to them to halt, and the men ran out on them like hounds; but they held
on their way, and though Andróg shot at them two vanished in the dusk.
One lagged behind, being slower or more heavily burdened; and he was
soon seized and thrown down, and held by many hard hands, though he
struggled and bit like a beast. But Túrin came up, and rebuked his men.
\'What have you there?\' he said. \'What need to be so fierce? It is old
and small. What harm is in it?\' ]{#calibre_link-958 .calibre_class_4}

[\'It bites,\' said Andróg, nursing a bleeding hand. \'It is an Orc, or
of Orc-kin. Kill it!\' ]{#calibre_link-960 .calibre_class_4}

[\'It deserves no less, for cheating our hope,\' said another, who had
taken the sack. \'There is nothing here but roots and small stones.\'
]{#calibre_link-962 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Nay,\' said Túrin, \'it is bearded. It is only a Dwarf, I guess. Let
him up, and speak.\' ]{#calibre_link-964 .calibre_class_4}

[So it was that Mîm came into the Tale of the Children of Húrin. For he
stumbled up on his knees before Túrin\'s feet and begged for his life.
\'I am old,\' he said, \'and poor. Only a Dwarf, as you say, not an Orc.
Mîm is my name. Do not let them slay me, master, for no cause, as Orcs
would.\' ]{#calibre_link-966 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin pitied him in his heart, but he said: \'Poor you seem, Mîm,
though that would be strange in a Dwarf; but we are poorer, I think:
houseless and friendless Men. If I said that we do not spare for pity\'s
sake only, being in great need, what would you offer for ransom?\'
]{#calibre_link-968 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I do not know what you desire, lord,\' said Mîm warily.
]{#calibre_link-970 .calibre_class_4}

[\'At this time, little enough!\' said Túrin, looking about him bitterly
with rain in his eyes. \'A safe place to sleep in out of the damp woods.
Doubtless you have such for yourself.\' ]{#calibre_link-972
.calibre_class_4}

[\'I have,\' said Mîm; \'but I cannot give it in ransom. I am too old to
live under the sky.\' ]{#calibre_link-974 .calibre_class_4}

[\'You need grow no older,\' said Andróg, stepping up with a knife in
his unharmed hand. \'I can spare you that.\' ]{#calibre_link-976
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Lord!\' cried Mîm in great fear, clinging to Túrin\'s knees. \'If I
lose my life, you lose the dwelling; for you will not find it without
Mîm. I cannot give it, but I will share it. There is more room in it
than once there was, so many have gone for ever,\' and he began to weep.
]{#calibre_link-978 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Your life is spared, Mîm,\' said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-980
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Till we come to his lair, at least,\' said Andróg.
]{#calibre_link-982 .calibre_class_4}

[But Túrin turned upon him, and said: \'If Mîm brings us to his home
without trickery, and it is good, then his life is ransomed; and he
shall not be slain by any man who follows me. So I swear.\'
]{#calibre_link-984 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Mîm kissed Túrin\'s knees and said: \'Mîm will be your friend,
lord. At first he thought you were an Elf, by your speech and your
voice. But if you are a Man, that is better. Mîm does not love Elves.\'
]{#calibre_link-986 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Where is this house of yours?\' said Andróg. \'It must be good indeed
to share it with a Dwarf. For Andróg does not like Dwarves. His people
brought few good tales of that race out of the East.\'
]{#calibre_link-988 .calibre_class_4}

[\'They left worse tales of themselves behind them,\' said Mîm. \'Judge
my home when you see it. But you will need light on your way, you
stumbling Men. I will return in good time and lead you.\' Then he rose
and picked up his sack. ]{#calibre_link-990 .calibre_class_4}

[\'No, no!\' said Andróg. \'You will not allow this, surely, captain?
You would never see the old rascal again.\' ]{#calibre_link-992
.calibre_class_4}

[\'It is growing dark,\' said Túrin. \'Let him leave us some pledge.
Shall we keep your sack and its load, Mîm?\' ]{#calibre_link-994
.calibre_class_4}

[But at this the Dwarf fell on his knees again in great trouble. \'If
Mîm did not mean to return, he would not return for an old sack of
roots,\' he said. \'I will come back. Let me go!\' ]{#calibre_link-996
.calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-45 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'I will not,\' said Túrin. \'If you will not part with your sack, you
must stay with it. A night under the leaves will make you pity us in
your turn, maybe.\' But he marked, and others also, that Mîm set more
store by the sack and his load than it seemed worth to the eye.
]{#calibre_link-998 .calibre_class_4}

[They led the old Dwarf away to their dismal camp, and as he went he
muttered in a strange tongue that seemed harsh with ancient hatred; but
when they put bonds on his legs he went suddenly quiet. And those who
were on the watch saw him sitting on through the night silent and still
as a stone, save for his sleepless eyes that glinted as they roved in
the dark. ]{#calibre_link-1000 .calibre_class_4}

[Before morning the rain ceased, and a wind stirred in the trees. Dawn
came more brightly than for many days, and light airs from the South
opened the sky, pale and clear about the rising of the sun. Mîm sat on
without moving, and he seemed as if dead; for now the heavy lids of his
eyes were closed, and the morning-light showed him withered and shrunken
with age. Túrin stood and looked down on him. \'There is light enough
now,\' he said. ]{#calibre_link-1002 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Mîm opened his eyes and pointed to his bonds; and when he was
released he spoke fiercely. \'Learn this, fools!\' he said. \'Do not put
bonds on a Dwarf! He will not forgive it. I do not wish to die, but for
what you have done my heart is hot. I repent my promise.\'
]{#calibre_link-1004 .calibre_class_4}

[\'But I do not,\' said Túrin. \'You will lead me to your home. Till
then we will not speak of death. That is *my* will.\' He looked
steadfastly in the eyes of the Dwarf, and Mîm could not endure it; few
indeed could challenge the eyes of Túrin in set will or in wrath. Soon
he turned away his head, and rose. \'Follow me, lord!\' he said.
]{#calibre_link-1006 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Good!\' said Túrin. \'But now I will add this: I understand your
pride. You may die, but you shall not be set in bonds again.\'
]{#calibre_link-1008 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I will not,\' said Mîm. \'But come now!\' And with that he led them
back to the place where he had been captured, and he pointed westward.
\'There is my home!\' he said. \'You have often seen it, I guess, for it
is tall. Sharbhund we called it, before the Elves changed all the
names.\' Then they saw that he was pointing to Amon Rûdh, the Bald Hill,
whose bare head watched over many leagues of the wild.
]{#calibre_link-1010 .calibre_class_4}

[\'We have seen it, but never nearer,\' said Andróg. \'For what safe
lair can be there, or water, or any other thing that we need? I guessed
that there was some trick. Do men hide on a hill-top?\'
]{#calibre_link-1012 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Long sight may be safer than lurking,\' said Túrin. \'Amon Rûdh gazes
far and wide. Well, Mîm, I will come and see what you have to show. How
long will it take us, stumbling Men, to come thither?\'
]{#calibre_link-1014 .calibre_class_4}

[\'All this day until dusk, if we start now,\' answered Mîm.
]{#calibre_link-1016 .calibre_class_4}

[Soon the company set out westward, and Túrin went at the head with Mîm
at his side. They walked warily when they left the woods, but all the
land seemed empty and quiet. They passed over the tumbled stones, and
began to climb; for Amon Rûdh stood upon the eastern edge of the high
moorlands that rose between the vales of Sirion and Narog, and even
above the stony heath at its base its crown was reared up a thousand
feet and more. Upon the eastern side a broken land climbed slowly up to
the high ridges among knots of birch and rowan, and ancient thorn-trees
rooted in rock. Beyond, upon the moors and about the lower slopes of
Amon Rûdh, there grew thickets of *aeglos;* but its steep grey head was
bare, save for the red *seregon* that mantled the stone.
]{#calibre_link-1018 .calibre_class_4}

[As the afternoon was waning the outlaws drew near to the roots of the
hill. They came now from the north, for so Mîm had led them, and the
light of the westering sun fell upon the crown of Amon Rûdh, and the
*seregon* was all in flower. ]{#calibre_link-1020 .calibre_class_4}

[\'See! There is blood on the hill-top,\' said Andróg.
]{#calibre_link-1022 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Not yet,\' said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-1024 .calibre_class_4}

[The sun was sinking and light was failing in the hollows. The hill now
loomed up before them and above them, and they wondered what need there
could be of a guide to so plain a mark. But as Mîm led them on, and they
began to climb the last steep slopes, they perceived that he was
following some path by secret signs or old custom. Now his course wound
to and fro, and if they looked aside they saw that at either hand dark
dells and chines opened, or the land ran down into wastes of great
stones with falls and holes masked by bramble and thorn. There without a
guide they might have laboured and clambered for days to find a way.
]{#calibre_link-1026 .calibre_class_4}
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-46 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[At length they came to steeper but smoother ground. They passed under
the shadows of ancient rowan-trees, into aisles of long-legged *aeglos:*
a gloom filled with a sweet scent. Then suddenly there was a rock-wall
before them, flat-faced and sheer, forty feet high, maybe, but dusk
dimmed the sky above them and guess was uncertain. ]{#calibre_link-1028
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Is this the door of your house?\' said Túrin. \'Dwarves love stone,
it is said.\' He drew close to Mîm, lest he should play them some trick
at the last. ]{#calibre_link-1030 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Not the door of the house, but the gate of the garth,\' said Mîm.
Then he turned to the right along the cliff-foot, and after twenty paces
he halted suddenly; and Túrin saw that by the work of hands or of
weather there was a cleft so shaped that two faces of the wall
overlapped, and an opening ran back to the left between them. Its
entrance was shrouded by long trailing plants rooted in crevices above,
but within there was a steep stony path going upward in the dark. Water
trickled down it, and it was dank. ]{#calibre_link-1032
.calibre_class_4}

[One by one they filed up. At the top the path turned right and south
again, and brought them through a thicket of thorns out upon a green
flat, through which it ran on into the shadows. They had come to Mîm\'s
house, Bar-en-Nibin-noeg, which only ancient tales in Doriath and
Nargothrond remembered, and no Men had seen. But night was falling, and
the east was starlit, and they could not yet see how this strange place
was shaped. ]{#calibre_link-1034 .calibre_class_4}

[Amon Rûdh had a crown: a great mass like a steep cap of stone with a
bare flattened top. Upon its north side there stood out from it a shelf,
level and almost square, which could not be seen from below; for behind
it stood the hill-crown like a wall, and west and east from its brink
sheer cliffs fell. Only from the north, as they had come, could it be
reached with ease by those who knew the way. From the \'gate\' a path
led, and passed soon into a little grove of dwarfed birches growing
about a clear pool in a rock-hewn basin. This was fed by a spring at the
foot of the wall behind, and through a runnel it spilled like a white
thread over the western brink of the shelf. Behind the screen of the
trees, near the spring between two tall buttresses of rock, there was a
cave. No more than a shallow grot it looked, with a low broken arch; but
further in it had been deepened and bored far under the hill by the slow
hands of the Petty-dwarves, in the long years that they had dwelt there,
untroubled by the Grey-elves of the woods. ]{#calibre_link-1036
.calibre_class_4}

[Through the deep dusk Mîm led them past the pool, where now the faint
stars were mirrored among the shadows of the birch-boughs. At the mouth
of the cave he turned and bowed to Túrin. \'Enter, lord!\' he said:
\'Bar-en-Danwedh, the House of Ransom. For so it shall be called.\'
]{#calibre_link-1038 .calibre_class_4}

[\'That may be,\' said Túrin. \'I will look at it first.\' Then he went
in with Mîm, and the others, seeing him unafraid, followed behind, even
Andróg, who most misdoubted the Dwarf. They were soon in a black dark;
but Mîm clapped his hands, and a little light appeared, coming round a
corner: from a passage at the back of the outer grot there stepped
another Dwarf bearing a small torch. ]{#calibre_link-1040
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Ha! I missed him, as I feared!\' said Andróg. But Mîm spoke quickly
with the other in their own harsh tongue, and seeming troubled or
angered by what he heard, he darted into the passage and disappeared.
Now Andróg was all for going forward. \'Attack first!\' he cried.
\'There may be a hive of them; but they are small.\'
]{#calibre_link-1042 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Three only, I guess,\' said Túrin; and he led the way, while behind
him the outlaws groped along the passage by the feel of the rough walls.
Many times it bent this way and that at sharp angles; but at last a
faint light gleamed ahead, and they came into a small but lofty hall,
dim-lit by lamps hanging down out of the roof-shadow upon fine chains.
Mîm was not there, but his voice could be heard, and led by it Túrin
came to the door of a chamber opening at the back of the hall. Looking
in, he saw Mîm kneeling on the floor. Beside him stood silent the Dwarf
with the torch; but on a stone couch by the far wall lay another.
\'Khîm, Khîm, Khîm!\' the old Dwarf wailed, tearing at his beard.
]{#calibre_link-1044 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Not all your shots went wild,\' said Túrin to Andróg. \'But this may
prove an ill hit. You loose shaft too lightly; but you may not live long
enough to learn wisdom.\' ]{#calibre_link-1046 .calibre_class_4}

[Leaving the others, Túrin entered softly and stood behind Mîm, and
spoke to him. \'What is the trouble, master?\' he said. \'I have some
healing arts. May I help you?\' ]{#calibre_link-1048 .calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-47 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000013.jpg){.calibre8
shapes="_x0000_i1040"}]{#calibre_link-1050 .calibre_class_5}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-48 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Mîm turned his head, and his eyes had a red light. \'Not unless you can
turn back time and cut off the cruel hands of your men,\' he answered.
\'This is my son. An arrow was in his breast. Now he is beyond speech.
He died at sunset. Your bonds held me from healing him.\'
]{#calibre_link-1052 .calibre_class_4}

[Again pity long hardened welled in Túrin\'s heart as water from rock.
\'Alas!\' he said. \'I would recall that shaft, if I could. Now
Bar-en-Danwedh, House of Ransom, shall this be called in truth. For
whether we dwell here or no, I will hold myself in your debt; and if
ever I come to any wealth, I will pay you a *danwedh* of heavy gold for
your son, in token of sorrow, even if it gladdens your heart no more.\'
]{#calibre_link-1054 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Mîm rose and looked long at Túrin. \'I hear you,\' he said. \'You
speak like a dwarf-lord of old; and at that I marvel. Now my heart is
cooled, though it is not glad. My own ransom I will pay, therefore: you
may dwell here, if you will. But this I will add: he that loosed the
shaft shall break his bow and his arrows and lay them at my son\'s feet;
and he shall never take an arrow nor bear bow again. If he does, he
shall die by it. That curse I lay on him.\' ]{#calibre_link-1056
.calibre_class_4}

[Andróg was afraid when he heard of this curse; and though he did so
with great grudge, he broke his bow and his arrows and laid them at the
dead Dwarf\'s feet. But as he came out from the chamber, he glanced
evilly at Mîm, and muttered: \'The curse of a dwarf never dies, they
say; but a Man\'s too may come home. May he die with a dart in his
throat!\' ]{#calibre_link-1058 .calibre_class_4}

[That night they lay in the hall and slept uneasily for the wailing of
Mîm and of Ibun, his other son. When that ceased they could not tell;
but when they woke at last the Dwarves were gone and the chamber was
closed by a stone. The day was fair again, and in the morning sunshine
the outlaws washed in the pool and prepared such food as they had; and
as they ate Mîm stood before them. ]{#calibre_link-1060
.calibre_class_4}

[He bowed to Túrin. \'He is gone and all is done,\' he said. \'He lies
with his fathers. Now we turn to such life as is left, though the days
before us may be short. Does Mîm\'s home please you? Is the ransom paid
and accepted?\' ]{#calibre_link-1062 .calibre_class_4}

[\'It is,\' said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-1064 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Then all is yours, to order your dwelling here as you will, save
this: the chamber that is closed, none shall open it but me.\'
]{#calibre_link-1066 .calibre_class_4}

[\'We hear you,\' said Túrin. \'But as for our life here, we are secure,
or so it seems; but still we must have food, and other things. How shall
we go out; or still more, how shall we return?\' ]{#calibre_link-1068
.calibre_class_4}

[To their disquiet Mîm laughed in his throat. \'Do you fear that you
have followed a spider to the heart of his web?\' he said. \'Nay, Mîm
does not eat Men. And a spider could ill deal with thirty wasps at a
time. See, you are armed, and I stand here bare. No, we must share, you
and I: house, food, and fire, and maybe other winnings. The house, I
guess, you will guard and keep secret for your own good, even when you
know the ways in and out. You will learn them in time. But in the
meantime Mîm must guide you, or Ibun his son, when you go out; and one
will go where you go and return when you return - or await you at some
point that you know and can find unguided. Ever nearer and nearer home
will that be, I guess.\' ]{#calibre_link-1070 .calibre_class_4}

[To this Túrin agreed, and he thanked Mîm, and most of his men were
glad; for under the sun of morning, while summer was yet high, it seemed
a fair place to dwell in. Andróg alone was ill-content. \'The sooner we
are masters of our own goings and comings the better,\' he said. \'Never
before have we taken a prisoner with a grievance to and fro on our
ventures.\' ]{#calibre_link-1072 .calibre_class_4}

[That day they rested, and cleaned their arms and mended their gear; for
they had food to last a day or two yet, and Mîm added to what they had.
Three great cooking-pots he lent to them, and firing; and he brought out
a sack. \'Rubbish,\' he said. \'Not worth the stealing. Only wild
roots.\' ]{#calibre_link-1074 .calibre_class_4}

[But when they were washed the roots proved white and fleshy with their
skins, and when boiled they were good to eat, somewhat like bread; and
the outlaws were glad of them, for they had long lacked bread save when
they could steal it. \'Wild Elves know them not; Grey-elves have not
found them; the proud ones from over the Sea are too proud to delve,\'
said Mîm. ]{#calibre_link-1076 .calibre_class_4}

[\'What is their name?\' said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-1078
.calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-49 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Mîm looked at him sidelong. \'They have no name, save in the
dwarf-tongue, which we do not teach,\' he said. \'And we do not teach
Men to find them, for Men are greedy and thriftless, and would not spare
till all the plants had perished; whereas now they pass them by as they
go blundering in the wild. No more will you learn of me; but you may
have enough of my bounty, as long as you speak fair and do not spy or
steal.\' Then again he laughed in his throat. \'They are of great
worth,\' he said. \'More than gold in the hungry winter, for they may be
hoarded like the nuts of a squirrel, and already we were building our
store from the first that are ripe. But you are fools, if you think that
I would not be parted from one small load even for the saving of my
life.\' ]{#calibre_link-1080 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I hear you,\' said Ulrad, who had looked in the sack when Mîm was
taken. \'Yet you would not be parted, and your words only make me wonder
the more.\' ]{#calibre_link-1082 .calibre_class_4}

[Mîm turned and looked at him darkly. \'You are one of the fools that
spring would not mourn if you perished in winter,\' he said to him. \'I
had spoken my word, and so must have returned, willing or not, with sack
or without, let a lawless and faithless man think what he will! But I
love not to be parted from my own by force of the wicked, be it no more
than a shoe-thong. Do I not remember that your hands were among those
that put bonds upon me, and so held me that I did not speak again with
my son? Ever when I deal out the earth-bread from my store you will be
counted out, and if you eat it, you shall eat by the bounty of your
fellows, not of me.\' ]{#calibre_link-1084 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Mîm went away; but Ulrad, who had quailed under his anger, spoke
to his back: \'High words! Nonetheless the old rogue had other things in
his sack, of like shape but harder and heavier. Maybe there are other
things beside earth-bread in the wild which Elves have not found and Men
must not know!\' ]{#calibre_link-1086 .calibre_class_4}

[\'That may be,\' said Túrin. \'Nonetheless the Dwarf spoke the truth in
one point at least, calling you a fool. Why must you speak your
thoughts? Silence, if fair words stick in your throat, would serve all
our ends better.\' ]{#calibre_link-1088 .calibre_class_4}

[The day passed in peace, and none of the outlaws desired to go abroad.
Túrin paced much upon the green sward of the shelf, from brink to brink;
and he looked out east, and west, and north, and wondered to find how
far were the views in the clear air. Northward, and seeming strangely
near, he could descry the forest of Brethil climbing green about the
Amon Obel. Thither he found that his eyes would stray more often than he
wished, though he knew not why; for his heart was set rather to the
northwest, where league upon league away on the skirts of the sky it
seemed to him that he could glimpse the Mountains of Shadow and the
borders of his home. But at evening Túrin looked west into the sunset,
as the sun rode down red into the hazes above the far distant coasts,
and the Vale of Narog lay deep in the shadows between.
]{#calibre_link-1090 .calibre_class_4}

[So began the abiding of Túrin son of Húrin in the halls of Mîm, in
Bar-en-Danwedh, the House of Ransom. ]{#calibre_link-1092
.calibre_class_4}

[For a long while the life of the outlaws went well to their liking.
Food was not scarce, and they had good shelter, warm and dry, with room
enough and to spare; for they found that the caves could have housed a
hundred or more at need. There was another smaller hall further in. It
had a hearth at one side, above which a smoke-shaft ran up through the
rock to a vent cunningly hidden in a crevice on the hillside. There were
also many other chambers, opening out of the halls or the passage
between them, some for dwelling, some for works or for stores. In
storage Mîm had more arts than they, and he had many vessels and chests
of stone and wood that looked to be of great age. But most of the
chambers were now empty: in the armouries hung axes and other gear
rusted and dusty, shelves and aumbries were bare; and the smithies were
idle. Save one: a small room that led out of the inner hall and had a
hearth which shared the smoke-vent of the hearth in the hall. There Mîm
would work at times, but would not allow others to be with him; and he
did not tell of a secret hidden stair that led from his house to the
flat summit of Amon Rûdh. This Andróg came upon when seeking in hunger
to find Mîm\'s stores of food he became lost in the caves; but he kept
this discovery to himself. ]{#calibre_link-1094 .calibre_class_4}

[During the rest of that year they went on no more raids, and if they
stirred abroad for hunting or gathering of food they went for the most
part in small parties. But for a long while they found it hard to
retrace their road, and beside Túrin not more than six of his men became
ever sure of the way. Nonetheless, seeing that those skilled in such
things could come to their lair without Mîm\'s help, they set a watch by
day and night near to the cleft in the north-wall. From the south they
expected no enemies, nor was there fear of any climbing Amon Rûdh from
that quarter; but by day there was at most times a watchman set on the
top of the crown, who could look far all about. Steep as were the sides
of the crown, the summit could be reached, for to the east of the
cave-mouth rough steps had been hewn leading up to slopes where men
could clamber unaided. ]{#calibre_link-1096 .calibre_class_4}
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-50 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[So the year wore on without hurt or alarm. But as the days drew in, and
the pool became grey and cold and the birches bare, and great rains
returned, they had to pass more time in shelter. Then they soon grew
weary of the dark under hill, or the dim half-light of the halls; and to
most it seemed that life would be better if it were not shared with Mîm.
Too often he would appear out of some shadowy corner or doorway when
they thought him elsewhere; and when Mîm was near unease fell on their
talk. They took to speaking ever to one another in whispers.
]{#calibre_link-1098 .calibre_class_4}

[ ]{#calibre_link-1099 .calibre_class_5}

[Yet, and strange it seemed to them, with Túrin it went otherwise; and
he became ever more friendly with the old Dwarf, and listened more and
more to his counsels. In the winter that followed he would sit for long
hours with Mîm, listening to his lore and the tales of his life; nor did
Túrin rebuke him if he spoke ill of the Eldar. Mîm seemed well pleased,
and showed much favour to Túrin in return; him only would he admit to
his smithy at times, and there they would talk softly together.
]{#calibre_link-1101 .calibre_class_4}

[But when autumn was passed the winter pressed them hard. Before Yule
snow came down from the North heavier than they had known it in the
river-vales; at that time, and ever the more as the power of Angband
grew, the winters worsened in Beleriand. Amon Rûdh was covered deep, and
only the hardiest dared stir abroad. Some fell sick, and all were
pinched with hunger. ]{#calibre_link-1103 .calibre_class_4}

[In the dim dusk of a day in midwinter there appeared suddenly among
them a Man, as it seemed, of great bulk and girth, cloaked and hooded in
white. He had eluded their watchmen, and he walked up to their fire
without a word. When men sprang up he laughed and threw back his hood,
and they saw that it was Beleg Strongbow. Under his wide cloak he bore a
great pack in which he had brought many things for the help of men.
]{#calibre_link-1105 .calibre_class_4}

[In this way Beleg came back to Túrin, yielding to his love against his
wisdom. Túrin was glad indeed, for he had often regretted his
stubbornness; and now the desire of his heart was granted without the
need to humble himself or to yield his own will. But if Túrin was glad,
not so was Andróg, nor some others of his company. It seemed to them
that there had been a tryst between Beleg and their captain, which he
had kept secret from them; and Andróg watched them jealously as the two
sat apart in speech together. ]{#calibre_link-1107 .calibre_class_4}

[Beleg had brought with him the Helm of Hador; for he hoped that it
might lift Túrin\'s thought again above his life in the wild as the
leader of a petty company. \'This is your own which I bring back to
you,\' he said to Túrin as he took out the helm. \'It was left in my
keeping on the north-marches; but was not forgotten, I think.\'
]{#calibre_link-1109 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Almost,\' said Túrin; \'but it shall not be so again\'; and he fell
silent, looking far away with the eyes of his thought, until suddenly he
caught the gleam of another thing that Beleg held in his hand. It was
the gift of Melian; but the silver leaves were red in the firelight, and
when Túrin saw the seal his eyes darkened. \'What have you there?\' he
said. ]{#calibre_link-1111 .calibre_class_4}

[\'The greatest gift that one who loves you still has to give,\'
answered Beleg. \'Here is *lembas in-Elidh,* the waybread of the Eldar
that no man has yet tasted.\' ]{#calibre_link-1113 .calibre_class_4}

[\'The helm of my fathers I take, with good will for your keeping,\'
said Túrin. \'But I will not receive gifts out of Doriath.\'
]{#calibre_link-1115 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Then send back your sword and your arms,\' said Beleg. \'Send back
also the teaching and fostering of your youth. And let your men, who
(you say) have been faithful, die in the desert to please your mood!
Nonetheless this waybread was a gift not to you but to me, and I may do
with it as I will. Eat it not, if it sticks in your throat; but others
may be more hungry and less proud.\' ]{#calibre_link-1117
.calibre_class_4}

[Túrin\'s eyes glinted, but as he looked in Beleg\'s face the fire in
them died, and they went grey, and he said in a voice hardly to be
heard: \'I wonder, friend, that you deign to come back to such a churl.
From you I will take whatever you give, even rebuke. Henceforward you
shall counsel me in all ways, save the road to Doriath only.\'
]{#calibre_link-1119 .calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-51 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000014.jpg){.calibre19
shapes="_x0000_i1041"}]{#calibre_link-1121 .calibre_class_5}

[In the days that followed Beleg laboured much for the good of the
Company. Those that were hurt or sick he tended, and they were quickly
healed. For in those days the Grey-elves were still a high people,
possessing great power, and they were wise in the ways of life and of
all living things; and though they were less in crafts and lore than the
Exiles from Valinor they had many arts beyond the reach of Men. Moreover
Beleg the Archer was great among the people of Doriath; he was strong,
and enduring, and far-sighted in mind as well as eye, and at need he was
valiant in battle, relying not only upon the swift arrows of his long
bow, but also upon his great sword Anglachel. And ever the more did
hatred grow in the heart of Mîm, who hated all Elves, as has been told,
and who looked with a jealous eye on the love that Túrin bore to Beleg.
]{#calibre_link-1123 .calibre_class_3}

[When winter passed, and the stirring came, and the spring, the outlaws
soon had sterner work to do. Morgoth\'s might was moved; and as the long
fingers of a groping hand the forerunners of his armies probed the ways
into Beleriand. ]{#calibre_link-1125 .calibre_class_3}

[Who knows now the counsels of Morgoth? Who can measure the reach of his
thought, who had been Melkor, mighty among the Ainur of the Great Song,
and sat now, the dark lord upon a dark throne in the North, weighing in
his malice all the tidings that came to him, whether by spy or by
traitor, seeing in the eyes of his mind and understanding far more of
the deeds and purposes of his enemies than even the wisest of them
feared, save Melian the Queen. To her often his thought reached out, and
there was foiled. ]{#calibre_link-1127 .calibre_class_3}

[In this year, therefore, he turned his malice towards the lands west of
Sirion, where there was still power to oppose him. Gondolin still stood,
but it was hidden. Doriath he knew, but could not enter yet. Further
still lay Nargothrond, to which none of his servants had yet found the
way, a name of fear to them; there the people of Finrod dwelt in hidden
strength. And far away from the South, beyond the white woods of the
birches of Nimbrethil, from the coast of Arvernien and the mouths of
Sirion, came rumour of the Havens of the Ships. Thither he could not
reach until all else had fallen. ]{#calibre_link-1129 .calibre_class_3}

[So now the Orcs came down out of the North in ever greater numbers.
Through Anach they came, and Dimbar was taken, and all the north-marches
of Doriath were infested. Down the ancient road they came that led
through the long defile of Sirion, past the isle where Minas Tirith of
Finrod had stood, and so through the land between Malduin and Sirion and
then on through the eaves of Brethil to the Crossings of Teiglin. Thence
of old the road passed on into the Guarded Plain, and then, along the
feet of the highlands watched over by Amon Rûdh, it ran down into the
vale of Narog and came at last to Nargothrond. But the Orcs did not go
far upon that road as yet; for there dwelt now in the wild a terror that
was hidden, and upon the red hill were watchful eyes of which they had
not been warned. ]{#calibre_link-1131 .calibre_class_3}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-52 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[In that spring Túrin put on again the Helm of Hador, and Beleg was
glad. At first their company had less than fifty men, but the woodcraft
of Beleg and the valour of Túrin made them seem to their enemies as a
host. The scouts of the Orcs were hunted, their camps were espied, and
if they gathered to march in force in some narrow place, out of the
rocks or from the shadow of the trees there leaped the Dragon-helm and
his men, tall and fierce. Soon at the very sound of his horn in the
hills their captains would quail and the Orcs would turn to flight
before any arrow whined or sword was drawn. ]{#calibre_link-1133
.calibre_class_4}

[It has been told that when Mîm surrendered his hidden dwelling on Amon
Rûdh to Túrin and his company, he demanded that he who had loosed the
arrow that slew his son should break his bow and his arrows and lay them
at the feet of Khîm; and that man was Andróg. Then with great ill-will
Andróg did as Mîm bade. Moreover Mîm declared that Andróg must never
again bear bow and arrow, and he laid a curse on him, that if
nevertheless he should do so, then would he meet his own death by that
means. ]{#calibre_link-1135 .calibre_class_4}

[Now in the spring of that year Andróg defied the curse of Mîm and took
up a bow again in a foray from Bar-en-Danwedh; and in that foray he was
struck by a poisoned orc-arrow, and was brought back dying in pain. But
Beleg healed him of his wound. And now the hatred that Mîm bore to Beleg
was increased still more, for he had thus undone his curse; but \'it
will bite again,\' he said. ]{#calibre_link-1137 .calibre_class_4}

[In that year far and wide in Beleriand the whisper went, under wood and
over stream and through the passes of the hills, saying that the Bow and
Helm that had fallen in Dimbar (as was thought) had arisen again beyond
hope. Then many, both Elves and Men, who went leaderless, dispossessed
but undaunted, remnants of battle and defeat and lands laid waste, took
heart again, and came to seek the Two Captains, though where they had
their stronghold none yet knew. Túrin received gladly all who came to
him, but by the counsel of Beleg he admitted no newcomer to his refuge
upon Amon Rûdh (and that was now named Echad i Sedryn, Camp of the
Faithful); the way thither only those of the Old Company knew and no
others were admitted. But other guarded camps and forts were established
round about: in the forest eastward, or in the highlands, or in the
southward fens, from Methed-en-glad (\'the End of the Wood\') south of
the Crossings of Teiglin to Bar-erib some leagues south of Amon Rûdh in
the once fertile land between Narog and the Meres of Sirion. From all
these places men could see the summit of Amon Rûdh, and by signals
receive tidings and commands. ]{#calibre_link-1139 .calibre_class_4}

[In this way, before the summer had passed, the following of Túrin had
swelled to a great force, and the power of Angband was thrown back. Word
of this came even to Nargothrond, and many there grew restless, saying
that if an outlaw could do such hurt to the Enemy, what might not the
Lord of Narog do. But Orodreth King of Nargothrond would not change his
counsels. In all things he followed Thingol, with whom he exchanged
messengers by secret ways; and he was a wise lord, according to the
wisdom of those who considered first their own people, and how long they
might preserve their life and wealth against the lust of the North.
Therefore he allowed none of his people to go to Túrin, and he sent
messengers to say to him that in all that he might do or devise in his
war he should not set foot in the land of Nargothrond, nor drive Orcs
thither. But help other than in arms he offered to the Two Captains,
should they have need (and in this, it is thought, he was moved by
Thingol and Melian). ]{#calibre_link-1141 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Morgoth withheld his hand; though he made frequent feint of
attack, so that by easy victory the confidence of these rebels might
become overweening. As it proved indeed. For Túrin now gave the name of
Dor-Cúarthol to all the land between Teiglin and the west march of
Doriath; and claiming the lordship of it he named himself anew, Gorthol,
the Dread Helm; and his heart was high. But to Beleg it seemed now that
the Helm had wrought otherwise with Túrin than he had hoped; and looking
into the days to come he was troubled in mind. ]{#calibre_link-1143
.calibre_class_4}

[One day as summer was wearing on he and Túrin were sitting in the Echad
resting after a long affray and march. Túrin said then to Beleg: \'Why
are you sad, and thoughtful? Does not all go well, since you returned to
me? Has not my purpose proved good?\' ]{#calibre_link-1145
.calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-53 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'All is well now,\' said Beleg. \'Our enemies are still surprised and
afraid. And still good days lie before us - for a while.\'
]{#calibre_link-1147 .calibre_class_4}

[\'And what then?\' said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-1149 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Winter,\' said Beleg. \'And after that another year, for those who
live to see it.\' ]{#calibre_link-1151 .calibre_class_4}

[\'And what then?\' ]{#calibre_link-1153 .calibre_class_4}

[\'The wrath of Angband. We have burned the fingertips of the Black
Hand - no more. It will not withdraw.\' ]{#calibre_link-1155
.calibre_class_4}

[\'But is not the wrath of Angband our purpose and delight?\' said
Túrin. \'What else would you have me do?\' ]{#calibre_link-1157
.calibre_class_4}

[\'You know full well,\' said Beleg. \'But of that road you have
forbidden me to speak. But hear me now. A king or the lord of a great
host has many needs. He must have a secure refuge; and he must have
wealth, and many whose work is not in war. With numbers comes the need
of food, more than the wild will furnish to hunters. And there comes the
passing of secrecy. Amon Rûdh is a good place for a few - it has eyes
and ears. But it stands alone, and is seen far off; and no great force
is needed to surround it - unless a host defends it, greater far than
ours is yet or than it is likely ever to be.\' ]{#calibre_link-1159
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Nonetheless, I will be the captain of my own host,\' said Túrin;
\'and if I fall, then I fall. Here I stand in the path of Morgoth, and
while I so stand he cannot use the southward road.\'
]{#calibre_link-1161 .calibre_class_4}

[Report of the Dragon-helm in the land west of Sirion came swiftly to
the ear of Morgoth, and he laughed, for now Túrin was revealed to him
again, who had long been lost in the shadows and under the veils of
Melian. Yet he began to fear that Túrin would grow to such a power that
the curse that he had laid upon him would become void, and he would
escape the doom that had been designed for him, or else that he might
retreat to Doriath and be lost to his sight again. Now therefore he had
a mind to seize Túrin and afflict him even as his father, to torment him
and enslave him. ]{#calibre_link-1163 .calibre_class_4}

[Beleg had spoken truly when he said to Túrin that they had but scorched
the fingers of the Black Hand, and that it would not withdraw. But
Morgoth concealed his designs, and for that time contented himself with
the sending out of his most skilled scouts; and ere long Amon Rûdh was
surrounded by spies, lurking unobserved in the wilderness and making no
move against the parties of men that went in and out.
]{#calibre_link-1165 .calibre_class_4}

[But Mîm was aware of the presence of Orcs in the lands about Amon Rûdh,
and the hatred that he bore to Beleg led him now in his darkened heart
to an evil resolve. One day in the waning of the year he told the men in
Bar-en-Danwedh that he was going with his son Ibun to search for roots
for their winter store; but his true purpose was to seek out the
servants of Morgoth, and to lead them to Túrin\'s
hiding-place.]{#calibre_link-1167
.calibre_class_3}^[∗\ ]{#calibre_link-1168
.calibre_class_3}^[]{#calibre_link-1169 .calibre_class_3}

[Nevertheless he attempted to impose certain conditions on the Orcs, who
laughed at him, but Mîm said that they knew little if they believed that
they could gain anything from a Petty-dwarf by torture. Then they asked
him what these conditions might be, and Mîm declared his demands: that
they pay him the weight in iron of each man whom they caught or slew,
but of Túrin and Beleg in gold; that Mîm\'s house, when rid of Túrin and
his company, be left to him, and himself unmolested; that Beleg be left
behind, bound, for Mîm to deal with; and that Túrin be let go free.
]{#calibre_link-1171 .calibre_class_4}

[To these conditions the emissaries of Morgoth readily agreed, with no
intention of fulfilling either the first or the second. The Orc-captain
thought that the fate of Beleg might well be left to Mîm; but as to
letting Túrin go free, \'alive to Angband\' were his orders. While
agreeing to the conditions he insisted that they keep Ibun as hostage;
and then Mîm became afraid, and tried to back out of his undertaking, or
else to escape. But the Orcs had his son, and so Mîm was obliged to
guide them to Bar-en-Danwedh. Thus was the House of Ransom betrayed.
]{#calibre_link-1173 .calibre_class_4}

[It has been told that the stony mass that was the crown or cap of Amon
Rûdh had a bare or flattened top, but that steep as were its sides men
could reach the summit by climbing a stair cut into the rock, leading
]{#calibre_link-1175 .calibre_class_4}

[∗ ]{#calibre_link-1177 .calibre_class_9}[But another tale is told,
which has it that Mîm did not encounter the Orcs with deliberate intent.
It was the capture of his son and their threat to torture him that led
Mîm to his treachery. ]{#calibre_link-1178 .calibre_class_9}
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-54 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[up from the shelf or terrace before the entrance to Mîm\'s house. On
the summit watchmen were set, and they gave warning of the approach of
the enemies. But these, guided by Mîm, came onto the level shelf before
the doors, and Túrin and Beleg were driven back to the entrance of
Bar-en-Danwedh. Some of the men who tried to climb up the steps cut in
the rock were shot down by the arrows of the Orcs. ]{#calibre_link-1180
.calibre_class_4}

[Túrin and Beleg retreated into the cave, and rolled a great stone
across the passage. In these straits Andróg revealed to them the hidden
stair leading to the flat summit of Amon Rûdh which he had found when
lost in the caves, as has been told. Then Túrin and Beleg with many of
their men went up by this stair and came out on the summit, surprising
those few of the Orcs who had already come there by the outer path, and
driving them over the edge. For a little while they held off the Orcs
climbing up the rock, but they had no shelter on the bare summit, and
many were shot from below. Most valiant of these was Andróg, who fell
mortally wounded by an arrow at the head of the outside stair.
]{#calibre_link-1182 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin and Beleg with the ten men left to them drew back to the
centre of the summit, where there was a standing stone, and making a
ring about it they defended themselves until all were slain save Beleg
and Túrin, for over them the Orcs cast nets. Túrin was bound and carried
off; Beleg who was wounded was bound likewise, but he was laid on the
ground with wrists and ankles tied to iron pins driven in to the rock.
]{#calibre_link-1184 .calibre_class_4}

[Now the Orcs, finding the issue of the secret stair, left the summit
and entered Bar-en-Danwedh, which they defiled and ravaged. They did not
find Mîm, lurking in his caves, and when they had departed from Amon
Rûdh Mîm appeared on the summit, and going to where Beleg lay prostrate
and unmoving he gloated over him while he sharpened a knife.
]{#calibre_link-1186 .calibre_class_4}

[But Mîm and Beleg were not the only living beings on that stony height.
Andróg, though himself wounded to the death, crawled among the dead
bodies towards them, and seizing a sword he thrust it at the Dwarf.
Shrieking in fear Mîm ran to the brink of the cliff and disappeared: he
fled down a steep and difficult goat\'s path that was known to him. But
Andróg putting forth his last strength cut through the wristbands and
fetters that bound Beleg, and so released him; but dying he said: \'My
hurts are too deep even for your healing.\' ]{#calibre_link-1188
.calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-55 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000015.jpg){.calibre21
shapes="_x0000_i1042"}]{#calibre_link-1190 .calibre_class_5}

[Beleg sought among the dead for Túrin, to bury him; but he could not
discover his body. He knew then that Húrin\'s son was still alive, and
taken to Angband; but he remained perforce in Bar-en-Danwedh until his
wounds were healed. He set out then with little hope to try to find the
trail of the Orcs, and he came upon their tracks near the Crossings of
Teiglin. There they divided, some passing along the eaves of the Forest
of Brethil towards the Ford of Brithiach, while others turned away
westwards; and it seemed plain to Beleg that he must follow those that
went direct with greatest speed to Angband, making for the Pass of
Anach. Therefore he journeyed on through Dimbar, and up to the Pass of
Anach in Ered Gorgoroth, the Mountains of Terror, and so to the
highlands of Taur-nu-Fuin, the Forest under Night, a region of dread and
dark enchantment, of wandering and despair. ]{#calibre_link-1192
.calibre_class_3}

[Benighted in that evil land, it chanced that Beleg saw a small light
among the trees, and going towards it he found an Elf, lying asleep
beneath a great dead tree: beside his head was a lamp, from which the
covering had slipped off. Then Beleg woke the sleeper, and gave him
*lembas,* and asked him what fate had brought him to this terrible
place; and he named himself Gwindor, son of Guilin. ]{#calibre_link-1194
.calibre_class_3}

[Grieving Beleg looked at him, for Gwindor was but a bent and timid
shadow of his former shape and mood, when in the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears that lord of Nargothrond rode to the very doors of Angband, and
there was taken. For few of the Noldor whom Morgoth took captive were
put to death, because of their skill in mining for metals and gems; and
Gwindor was not slain, but put to labour in the mines of the North.
These Noldor possessed many of the Fëanorian lamps, which were crystals
hung in a fine chain net, the crystals being ever-shining with an inner
blue radiance marvellous for finding the way in the darkness of night or
in tunnels; of these lamps they themselves did not know the secret. Many
of the mining Elves thus escaped from the darkness of the mines, for
they were able to bore their way out; but Gwindor received a small sword
from one who worked in the forges, and when working in a stone-gang
turned suddenly on the guards. He escaped, but with one hand cut off;
and now he lay exhausted under the great pines of Taur-nu-Fuin.
]{#calibre_link-1196 .calibre_class_3}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-56 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[From Gwindor Beleg learned that the small company of Orcs ahead of
them, from whom he had hidden, had no captives, and were going with
speed: an advance guard, perhaps, bearing report to Angband. At this
news Beleg despaired: for he guessed that the tracks that he had seen
turning away westwards after the Crossings of Teiglin were those of a
greater host, who had in orc-fashion gone marauding in the lands seeking
food and plunder, and might now be returning to Angband by way of \'the
Narrow Land\', the long defile of Sirion, much further to the west. If
this were so, his sole hope lay in returning to the Ford of Brithiach,
and then going north to Tol Sirion. But scarcely had he determined on
this than they heard the noise of a great host approaching through the
forest from the south; and hiding in the boughs of a tree they watched
the servants of Morgoth pass, moving slowly, laden with booty and
captives, surrounded by wolves. And they saw Túrin with chained hands
being driven on with whips. ]{#calibre_link-1198 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Beleg told him of his own errand in Taur-nu-Fuin; and Gwindor
sought to dissuade him from his quest, saying that he would but join
Túrin in the anguish that awaited him. But Beleg would not abandon
Túrin, and despairing himself he aroused hope again in Gwindor\'s heart;
and together they went on, following the Orcs until they came out of the
forest on the high slopes that ran down to the barren dunes of the
Anfauglith. There within sight of\'the peaks of Thangorodrim the Orcs
made their encampment in a bare dale, and set wolf-sentinels all about
its rim. There they fell to carousing and feasting on their booty; and
after tormenting their prisoners most fell drunkenly asleep. By that
time day was failing and it became very dark. A great storm rode up out
of the West, and thunder rumbled far off as Beleg and Gwindor crept
towards the camp. ]{#calibre_link-1200 .calibre_class_4}

[When all in the camp were sleeping Beleg took up his bow and in the
darkness shot four of the wolf-sentinels on the south side, one by one
and silently. Then in great peril they entered in, and they found Túrin
fettered hand and foot and tied to a tree. All about knives that had
been cast at him by his tormentors were embedded in the trunk, but he
was not hurt; and he was senseless in a drugged stupor or swooned in a
sleep of utter weariness. Then Beleg and Gwindor cut the bonds from the
tree, and bore Túrin out of the camp. But he was too heavy to carry far,
and they could go no further than to a thicket of thorn trees high on
the slopes above the camp. There they laid him down; and now the storm
drew nearer, and lightning flashed on Thangorodrim. Beleg drew his sword
Anglachel, and with it he cut the fetters that bound Túrin; but fate was
that day more strong, for the blade of Eöl the Dark Elf slipped in his
hand, and pricked Túrin\'s foot. ]{#calibre_link-1202 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin was roused into a sudden wakefulness of rage and fear, and
seeing a form bending over him in the gloom with a naked blade in hand
he leapt up with a great cry, believing that Orcs were come again to
torment him; and grappling with him in the darkness he seized Anglachel,
and slew Beleg Cúthalion thinking him a foe. ]{#calibre_link-1204
.calibre_class_4}

[But as he stood, finding himself free, and ready to sell his life
dearly against imagined foes, there came a great flash of lightning
above them, and in its light he looked down on Beleg\'s face. Then Túrin
stood stonestill and silent, staring on that dreadful death, knowing
what he had done; and so terrible was his face, lit by the lightning
that flickered all about them, that Gwindor cowered down upon the ground
and dared not raise his eyes. ]{#calibre_link-1206 .calibre_class_4}

[But now in the camp beneath the Orcs were roused, both by the storm and
by Túrin\'s cry, and discovered that Túrin was gone; but no search was
made for him, for they were filled with terror by the thunder that came
out of the West, believing that it was sent against them by the great
Enemies beyond the Sea. Then a wind arose, and great rains fell, and
torrents swept down from the heights of Taur-nu-Fuin; and though Gwindor
cried out to Túrin, warning him of their utmost peril, he made no
answer, but sat unmoving and unweeping beside the body of Beleg
Cúthalion, lying in the dark forest slain by his hand even as he cut the
bonds of thraldom from him. ]{#calibre_link-1208 .calibre_class_4}

[When morning came the storm was passed away eastward over Lothlann, and
the sun of autumn rose hot and bright; but the Orcs hating this almost
as much as the thunder, and believing that Túrin would have fled far
from that place and all trace of his flight be washed away, they
departed in haste, eager to return to Angband. Far off Gwindor saw them
marching northward over the steaming sands of Anfauglith. Thus it came
to pass that they returned to Morgoth empty-handed, and left behind them
the son of Húrin, who sat crazed and unwitting on the slopes of
Taur-nu-Fuin, bearing a burden heavier than their bonds.
]{#calibre_link-1210 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-57 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Then Gwindor roused Túrin to aid him in the burial of Beleg, and he
rose as one that walked in sleep; and together they laid Beleg in a
shallow grave, and placed beside him Belthronding his great bow, that
was made of black yew-wood. But the dread sword Anglachel Gwindor took,
saying that it were better that it should take vengeance on the servants
of Morgoth than lie useless in the earth; and he took also the *lembas*
of Melian to strengthen them in the wild. ]{#calibre_link-1212
.calibre_class_4}

[Thus ended Beleg Strongbow, truest of friends, greatest in skill of all
that harboured in the woods of Beleriand in the Elder Days, at the hand
of him whom he most loved; and that grief was graven on the face of
Túrin and never faded. ]{#calibre_link-1214 .calibre_class_4}

[But courage and strength were renewed in the Elf of Nargothrond, and
departing from Taur-nu-Fuin he led Túrin far away. Never once as they
wandered together on long and grievous paths did Túrin speak, and he
walked as one without wish or purpose, while the year waned and winter
drew on over the northern lands. But Gwindor was ever beside him to
guard him and guide him; and thus they passed westward over Sirion and
came at length to the Beautiful Mere and Eithel Ivrin, the springs
whence Narog rose beneath the Mountains of Shadow. There Gwindor spoke
to Túrin, saying: \'Awake, Túrin son of Húrin! On Ivrin\'s lake is
endless laughter. She is fed from crystal fountains unfailing, and
guarded from defilement by Ulmo, Lord of Waters, who wrought her beauty
in ancient days.\' Then Túrin knelt and drank from that water; and
suddenly he cast himself down, and his tears were unloosed at last, and
he was healed of his madness. ]{#calibre_link-1216 .calibre_class_4}

[There he made a song for Beleg, and he named it *Laer Cú Beleg,* the
Song of the Great Bow, singing it aloud heedless of peril. And Gwindor
gave the sword Anglachel into his hands, and Túrin knew that it was
heavy and strong and had great power; but its blade was black and dull
and its edges blunt. Then Gwindor said: \'This is a strange blade, and
unlike any that I have seen in Middle-earth. It mourns for Beleg even as
you do. But be comforted; for I return to Nargothrond of the House of
Finarfin, where I was born and dwelt before my grief. You shall come
with me, and be healed and renewed.\' ]{#calibre_link-1218
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Who are you?\' said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-1220 .calibre_class_4}

[\'A wandering Elf, a thrall escaped, whom Beleg met and comforted,\'
said Gwindor. \'Yet once I was Gwindor son of Guilin, a lord of
Nargothrond, until I went to the Nirnaeth Arnoediad, and was enslaved in
Angband.\' ]{#calibre_link-1222 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Then have you seen Húrin son of Galdor, the warrior of Dor-lómin?\'
said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-1224 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I have not seen him,\' said Gwindor. \'But the rumour runs through
Angband that he still defies Morgoth; and Morgoth has laid a curse upon
him and all his kin.\' ]{#calibre_link-1226 .calibre_class_4}

[\'That I do believe,\' said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-1228
.calibre_class_4}

[And now they arose, and departing from Eithel Ivrin they journeyed
southward along the banks of Narog, until they were taken by scouts of
the Elves and brought as prisoners to the hidden stronghold.
]{#calibre_link-1230 .calibre_class_4}

[Thus did Túrin come to Nargothrond. ]{#calibre_link-1232
.calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-58 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[At first his own people did not know Gwindor, who went out young and
strong, and returned now seeming as one of the aged among mortal Men,
because of his torments and his labours; and now also he was maimed. But
Finduilas daughter of Orodreth the King knew him and welcomed him, for
she had loved him, and indeed they were betrothed, before the Nirnaeth,
and so greatly did Gwindor love her beauty that he named her Faelivrin,
which is the sheen of the sun upon the pools of Ivrin.
]{#calibre_link-1234 .calibre_class_5}

[Thus Gwindor came home, and for his sake Túrin was admitted with him;
for Gwindor said that he was a valiant man, dear friend of Beleg
Cüthalion of Doriath. But when Gwindor would tell his name Túrin checked
him, saying: \'I am Agarwaen, the son of Úmarth (which is the
Bloodstained, son of Ill-fate), a hunter in the woods.\' But though the
Elves guessed that he took these names because of the slaying of his
friend (not knowing other reasons), they questioned him no more.
]{#calibre_link-1236 .calibre_class_4}

[The sword Anglachel was forged anew for him by the cunning smiths of
Nargothrond, and though ever black its edges shone with pale fire. Then
Túrin himself became known in Nargothrond as Mormegil, the Black Sword,
for the rumour of his deeds with that weapon; but he named the sword
Gurthang, Iron of Death. ]{#calibre_link-1238 .calibre_class_4}

[Because of his prowess and his skill in warfare with Orcs Túrin found
favour with Orodreth, and was admitted to his council. Now Túrin had no
liking for the manner of fighting of the Elves of Nargothrond, of ambush
and stealth and secret arrow, and he urged that it be abandoned, and
that they should use their strength to attack the servants of the Enemy,
to open battle and pursuit. But Gwindor spoke ever against Túrin in this
matter in the council of the King, saying that he had been in Angband
and had had a glimpse of the power of Morgoth, and had some inkling of
his designs. \'Petty victories will prove profitless at the last,\' he
said; \'for thus Morgoth learns where the boldest of his enemies are to
be found, and gathers strength great enough to destroy them. All the
might of the Elves and Edain united sufficed only to contain him, and to
gain the peace of a siege; long indeed, but only so long as Morgoth
bided his time before he broke the leaguer; and never again can such a
union be made. Only in secrecy lies hope of survival. Until the Valar
come.\' ]{#calibre_link-1240 .calibre_class_4}
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-59 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'The Valar!\' said Túrin. \'They have forsaken you, and they hold Men
in scorn. What use to look westward across the endless Sea to a dying
sunset in the West? There is but one Vala with whom we have to do, and
that is Morgoth; and if in the end we cannot overcome him, at least we
can hurt him and hinder him. For victory is victory, however small, nor
is its worth only from what follows from it. But it is expedient also.
Secrecy is not finally possible: arms are the only wall against Morgoth.
If you do nothing to halt him, all Beleriand will fall under his shadow
before many years are passed, and then one by one he will smoke you out
of your earths. And what then? A pitiable remnant will fly south and
west, to cower on the shores of the Sea, caught between Morgoth and
Ossë. Better then to win a time of glory, though it be short-lived; for
the end will be no worse. You speak of secrecy, and say that therein
lies the only hope; but could you ambush and waylay every scout and spy
of Morgoth to the last and least, so that none came ever back with
tidings to Angband, yet from that he would learn that you lived and
guess where. And this also I say: though mortal Men have little life
beside the span of the Elves, they would rather spend it in battle than
fly or submit. The defiance of Húrin Thalion is a great deed; and though
Morgoth slay the doer he cannot make the deed not to have been. Even the
Lords of the West will honour it; and is it not written into the history
of Arda, which neither Morgoth nor Manwë can unwrite?\'
]{#calibre_link-1242 .calibre_class_4}

[\'You speak of high things,\' Gwindor answered, \'and plain it is that
you have lived among the Eldar. But a darkness is on you if you set
Morgoth and Manwë together, or speak of the Valar as the foes of Elves
and Men; for the Valar scorn nothing, and least of all the Children of
Ilúvatar. Nor do you know all the hopes of the Eldar. It is a prophecy
among us that one day a messenger from Middle-earth will come through
the shadows to Valinor, and Manwë will hear, and Mandos relent. For that
time shall we not attempt to preserve the seed of the Noldor, and of the
Edain also? And Círdan dwells now in the South, and there is building of
ships; but what know you of ships, or of the Sea? You think of yourself
and of your own glory, and bid us each do likewise; but we must think of
others beside ourselves, for not all can fight and fall, and those we
must keep from war and ruin, while we can.\' ]{#calibre_link-1244
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Then send them to your ships, while there is yet time,\' said Túrin.
]{#calibre_link-1246 .calibre_class_4}

[\'They will not be parted from us,\' said Gwindor, \'even could Círdan
sustain them. We must abide together as long as we may, and not court
death.\' ]{#calibre_link-1248 .calibre_class_4}

[\'All this I have answered,\' said Túrin. \'Valiant defence of the
borders and hard blows ere the enemy gathers; in that course lies the
best hope of your long abiding together. And do those that you speak of
love such skulkers in the woods, hunting strays like a wolf, better than
one who puts on his helm and figured shield, and drives away the foe, be
they far greater than all his host? At least the women of the Edain do
not. They did not hold back the men from the Nirnaeth Arnoediad.\'
]{#calibre_link-1250 .calibre_class_4}

[\'But they suffered greater woe than if that field had not been
fought,\' said Gwindor. ]{#calibre_link-1252 .calibre_class_4}

[But Túrin advanced greatly in the favour of Orodreth, and he became the
chief counsellor of the King, who submitted all things to his advice. In
that time the Elves of Nargothrond forsook their secrecy, and great
store of weapons were made; and by the counsel of Túrin the Noldor built
a mighty bridge over the Narog from the Doors of Felagund for the
swifter passage of their arms, since war was now chiefly east of Narog
in the Guarded Plain. As its north-march Nargothrond now held the
\'Debatable Land\' about the sources of Ginglith, Narog, and the fringes
of the Woods of Núath. Between Nenning and Narog no Orc came; and east
of Narog their realm went to the Teiglin and the borders of the Moors of
the Nibin-noeg. ]{#calibre_link-1254 .calibre_class_4}

[Gwindor fell into dishonour, for he was no longer forward in arms, and
his strength was small; and the pain of his maimed left arm was often
upon him. But Túrin was young, and only now reached his full manhood;
and he was in truth the son of Morwen Eledhwen to look upon: tall,
dark-haired and pale-skinned, with grey eyes, and his face more
beautiful than any other among mortal men, in the Elder Days. His speech
and bearing were those of the ancient kingdom of Doriath, and even among
the Elves he might be taken at first meeting for one from the great
houses of the Noldor. So valiant was Túrin, and so exceedingly skilled
in ]{#calibre_link-1256 .calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-60 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000016.jpg){.calibre8
shapes="_x0000_i1043"}]{#calibre_link-1258 .calibre_class_5}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-61 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[arms, especially with sword and shield, that the Elves said that he
could not be slain, save by mischance, or an evil arrow from afar.
Therefore they gave him dwarf-mail, to guard him; and in a grim mood he
found in the armouries a dwarf-mask all gilded, and he put it on before
battle, and his enemies fled before his face. ]{#calibre_link-1260
.calibre_class_4}

[Now that he had his way, and all went well, and he had work to do after
his heart, and had honour in it, he was courteous to all, and less grim
than of old, so that well nigh all hearts were turned to him; and many
called him Adanedhel, the Elf-man. But most of all Finduilas the
daughter of Orodreth found her heart moved whenever he came near, or was
in hall. She was golden-haired after the manner of the house of
Finarfin, and Túrin began to take pleasure in the sight of her and in
her company; for she reminded him of his kindred and the women of
Dor-lómin in his father\'s house. ]{#calibre_link-1262 .calibre_class_4}

[At first he met her only when Gwindor was by; but after a while she
sought him out, so that they met at times alone, though it seemed to be
by chance. Then she would question him about the Edain, of whom she had
seen few and seldom, and about his country and his kin.
]{#calibre_link-1264 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin spoke freely to her concerning these things, though he did
not name the land of his birth, nor any of his kindred; and on a time he
said to her: \'I had a sister, Lalaith, or so I named her; and of her
you put me in mind. But Lalaith was a child, a yellow flower in the
green grass of spring; and had she lived she would now, maybe, have
become dimmed with grief. But you are queenly, and as a golden tree; I
would I had a sister so fair.\' ]{#calibre_link-1266 .calibre_class_4}

[\'But you are kingly,\' said she, \'even as the lords of the people of
Fingolfin; I would I had a brother so valiant. And I do not think that
Agarwaen is your name, nor is it fit for you, Adanedhel. I call you
Thurin, the Secret.\' ]{#calibre_link-1268 .calibre_class_4}

[At this Túrin started, but he said: \'That is not my name; and I am not
a king, for our kings are of the Eldar, as I am not.\'
]{#calibre_link-1270 .calibre_class_4}

[Now Túrin marked that Gwindor\'s friendship grew cooler towards him;
and he wondered also that whereas at first the woe and horror of Angband
had begun to be lifted from him, now he seemed to slip back into care
and sorrow. And he thought, it may be that he is grieved that I oppose
his counsels, and have overcome him; I would it were not so. For he
loved Gwindor as his guide and healer, and was filled with pity for him.
But in those days the radiance of Finduilas also became dimmed, her
footsteps slow and her face grave, and she grew wan and thin; and Túrin
perceiving this surmised that the words of Gwindor had set fear in her
heart of what might come to pass. ]{#calibre_link-1272 .calibre_class_4}

[In truth Finduilas was torn in mind. For she honoured Gwindor and
pitied him, and wished not to add one tear to his suffering; but against
her will her love for Túrin grew day by day, and she thought of Beren
and Lúthien. But Túrin was not like Beren! He did not scorn her, and was
glad in her company; yet she knew that he had no love of the kind she
wished. His mind and heart were elsewhere, by rivers in springs long
past. ]{#calibre_link-1274 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin spoke to Finduilas, and said: \'Do not let the words of
Gwindor affright you. He has suffered in the darkness of Angband; and it
is hard for one so valiant to be thus crippled and backward perforce. He
needs all solace, and a longer time for healing.\' ]{#calibre_link-1276
.calibre_class_4}

[\'I know it well,\' she said. ]{#calibre_link-1278 .calibre_class_4}

[\'But we will win that time for him!\' said Túrin. \'Nargothrond shall
stand! Never again will Morgoth the Craven come forth from Angband, and
all his reliance must be on his servants; thus says Melian of Doriath.
They are the fingers of his hands; and we will smite them, and cut them
off, till he draws back his claws. Nargothrond shall stand!\'
]{#calibre_link-1280 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Perhaps,\' said she. \'It shall stand, if you can achieve it. But
have a care, Thurin; my heart is heavy when you go out to battle, lest
Nargothrond be bereaved.\' ]{#calibre_link-1282 .calibre_class_4}

[Afterwards Túrin sought out Gwindor, and said to him: \'Gwindor, dear
friend, you are falling back into sadness; do not so! For your healing
will come in the houses of your kin, and in the light of Finduilas.\'
]{#calibre_link-1284 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Gwindor stared at Túrin, but he said nothing, and his face was
clouded. ]{#calibre_link-1286 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Why do you look upon me so?\' said Túrin. \'Often your eyes have
gazed at me strangely of late. How have I grieved you? I have opposed
your counsels; but a man must speak as he sees, nor hide the truth that
he believes, for any private cause. I would that we were one in mind;
for to you I owe a great debt, and I shall not forget it.\'
]{#calibre_link-1288 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-62 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'Will you not?\' said Gwindor. \'Nonetheless your deeds and your
counsels have changed my home and my kin. Your shadow lies upon them.
Why should I be glad, who have lost all to you?\' ]{#calibre_link-1290
.calibre_class_4}

[Túrin did not understand these words, and did but guess that Gwindor
begrudged him his place in the heart and counsels of the King.
]{#calibre_link-1292 .calibre_class_4}

[But Gwindor, when Túrin had gone, sat alone in dark thought, and he
cursed Morgoth who could thus pursue his enemies with woe, whithersoever
they might run. \'And now at last,\' he said, \'I believe the rumour of
Angband that Morgoth has cursed Húrin and all his kin.\' And going to
find Finduilas he said to her: \'A sadness and doubt is upon you; and
too often now I miss you, and begin to guess that you are avoiding me.
Since you tell me not the cause, I must guess. Daughter of the house of
Finarfin, let no grief lie between us; for though Morgoth has laid my
life in ruin, you still I love. But go whither love leads you; for I am
become unfit to wed you; and neither my prowess nor my counsel have any
honour more.\' ]{#calibre_link-1294 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Finduilas wept. \'Weep not yet!\' said Gwindor. \'But beware lest
you have cause. Not fitting is it that the Elder Children of Ilúvatar
should wed the Younger; nor is it wise, for they are brief, and soon
pass, to leave us in widowhood while the world lasts. Neither will fate
suffer it, unless it be once or twice only, for some high cause of doom
that we do not perceive. ]{#calibre_link-1296 .calibre_class_4}

[\'But this man is not Beren, even if he be both as fair and as brave. A
doom lies on him; a dark doom. Enter not into it! And if you will, your
love shall betray you to bitterness and death. For hearken to me! Though
he be indeed *agarwaen* son of *úmarth,* his right name is Túrin son of
Húrin, whom Morgoth holds in Angband, and has cursed all his kin. Doubt
not the power of Morgoth Bauglir! Is it not written in me?\'
]{#calibre_link-1298 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Finduilas rose, and queenly indeed she looked. \'Your eyes are
dimmed, Gwindor,\' she said. \'You do not see or understand what has
here come to pass. Must I now be put to double shame to reveal the truth
to you? For I love you, Gwindor, and I am ashamed that I love you not
more, but have taken a love even greater, from which I cannot escape. I
did not seek it, and long I put it aside. But if I have pity for your
hurts, have pity on mine. Túrin loves me not, nor will.\'
]{#calibre_link-1300 .calibre_class_4}

[\'You say this,\' said Gwindor, \'to take the blame from him whom you
love. Why does he seek you out, and sit long with you, and come ever
more glad away?\' ]{#calibre_link-1302 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Because he also needs solace,\' said Finduilas, \'and is bereaved of
his kin. You both have your needs. But what of Finduilas? Now is it not
enough that I must confess myself to you unloved, but that you should
say that I speak so to deceive?\' ]{#calibre_link-1304 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Nay, a woman is not easily deceived in such a case,\' said Gwindor.
\'Nor will you find many who will deny that they are loved, if that is
true.\' ]{#calibre_link-1306 .calibre_class_4}

[\'If any of us three be faithless, it is I: but not in will. But what
of your doom and rumours of Angband? What of death and destruction? The
Adanedhel is mighty in the tale of the World, and his stature shall
reach yet to Morgoth in some far day to come.\' ]{#calibre_link-1308
.calibre_class_4}

[\'He is proud,\' said Gwindor. ]{#calibre_link-1310 .calibre_class_4}

[\'But also he is merciful,\' said Finduilas. \'He is not yet awake, but
still pity can ever pierce his heart, and he will never deny it. Pity
maybe shall be ever the only entry. But he does not pity me. He holds me
in awe, as were I both his mother and a queen.\' ]{#calibre_link-1312
.calibre_class_4}

[Maybe Finduilas spoke truly, seeing with the keen eyes of the Eldar.
And now Túrin, not knowing what had passed between Gwindor and
Finduilas, was ever gentler towards her as she seemed more sad. But on a
time Finduilas said to him: \'Thurin Adanedhel, why did you hide your
name from me? Had I known who you were I should not have honoured you
less, but I should better have understood your grief.\'
]{#calibre_link-1314 .calibre_class_4}

[\'What do you mean?\' he said. \'Whom do you make me?\'
]{#calibre_link-1316 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Túrin son of Húrin Thalion, captain of the North.\'
]{#calibre_link-1318 .calibre_class_4}
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-63 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Now when Túrin learned from Finduilas of what had passed, he was
wrathful, and he said to Gwindor: \'In love I hold you for rescue and
safe-keeping. But now you have done ill to me, friend, to betray my
right name, and call down my doom upon me, from which I would lie hid.\'
]{#calibre_link-1320 .calibre_class_4}

[But Gwindor answered: \'The doom lies in yourself, not in your name.\'
]{#calibre_link-1322 .calibre_class_4}

[In that time of respite and hope, when because of the deeds of the
Mormegil the power of Morgoth was stemmed west of Sirion, and all the
woods had peace, Morwen fled at last from Dor-lómin with Niënor her
daughter, and adventured the long journey to Thingol\'s halls. There new
grief awaited her, for she found Túrin gone, and to Doriath there had
come no tidings since the Dragon-helm had vanished from the lands west
of Sirion; but Morwen remained in Doriath with Niënor as guests of
Thingol and Melian, and were treated with honour. ]{#calibre_link-1324
.calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-64 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000017.jpg){.calibre22
shapes="_x0000_i1044"}]{#calibre_link-1326 .calibre_class_5}

[When five years had passed since Túrin came to Nargothrond, in the
spring of the year, there came two Elves, and they named themselves
Gelmir and Arminas, of the people of Finarfin; and they said that they
had an errand to the Lord of Nargothrond. Túrin now commanded all the
forces of Nargothrond, and ruled all matters of war; indeed he was
become stern and proud, and would order all things as he wished or
thought good. They were brought therefore before Túrin; but Gelmir said:
\'It is to Orodreth, Finarfin\'s son, that we would speak.\'
]{#calibre_link-1328 .calibre_class_3}

[And when Orodreth came, Gelmir said to him: \'Lord, we were of
Angrod\'s people, and we have wandered far since the Nirnaeth; but of
late we have dwelt among Círdan\'s following by the Mouths of Sirion.
And on a day he called us, and bade us go to you; for Ulmo himself, the
Lord of Waters, had appeared to him and warned him of great peril that
draws near to Nargothrond.\' ]{#calibre_link-1330 .calibre_class_3}

[But Orodreth was wary, and he answered: \'Why then do you come hither
out of the North? Or perhaps you had other errands also?\'
]{#calibre_link-1332 .calibre_class_3}

[Then Arminas said: \'Yes, lord. Ever since the Nirnaeth I have sought
for the hidden kingdom of Turgon, and I have found it not; and in this
search I fear now that I have delayed our errand hither over long. For
Círdan sent us along the coast by ship, for secrecy and speed, and we
were put ashore in Drengist. But among the sea-folk were some that came
south in past years as messengers from Turgon, and it seemed to me from
their guarded speech that maybe Turgon dwells still in the North, and
not in the South as most believe. But we have found neither sign nor
rumour of what we sought.\' ]{#calibre_link-1334 .calibre_class_3}

[\'Why do you seek Turgon?\' said Orodreth. ]{#calibre_link-1336
.calibre_class_3}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-65 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'Because it is said that his kingdom shall stand longest against
Morgoth,\' answered Arminas. And these words seemed to Orodreth
ill-omened, and he was displeased. ]{#calibre_link-1338
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Then tarry not in Nargothrond,\' said he; \'for here you will hear no
news of Turgon. And I need none to teach me that Nargothrond stands in
peril.\' ]{#calibre_link-1340 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Be not angered, lord,\' said Gelmir, \'if we answer your questions
with truth. And our wandering from the straight path hither has not been
fruitless, for we have passed beyond the reach of your furthest scouts;
we have traversed Dor-lómin and all the lands under the eaves of
]{#calibre_link-1342 .calibre_class_4}

[Ered Wethrin, and we have explored the Pass of Sirion spying out the
ways of the Enemy. There is a great gathering of Orcs and evil creatures
in those regions, and a host is mustering about Sauron\'s Isle.\'
]{#calibre_link-1344 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I know it,\' said Túrin. \'Your news is stale. If the message of
Círdan was to any purpose, it should have come sooner.\'
]{#calibre_link-1346 .calibre_class_4}

[\'At least, lord, you shall hear the message now,\' said Gelmir to
Orodreth. \'Hear then the words of the Lord of Waters! Thus he spoke to
Círdan: \"The Evil of the North has defiled the springs of Sirion, and
my power withdraws from the fingers of the flowing waters. But a worse
thing is yet to come forth. Say therefore to the Lord of Nargothrond:
Shut the doors of the fortress, and go not abroad. Cast the stones of
your pride into the loud river, that the creeping evil may not find the
gate.\"\' ]{#calibre_link-1348 .calibre_class_4}

[These words seemed dark to Orodreth, and he turned as ever to Túrin for
counsel. But Túrin mistrusted the messengers, and he said in scorn:
\'What does Círdan know of our wars, who dwell nigh to the Enemy? Let
the mariner look to his ships! But if in truth the Lord of Waters would
send us counsel, let him speak more plainly. Otherwise to one trained in
war it will still seem better in our case to muster our strength, and go
boldly to meet our foes, ere they come too nigh.\' ]{#calibre_link-1350
.calibre_class_4}

[Then Gelmir bowed before Orodreth, and said: \'I have spoken as I was
bidden, lord\'; and he turned away. But Arminas said to Túrin: \'Are you
indeed of the House of Hador, as I have heard said?\'
]{#calibre_link-1352 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Here I am named Agarwaen, the Black Sword of Nargothrond,\' answered
Túrin. \'You deal much, it seems, in guarded speech, friend Arminas. It
is well that Turgon\'s secret is hid from you, or soon it would be heard
in Angband. A man\'s name is his own, and should the son of Húrin learn
that you have betrayed him when he would be hid, then may Morgoth take
you and burn out your tongue!\' ]{#calibre_link-1354 .calibre_class_4}

[Arminas was dismayed by the black wrath of Túrin; but Gelmir said: \'He
shall not be betrayed by us, Agarwaen. Are we not in council behind
closed doors, where speech may be plainer? And Arminas, I deem,
questioned you, since it is known to all that dwell by the Sea that Ulmo
has great love for the House of Hador, and some say that Húrin and Huor
his brother came once into the Hidden Realm.\' ]{#calibre_link-1356
.calibre_class_4}

[\'If that were so, then he would speak of it to none, neither the great
nor the less, and least of all to his son in childhood,\' answered
Túrin. \'Therefore I do not believe that Arminas asked this of me in
order to learn aught of Turgon. I mistrust such messengers of
mischief.\' ]{#calibre_link-1358 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Save your mistrust!\' said Arminas in anger. \'Gelmir mistakes me. I
asked because I doubted what here seems believed; for little indeed do
you resemble the kin of Hador, whatever your name.\'
]{#calibre_link-1360 .calibre_class_4}

[\'And what do you know of them?\' said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-1362
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Húrin I have seen,\' answered Arminas, \'and his fathers before him.
And in the wastes of Dor-lómin I met with Tuor, son of Huor, Húrin\'s
brother; and he is like his fathers, as you are not.\'
]{#calibre_link-1364 .calibre_class_4}

[\'That may be,\' said Túrin, \'though of Tuor I have heard no word ere
now. But if my head be dark and not golden, of that I am not ashamed.
For I am not the first of sons in the likeness of his mother; and I come
through Morwen Eledhwen of the House of Bëor and the kindred of Beren
Camlost.\' ]{#calibre_link-1366 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I spoke not of the difference between the black and the gold,\' said
Arminas. \'But others of the House of Hador bear themselves otherwise,
and Tuor among them. For they use courtesy, and they listen to good
counsel, holding the Lords of the West in awe. But you, it seems, will
take counsel with your own wisdom, or with your sword only; and you
speak haughtily. And I say to you, Agarwaen Mormegil, that if you do so,
other shall be your doom than one of the Houses of Hador and Bëor might
look for.\' ]{#calibre_link-1368 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Other it has ever been,\' answered Túrin. \'And if, as it seems, I
must bear the hate of Morgoth because of the valour of my father, shall
I also endure the taunts and ill-boding of a runagate from war, though
he claim the kinship of kings? Get you back to the safe shores of the
Sea!\' ]{#calibre_link-1370 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-66 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Then Gelmir and Arminas departed, and went back to the South; but
despite Túrin\'s taunts they would gladly have awaited battle beside
their kin, and they went only because Círdan had bidden them under the
command of Ulmo to bring back word to him of Nargothrond and of the
speeding of their errand there. And Orodreth was much troubled by the
words of the messengers; but all the more fell became the mood of Túrin,
and he would by no means listen to their counsels, and least of all
would he suffer the great bridge to be cast down. For so much at least
of the words of Ulmo were read aright. ]{#calibre_link-1372
.calibre_class_4}

[Soon after the departure of the messengers Handir Lord of Brethil was
slain; for the Orcs invaded his land, seeking to secure the Crossings of
Teiglin for their further advance. Handir gave them battle, but the Men
of Brethil were worsted and driven back into their woods. The Orcs did
not pursue them, for they had achieved their purpose for that time; and
they continued to muster their strength in the Pass of Sirion.
]{#calibre_link-1374 .calibre_class_4}

[In the autumn of the year, biding his hour, Morgoth loosed upon the
people of Narog the great host that he had long prepared; and Glaurung
the Father of Dragons passed over Anfauglith, and came thence into the
north vales of Sirion and there did great evil. Under the shadows of
Ered Wethrin, leading a great army of Orcs in his train, he defiled the
Eithel Ivrin, and thence he passed into the realm of Nargothrond,
burning the Talath Dirnen, the Guarded Plain, between Narog and Teiglin.
]{#calibre_link-1376 .calibre_class_4}

[Then the warriors of Nargothrond went forth, and tall and terrible on
that day looked Túrin, and the heart of the host was uplifted as he rode
on the right hand of Orodreth. But greater far was the host of Morgoth
than any scouts had told, and none but Túrin defended by his dwarf-mask
could withstand the approach of Glaurung. ]{#calibre_link-1378
.calibre_class_4}

[The Elves were driven back and defeated on the field of Tumhalad; and
there all the pride and host of Nargothrond withered away. Orodreth the
King was slain in the forefront of the battle, and Gwindor son of Guilin
was wounded to the death. But Túrin came to his aid, and all fled before
him; and he bore Gwindor out of the rout, and escaping to a wood there
laid him on the grass. ]{#calibre_link-1380 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Gwindor said to Túrin: \'Let bearing pay for bearing! But
ill-fated was mine, and vain is yours; for my body is marred beyond
healing, and I must leave Middle-earth. And though I love you, son of
Húrin, yet I rue the day that I took you from the Orcs. But for your
prowess and your pride, still I should have love and life, and
Nargothrond should yet stand a while. Now if you love me, leave me!
Haste you to Nargothrond, and save Finduilas. And this last I say to
you: she alone stands between you and your doom. If you fail her, it
shall not fail to find you. Farewell!\' ]{#calibre_link-1382
.calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin sped back to Nargothrond, mustering such of the rout as he
met with on the way; and the leaves fell from the trees in a great wind
as they went, for the autumn was passing to a dire winter. But Glaurung
and his host of Orcs were there before him, because of his rescue of
Gwindor, and they came suddenly, ere those that were left on guard were
aware of what had befallen on the field of Tumhalad. In that day the
bridge that Túrin had caused to be built over Narog proved an evil; for
it was great and mightily made and could not swiftly be destroyed, and
thus the enemy came readily over the deep river, and Glaurung came in
full fire against the Doors of Felagund, and overthrew them, and passed
within. ]{#calibre_link-1384 .calibre_class_4}

[And even as Túrin came up the ghastly sack of Nargothrond was well-nigh
achieved. The Orcs had slain or driven off all that remained in arms,
and they were even then ransacking the great halls and chambers,
plundering and destroying; but those of the women and maidens that were
not burned or slain they had herded on the terrace before the doors, as
slaves to be taken to Angband. Upon this ruin and woe Túrin came, and
none could withstand him; or would not, though he struck down all before
him, and passed over the bridge, and hewed his way towards the captives.
]{#calibre_link-1386 .calibre_class_4}

[And now he stood alone, for the few that had followed him had fled into
hiding. But in that moment Glaurung the fell issued from the gaping
Doors of Felagund, and lay behind, between Túrin and the bridge. Then
suddenly he spoke by the evil spirit that was in him, saying: \'Hail,
son of Húrin. Well met!\' ]{#calibre_link-1388 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin sprang about, and strode against him, and fire was in his
eyes, and the edges of Gurthang shone as with flame. But Glaurung
withheld his blast, and opened wide his serpent-eyes and gazed upon
Túrin. Without fear Túrin looked in those eyes as he raised up his
sword; and straightway he fell under the dreadful spell of the dragon,
and was as one turned to stone. Thus long they stood unmoving, silent
before the great Doors of Felagund. Then ]{#calibre_link-1390
.calibre_class_4}
:::

::::: {#calibre_link-67 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Glaurung spoke again, taunting Túrin. \'Evil have been all your ways,
son of Húrin,\' said he. \'Thankless fosterling, outlaw, slayer of your
friend, thief of love, usurper of Nargothrond, captain foolhardy, and
deserter of your kin. As thralls your mother and your sister live in
Dor-lómin, in misery and want. You are arrayed as a prince, but they go
in rags. For you they yearn, but you care not for that. Glad may your
father be to learn that he has such a son: as learn he shall.\' And
Túrin being under the spell of Glaurung hearkened to his words, and he
saw himself as in a mirror misshapen by malice, and he loathed what he
saw. ]{#calibre_link-1392 .calibre_class_4}

[And while he was yet held by the eyes of Glaurung in torment of mind,
and could not stir, at a sign from the Dragon the Orcs drove away the
herded captives, and they passed nigh to Túrin and went over the bridge.
And among them was Finduilas, and she held out her arms to Túrin, and
called him by name. But not until her cries and the wailing of the
captives was lost upon the northward road did Glaurung release Túrin,
and he might not stop his ears against that voice that haunted him
after. ]{#calibre_link-1394 .calibre_class_4}

[Then suddenly Glaurung withdrew his glance, and waited; and Túrin
stirred slowly as one waking from a hideous dream. Then coming to
himself with a loud cry he sprang upon the Dragon. But Glaurung laughed,
saying: \'If you wish to be slain, I will slay you gladly. But small
help will that be to Morwen and Niënor. No heed did you give to the
cries of the Elf-woman. Will you deny also the bond of your blood?\'
]{#calibre_link-1396 .calibre_class_4}

[But Túrin drawing back his sword stabbed at his eyes; and Glaurung
coiling back swiftly towered above him, and said: \'Nay! At least you
are valiant. Beyond all whom I have met. And they lie who say that we of
our part do not honour the valour of foes. See now! I offer you freedom.
Go to your kin, if you can. Get you gone! And if Elf or Man be left to
make tale of these days, then surely in scorn they will name you, if you
spurn this gift.\' ]{#calibre_link-1398 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin, being yet bemused by the eyes of the dragon, as if he were
treating with a foe that could know pity, believed the words of
Glaurung, and turning away he sped over the bridge. But as he went,
Glaurung spoke behind him, saying in a fell voice: \'Haste you now, son
of Húrin, to Dor-lómin! Or perhaps the Orcs shall come before you, once
again. And if you tarry for Finduilas, then never shall you see Morwen
or Niënor again; and they will curse you.\' ]{#calibre_link-1400
.calibre_class_4}

[But Túrin passed away on the northward road, and Glaurung laughed once
more, for he had accomplished the errand of his Master. Then he turned
to his own pleasure, and sent forth his blast, and burned all about him.
But all the Orcs that were busy in the sack he routed forth, and drove
them away, and denied them their plunder even to the last thing of
worth. The bridge then he broke down and cast into the foam of Narog;
and being thus secure he gathered all the hoard and riches of Felagund
and heaped them, and lay upon them in the innermost hall, and rested a
while. ]{#calibre_link-1402 .calibre_class_4}

[And Túrin hastened along the ways to the North, through the lands now
desolate between Narog and Teiglin, and the Fell Winter came down to
meet him; for that year snow fell ere autumn was passed, and spring came
late and cold. Ever it seemed to him as he went that he heard the cries
of Finduilas, calling his name by wood and hill, and great was his
anguish; but his heart being hot with the lies of Glaurung, and seeing
ever in his mind the Orcs burning the house of Húrin or putting Morwen
and Niënor to torment, he held on his way, turning never aside.
]{#calibre_link-1404 .calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  [![](images/000018.jpg){.calibre23 shapes="_x0000_i1045"}]{#calibre_link-1406 .calibre_class_5}
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
:::::

::: {#calibre_link-68 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000019.jpg){.calibre24
shapes="_x0000_i1046"}]{#calibre_link-1408 .calibre_class_5}

[At last worn by haste and the long road (for forty leagues and more had
he journeyed without rest) he came with the first ice of winter to the
pools of Ivrin, where before he had been healed. But they were now only
a frozen mire, and he could drink there no more. ]{#calibre_link-1410
.calibre_class_3}

[Thence he came to the passes into Dor-lómin, and snow came bitterly
from the North, and the ways were perilous and cold. Though three and
twenty years were gone since he had trodden that path, it was graven in
his heart, so great was the sorrow of each step at the parting from
Morwen. Thus at last he came back to the land of his childhood. It was
bleak and bare; and the people there were few and churlish, and they
spoke the harsh tongue of the Easterlings, and the old tongue was become
the language of serfs, or of foes. Therefore Túrin walked warily, hooded
and silent, and he came at last to the house that he sought. It stood
empty and dark, and no living thing dwelt near it; for Morwen was gone,
and Brodda the Incomer (he that took by force Aerin, Húrin\'s kinswoman,
to wife) had plundered her house, and taken all that was left to her of
goods or of servants. Brodda\'s house stood nearest to the old house of
Húrin, and thither Túrin came, spent with wandering and grief, begging
for shelter; and it was granted to him, for some of the kindlier manners
of old were still kept there by Aerin. He was given a seat by the fire
by the servants, and a few vagabonds as grim and wayworn as he; and he
asked news of the land. ]{#calibre_link-1412 .calibre_class_4}

[At that the company fell silent, and some drew away, looking askance at
the stranger. But one old vagabond man, with a crutch, said: \'If you
must speak the old tongue, master, speak it softer, and ask for no
tidings. Would you be beaten for a rogue, or hung for a spy? For both
you may well be by the looks of you. Which is but to say,\' he said,
coming near and speaking low in Túrin\'s ear, \'one of the kindly folk
of old that came with Hador in the days of gold, before heads wore
wolf-hair. Some here are of like sort, though now made beggars and
slaves, and but for the Lady Aerin would get neither this fire nor this
broth. Whence are you, and what news would you have?\'
]{#calibre_link-1414 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-69 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'There was a lady called Morwen,\' answered Túrin, \'and long ago I
lived in her house. Thither after far wandering I came to seek welcome,
but neither fire nor folk are there now.\' ]{#calibre_link-1416
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Nor have been this long year and more,\' answered the old man. \'But
scant were both fire and folk in that house since the deadly war; for
she was of the old people - as doubtless you know, the widow of our
lord, Húrin Galdor\'s son. They dared not touch her, though, for they
feared her; proud and fair as a queen, before sorrow marred her.
Witchwife they called her, and shunned her. Witchwife: it is but
\"elf-friend\" in the new language. Yet they robbed her. Often would she
and her daughter have gone hungry, but for the Lady Aerin. She aided
them in secret, it is said, and was often beaten for it by the churl
Brodda, her husband by need.\' ]{#calibre_link-1418 .calibre_class_4}

[\'And this long year and more?\' said Túrin. \'Are they dead, or made
thralls? Or have the Orcs assailed her?\' ]{#calibre_link-1420
.calibre_class_4}

[\'It is not known for sure,\' said the old man. \'But she is gone with
her daughter; and this Brodda has plundered her and stripped what
remained. Not a dog is left, and her few folk made his slaves; save some
that have gone begging, as have I. I served her many a year, and the
great master before, Sador Onefoot: a cursed axe in the woods long ago,
or I would be lying in the Great Mound now. Well I remember the day when
Húrin\'s boy was sent away, and how he wept; and she, when he was gone.
To the Hidden Kingdom he went, it was said.\' ]{#calibre_link-1422
.calibre_class_4}

[With that the old man stayed his tongue, and eyed Túrin doubtfully. \'I
am old and I babble, master,\' he said. \'Mind me not! But though it be
pleasant to speak the old tongue with one that speaks it fair as in time
past, the days are ill, and one must be wary. Not all that speak the
fair tongue are fair at heart.\' ]{#calibre_link-1424 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Truly,\' said Túrin. \'My heart is grim. But if you fear that I am a
spy of the North or the East, then you have learned little more wisdom
than you had long ago, Sador Labadal.\' ]{#calibre_link-1426
.calibre_class_4}

[The old man eyed him agape; then trembling he spoke. \'Come outside! It
is colder, but safer. You speak too loud, and I too much, for an
Easterling\'s hall.\' ]{#calibre_link-1428 .calibre_class_4}

[When they were come into the court he clutched at Túrin\'s cloak.
\'Long ago you dwelt in that house, you say. Lord Túrin, why have you
come back? My eyes are opened, and my ears at last: you have the voice
of your father. But young Túrin alone ever gave me that name, Labadal.
He meant no ill: we were merry friends in those days. What does he seek
here now? Few are we left; and we are old and weaponless. Happier are
those in the Great Mound.\' ]{#calibre_link-1430 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I did not come with thought of battle,\' said Túrin, \'though your
words have waked the thought in me now, Labadal. But it must wait. I
came seeking the Lady Morwen and Niënor. What can you tell me, and
swiftly?\' ]{#calibre_link-1432 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Little, lord,\' said Sador. \'They went away secretly. It was
whispered among us that they were summoned by the Lord Túrin; for we did
not doubt that he had grown great in the years, a king or a lord in some
south country. But it seems this is not so.\' ]{#calibre_link-1434
.calibre_class_4}

[\'It is not,\' answered Túrin. \'A lord I was in a south country,
though now I am a vagabond. But I did not summon them.\'
]{#calibre_link-1436 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Then I know not what to tell you,\' said Sador. \'But the Lady Aerin
will know, I doubt not. She knew all the counsel of your mother.\'
]{#calibre_link-1438 .calibre_class_4}

[\'How can I come to her?\' ]{#calibre_link-1440 .calibre_class_4}

[\'That I know not. It would cost her much pain were she caught
whispering at a door with a wandering wretch of the downtrod people,
even could any message call her forth. And such a beggarman as you are
will not walk far up the hall towards the high board before the
Easterlings seize him and beat him, or worse.\' ]{#calibre_link-1442
.calibre_class_4}

[Then in anger Túrin cried: \'May I not walk up Brodda\'s hall, and will
they beat me? Come, and see!\' ]{#calibre_link-1444 .calibre_class_4}

[Thereupon he went into the hall, and cast back his hood, and thrusting
aside all in his path he strode towards the board where sat the master
of the house and his wife, and other Easterling lords. Then some rose to
seize him, but he flung them to the ground, and cried: \'Does no one
rule this house, or is it an Orc-hold rather? Where is the master?\'
]{#calibre_link-1446 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Brodda rose in wrath. \'I rule this house,\' said he. But before
he could say more, Túrin said: \'Then you have not yet learned the
courtesy that was in this land before you. Is it now the manner of men
to let lackeys mishandle the kinsmen of their wives? Such am I, and I
have an errand to the Lady Aerin. Shall I ]{#calibre_link-1448
.calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-70 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[come freely, or shall I come as I will?\' ]{#calibre_link-1450
.calibre_class_3}

[\'Come,\' said Brodda, scowling; but Aerin turned pale.
]{#calibre_link-1452 .calibre_class_5}

[Then Túrin strode to the high board and stood before it, and bowed.
\'Your pardon, Lady Aerin,\' he said, \'that I break in upon you thus;
but my errand is urgent and has brought me far. I seek Morwen, Lady of
Dor-lómin, and Niënor her daughter. But her house is empty and
plundered. What can you tell me?\' ]{#calibre_link-1454
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Nothing,\' said Aerin in great fear, for Brodda watched her narrowly.
]{#calibre_link-1456 .calibre_class_4}

[\'That I do not believe,\' said Túrin. ]{#calibre_link-1458
.calibre_class_4}

[Then Brodda sprang forth, and he was red with drunken rage. \'No
more!\' he cried. \'Shall my wife be gainsaid before me, by a beggar
that speaks the serf-tongue? There is no Lady of Dor-lómin. But as for
Morwen, she was of the thrall-folk, and has fled as thralls will. Do you
likewise, and swiftly, or I will have you hung on a tree!\'
]{#calibre_link-1460 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin leapt at him, and drew his black sword, and seized Brodda by
the hair and laid back his head. \'Let no one stir,\' said he, \'or this
head will leave its shoulders! Lady Aerin, I would beg your pardon once
more, if I thought that this churl had ever done you anything but wrong.
But speak now, and do not deny me! Am I not Túrin, Lord of Dor-lómin?
Shall I command you?\' ]{#calibre_link-1462 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Command me,\' she said. ]{#calibre_link-1464 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Who plundered the house of Morwen?\' ]{#calibre_link-1466
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Brodda,\' she answered. ]{#calibre_link-1468 .calibre_class_4}

[\'When did she flee, and whither?\' ]{#calibre_link-1470
.calibre_class_4}

[\'A year and three months gone,\' said Aerin. \'Master Brodda and
others of the Incomers of the East hereabout oppressed her sorely. Long
ago she was bidden to the ]{#calibre_link-1472 .calibre_class_4}

[Hidden Kingdom; and she went forth at last. For the lands between were
then free of evil for a while, because of the prowess of the Blacksword
of the south country, it is said; but that is now ended. She looked to
find her son there awaiting her. But if you are he, then I fear that all
has gone awry.\' ]{#calibre_link-1474 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin laughed bitterly. \'Awry, awry?\' he cried. \'Yes, ever
awry: as crooked as Morgoth!\' And suddenly a black wrath shook him; for
his eyes were opened, and the spell of Glaurung loosed its last threads,
and he knew the lies with which he had been cheated. \'Have I been
cozened, that I might come and die here dishonoured, who might at least
have ended valiantly before the Doors of Nargothrond?\' And out of the
night about the hall it seemed to him that he heard the cries of
Finduilas. ]{#calibre_link-1476 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Not first will I die here!\' he cried. And he seized Brodda, and with
the strength of his great anguish and wrath he lifted him on high and
shook him, as if he were a dog. \'Morwen of the thrall-folk, did you
say? You son of dastards, thief, slave of slaves!\' Thereupon he flung
Brodda head foremost across his own table, full in the face of an
Easterling that rose to assail Túrin. In that fall Brodda\'s neck was
broken; and Túrin leapt after his cast and slew three more that cowered
there, for they were caught weaponless. There was tumult in the hall.
The Easterlings that sat there would have come against Túrin, but many
others were gathered there who were of the elder people of Dor-lómin:
long had they been tame servants, but now they rose with shouts of
rebellion. Soon there was great fighting in the hall, and though the
thralls had but meat-knives and such things as they could snatch up
against daggers and swords, many were quickly slain on either hand,
before Túrin leapt down among them and slew the last of the Easterlings
that remained in the hall. ]{#calibre_link-1478 .calibre_class_4}

[Then he rested, leaning against a pillar, and the fire of his rage was
as ashes. But old Sador crept up to him and clutched him about the
knees, for he was wounded to the death. \'Thrice seven years and more,
it was long to wait for this hour,\' he said. \'But now go, go, lord!
Go, and do not come back, unless with greater strength. They will raise
the land against you. Many have run from the hall. Go, or you will end
here. Farewell!\' Then he slipped down and died. ]{#calibre_link-1480
.calibre_class_4}

[\'He speaks with the truth of death,\' said Aerin. \'You have learned
what you would. Now go swiftly! But go first to Morwen and comfort her,
or I will hold all the wrack you have wrought here hard to forgive. For
ill though my life was, you have brought death to me with your violence.
The Incomers will avenge this night on all that were here. Rash are your
deeds, son of Húrin, as if you were still but the child that I knew.\'
]{#calibre_link-1482 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::::: {#calibre_link-71 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'And faint heart is yours, Aerin Indor\'s daughter, as it was when I
called you aunt, and a rough dog frightened you,\' said Túrin. \'You
were made for a kinder world. But come away! I will bring you to
Morwen.\' ]{#calibre_link-1484 .calibre_class_4}

[\'The snow lies on the land, but deeper upon my head,\' she answered.
\'I should die as soon in the wild with you, as with the brute
Easterlings. You cannot mend what you have done. Go! To stay will make
all the worse, and rob Morwen to no purpose. Go, I beg you!\'
]{#calibre_link-1486 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin bowed low to her, and turned, and left the hall of Brodda;
but all the rebels that had the strength followed him. They fled towards
the mountains, for some among them knew well the ways of the wild, and
they blessed the snow that fell behind them and covered their trail.
Thus though soon the hunt was up, with many men and dogs and braying of
horses, they escaped south into the hills. Then looking back they saw a
red light far off in the land they had left. ]{#calibre_link-1488
.calibre_class_4}

[\'They have fired the hall,\' said Túrin. \'To what purpose is that?\'
]{#calibre_link-1490 .calibre_class_4}

[\'They? No, lord: she, I guess,\' said one, Asgon by name. \'Many a man
of arms misreads patience and quiet. She did much good among us at much
cost. Her heart was not faint, and patience will break at the last.\'
]{#calibre_link-1492 .calibre_class_4}

[Now some of the hardiest that could endure the winter stayed with Túrin
and led him by strange paths to a refuge in the mountains, a cave known
to outlaws and runagates; and some store of food was hidden there. There
they waited until the snow ceased, and they gave him food and took him
to a pass little used that led south to Sirion\'s Vale, where the snow
had not come. On the downward path they parted. ]{#calibre_link-1494
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Farewell now, Lord of Dor-lómin,\' said Asgon. \'But do not forget
us. We shall be hunted men now; and the Wolf-folk will be crueller
because of your coming. Therefore go, and do not return, unless you come
with strength to deliver us. Farewell!\' ]{#calibre_link-1496
.calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  [![](images/000020.jpg){.calibre25 shapes="_x0000_i1047"}]{#calibre_link-1498 .calibre_class_5}
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
:::::

:::: {#calibre_link-72 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000021.jpg){.calibre8
shapes="_x0000_i1048"}]{#calibre_link-1500 .calibre_class_5}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-73 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000022.jpg){.calibre26
shapes="_x0000_i1049"}]{#calibre_link-1502 .calibre_class_5}

[Now Túrin went down towards Sirion, and he was torn in mind. For it
seemed to him that whereas before he had two bitter choices, now there
were three, and his oppressed people called him, upon whom he had
brought only increase of woe. This comfort only he had: that beyond
doubt Morwen and Niënor had come long since to Doriath, and only by the
prowess of the Blacksword of Nargothrond had their road been made safe.
And he said in his thought: \'Where else better might I have bestowed
them, had I come indeed sooner? If the Girdle of Melian be broken, then
all is ended. Nay, it is better as things be; for by my wrath and rash
deeds I cast a shadow wherever I dwell. Let Melian keep them! And I will
leave them in peace unshadowed for a while.\' ]{#calibre_link-1504
.calibre_class_4}

[But too late now Túrin sought for Finduilas, roaming the woods under
the eaves of Ered Wethrin, wild and wary as a beast; and he waylaid all
the roads that went north to the Pass of Sirion. Too late. For all
trails had been washed away by the rains and the snows. But\'thus it was
that Túrin passing down Teiglin came upon some of the People of Haleth
from the Forest of Brethil. They were dwindled now by war to a small
people, and dwelt for the most part secretly within a stockade upon Amon
Obel deep in the forest. Ephel Brandir that place was named; for Brandir
son of Handir was now their lord, since his father was slain. And
Brandir was no man of war, being lamed by a leg broken in a misadventure
in childhood; and he was moreover gentle in mood, loving wood rather
than metal, and the knowledge of things that grow in the earth rather
than other lore. ]{#calibre_link-1506 .calibre_class_4}

[But some of the woodmen still hunted the Orcs on their borders; and
thus it was that as Túrin came thither he heard the sound of an affray.
He hastened towards it, and coming warily through the trees he saw a
small band of men surrounded by Orcs. They defended themselves
desperately, with their backs to a knot of trees that grew apart in a
glade; but the Orcs were in great number, and they had little hope of
escape, unless help came. Therefore, out of sight in the underwood,
Túrin made a great noise of stamping and crashing, and then he cried in
a loud voice, as if leading many men: \'Ha! Here we find them! Follow me
all! Out now, and slay!\' ]{#calibre_link-1508 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-74 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[At that many of the Orcs looked back in dismay, and then out came Túrin
leaping, waving as if to men behind, and the edges of Gurthang flickered
like flame in his hand. Too well was that blade known to the Orcs, and
even before he sprang among them many scattered and fled. Then the
woodmen ran to join him, and together they hunted their foes into the
river: few came across. At last they halted on the bank, and Dorlas,
leader of the woodmen, said: \'You are swift in the hunt, lord; but your
men are slow to follow.\' ]{#calibre_link-1510 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Nay,\' said Túrin, \'we all run together as one man, and will not be
parted.\' ]{#calibre_link-1512 .calibre_class_4}

[Then the Men of Brethil laughed, and said: \'Well, one such is worth
many. And we owe you great thanks. But who are you, and what do you
here?\' ]{#calibre_link-1514 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I do but follow my trade, which is Orc-slaying,\' said Túrin. \'And I
dwell where my trade is. I am Wildman of the Woods.\'
]{#calibre_link-1516 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Then come and dwell with us,\' said they. \'For we dwell in the
woods, and we have need of such craftsmen. You would be welcome!\'
]{#calibre_link-1518 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin looked at them strangely, and said: \'Are there then any
left who will suffer me to darken their doors? But, friends, I have
still a grievous errand: to find Finduilas, daughter of Orodreth of
Nargothrond, or at least to learn news of her. Alas! Many weeks is it
since she was taken from Nargothrond, but still I must go seeking.\'
]{#calibre_link-1520 .calibre_class_4}

[Then they looked on him with pity, and Dorlas said: \'Seek no more. For
an Orc-host came up from Nargothrond towards the Crossings of Teiglin,
and we had long warning of it: it marched very slow, because of the
number of captives that were led. Then we thought to deal our small
stroke in the war, and we ambushed the Orcs with all the bowmen we could
muster, and hoped to save some of the prisoners. But alas! as soon as
they were assailed the foul Orcs slew first the women among their
captives; and the daughter of Orodreth they fastened to a tree with a
spear.\' ]{#calibre_link-1522 .calibre_class_4}

[Túrin stood as one mortally stricken. \'How do you know this?\' he
said. ]{#calibre_link-1524 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Because she spoke to me, before she died,\' said Dorlas. \'She looked
upon us as though seeking one whom she had expected, and she said:
\"Mormegil. Tell the Mormegil that Finduilas is here.\" She said no
more. But because of her latest words we laid her where she died. She
lies in a mound beside Teiglin. Yes, it is a month now ago.\'
]{#calibre_link-1526 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Bring me there,\' said Túrin; and they led him to a hillock by the
Crossings of Teiglin. There he laid himself down, and a darkness fell on
him, so that they thought he was dead. But Dorlas looked down at him as
he lay, and then he turned to his men and said: \'Too late! This is a
piteous chance. But see: here lies the Mormegil himself, the great
captain of Nargothrond. By his sword we should have known him, as did
the Orcs.\' For the fame of the Black Sword of the South had gone far
and wide, even into the deeps of the wood. ]{#calibre_link-1528
.calibre_class_4}

[Now therefore they lifted him with reverence and bore him to Ephel
Brandir; and Brandir coming to meet them wondered at the bier that they
bore. Then drawing back the coverlet he looked on the face of Túrin son
of Húrin; and a dark shadow fell on his heart. \'O cruel Men of
Haleth!\' he cried. \'Why did you hold back death from this man? With
great labour you have brought hither the last bane of our people.\'
]{#calibre_link-1530 .calibre_class_4}

[But the woodmen said: \'Nay, it is the Mormegil of Nargothrond, a
mighty Orc-slayer, and he shall be a great help to us, if he lives. And
were it not so, should we leave a man woe-stricken to lie as carrion by
the way?\' ]{#calibre_link-1532 .calibre_class_4}

[\'You should not indeed,\' said Brandir. \'Doom willed it not so.\' And
he took Túrin into his house and tended him with care.
]{#calibre_link-1534 .calibre_class_4}

[But when at last Túrin shook off the darkness, spring was returning;
and he awoke and saw sun on the green buds. Then the courage of the
House of Hador awoke in him also, and he arose and said in his heart:
\'All my deeds and past days were dark and full of evil. But a new day
is come. Here I will stay at peace, and renounce name and kin; and so I
will put my shadow behind me, or at the least not lay it upon those that
I love.\' ]{#calibre_link-1536 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::::: {#calibre_link-75 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Therefore he took a new name, calling himself Turambar, which in the
High-elven speech signified Master of Doom; and he dwelt among the
woodmen, and was loved by them, and he charged them to forget his name
of old, and to count him as one born in Brethil. Yet with the change of
a name he could not change wholly his temper, nor forget his old griefs
against the servants of Morgoth; and he would go hunting the Orcs with a
few of the same mind, though this was displeasing to Brandir. For he
hoped rather to preserve his people by silence and secrecy.
]{#calibre_link-1538 .calibre_class_4}

[\'The Mormegil is no more,\' said he, \'yet have a care lest the valour
of Turambar bring a like vengeance on Brethil!\' ]{#calibre_link-1540
.calibre_class_4}

[Therefore Turambar laid his black sword by, and took it no more to
battle, and wielded rather the bow and the spear. But he would not
suffer the Orcs to use the Crossings of Teiglin or draw near the mound
where Finduilas was laid. Haudh-en-Elleth it was named, the Mound of the
Elf-maid, and soon the Orcs learned to dread that place, and shunned it.
And Dorlas said to Turambar: \'You have renounced the name, but the
Blacksword you are still; and does not rumour say truly that he was the
son of Húrin of Dor-lómin, lord of the House of Hador?\'
]{#calibre_link-1542 .calibre_class_4}

[And Turambar answered: \'So I have heard. But publish it not, I beg
you, as you are my friend.\' ]{#calibre_link-1544 .calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  [![](images/000023.jpg){.calibre27 shapes="_x0000_i1050"}]{#calibre_link-1546 .calibre_class_5}
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
:::::

::: {#calibre_link-76 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000024.jpg){.calibre28
shapes="_x0000_i1051"}]{#calibre_link-1548 .calibre_class_5}

[When the Fell Winter withdrew new tidings of Nargothrond came to
Doriath. For some that escaped from the sack, and had survived the
winter in the wild, came at last seeking refuge with Thingol, and the
march-wards brought them to the King. And some said that all the enemy
had withdrawn northwards, and others that Glaurung abode still in the
halls of Felagund; and some said that the Mormegil was slain, and others
that he was cast under a spell by the Dragon and dwelt there yet, as one
changed to stone. But all declared that it was known in Nargothrond ere
the end that the Blacksword was none other than Túrin son of Húrin of
Dor-lómin. ]{#calibre_link-1550 .calibre_class_4}

[Then great was the fear and sorrow of Morwen and of Niënor; and Morwen
said: \'Such doubt is the very work of Morgoth! May we not learn the
truth, and know surely the worst that we must endure?\'
]{#calibre_link-1552 .calibre_class_4}

[Now Thingol himself desired greatly to know more of the fate of
Nargothrond, and had in mind already the sending out of some that might
go warily thither, but he believed that Túrin was indeed slain or beyond
rescue, and he was loath to see the hour when Morwen should know this
clearly. Therefore he said to her: \'This is a perilous matter, Lady of
Dor-lómin, and must be pondered. Such doubt may in truth be the work of
Morgoth, to draw us on to some rashness.\' ]{#calibre_link-1554
.calibre_class_4}

[But Morwen being distraught cried: \'Rashness, lord! If my son lurks in
the woods hungry, if he lingers in bonds, if his body lies unburied,
then I would be rash. I would lose no hour to go to seek him.\'
]{#calibre_link-1556 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Lady of Dor-lómin,\' said Thingol, \'that surely the son of Húrin
would not desire. Here would he think you better bestowed than in any
other land that remains: in the keeping of Melian. For Húrin\'s sake and
Túrin\'s I would not have you wander abroad in the black peril of these
days.\' ]{#calibre_link-1558 .calibre_class_4}

[\'You did not hold Túrin from peril, but me you will hold from him,\'
cried Morwen. \'In the keeping of Melian! Yes, a prisoner of the Girdle!
Long did I hold back before I entered it, and now I rue it.\'
]{#calibre_link-1560 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Nay, if you speak so, Lady of Dor-lómin,\' said Thingol, \'know this:
the Girdle is open. Free you came hither: free you shall stay - or go.\'
]{#calibre_link-1562 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-77 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Then Melian, who had remained silent, spoke: \'Go not hence, Morwen. A
true word you said: this doubt is of Morgoth. If you go, you go at his
will.\' ]{#calibre_link-1564 .calibre_class_4}

[Tear of Morgoth will not withhold me from the call of my kin,\' Morwen
answered. \'But if you fear for me, lord, then lend me some of your
people.\' ]{#calibre_link-1566 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I command you not,\' said Thingol. \'But my people are my own to
command. I will send them at my own advice.\' ]{#calibre_link-1568
.calibre_class_4}

[Then Morwen said no more, but wept; and she left the presence of the
King. Thingol was heavyhearted, for it seemed to him that the mood of
Morwen was fey; and he asked Melian whether she would not restrain her
by her power. \'Against the coming in of evil I may do much,\' she
answered. \'But against the going out of those who will go, nothing.
That is your part. If she is to be held here, you must hold her with
strength. Yet maybe thus you will overthrow her mind.\'
]{#calibre_link-1570 .calibre_class_4}

[Now Morwen went to Niënor, and said: \'Farewell, daughter of Húrin. I
go to seek my son, or true tidings of him, since none here will do
aught, but tarry till too late. Await me here until haply I return.\'
Then Niënor in dread and distress would restrain her, but Morwen
answered nothing, and went to her chamber; and when morning came she had
taken horse and gone. ]{#calibre_link-1572 .calibre_class_4}

[Now Thingol had commanded that none should stay her, or seem to waylay
her. But as soon as she went forth, he gathered a company of the
hardiest and most skilled of his march-wards, and he set Mablung in
charge. ]{#calibre_link-1574 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Follow now speedily,\' he said, \'yet let her not be aware of you.
But when she is come into the wild, if danger threatens, then show
yourselves; and if she will not return, then guard her as you may. But
some of you I would have go forward as far as you can, and learn all
that you may.\' ]{#calibre_link-1576 .calibre_class_4}

[Thus it was that Thingol sent out a larger company than he had at first
intended, and there were ten riders among them with spare horses. They
followed after Morwen; and she went south through Region, and so came to
the shores of Sirion above the Twilit Meres; and there she halted, for
Sirion was wide and swift, and she did not know the way. Therefore now
the guards must needs reveal themselves; and Morwen said: \'Will Thingol
stay me? Or late does he send me the help he denied?\'
]{#calibre_link-1578 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Both,\' answered Mablung. \'Will you not return?\'
]{#calibre_link-1580 .calibre_class_4}

[\'No,\' she said. ]{#calibre_link-1582 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Then I must help you,\' said Mablung, \'though it is against my own
will. Wide and deep here is Sirion, and perilous to swim for beast or
man.\' ]{#calibre_link-1584 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Then bring me over by whatever way the Elven-folk are used to
cross,\' said Morwen; \'or else I will try the swimming.\'
]{#calibre_link-1586 .calibre_class_4}

[Therefore Mablung led her to the Twilit Meres. There amid creeks and
reeds ferries were kept hidden and guarded on the east shore; for by
that way messengers would pass to and fro between Thingol and his kin in
Nargothrond. Now they waited until the starlit night was late, and they
passed over in the white mists before the dawn. And even as the sun rose
red beyond the Blue Mountains, and a strong morning-wind blew and
scattered the mists, the guards went up onto the west shore, and left
the Girdle of Melian. Tall Elves of Doriath they were, grey-clad, and
cloaked over their mail. Morwen from the ferry watched them as they
passed silently, and then suddenly she gave a cry, and pointed to the
last of the company that went by. ]{#calibre_link-1588 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Whence came he?\' she said. \'Thrice ten you came to me. Thrice ten
and one you go ashore!\' ]{#calibre_link-1590 .calibre_class_4}

[Then the others turned, and saw that the sun shone upon a head of gold:
for it was Niënor, and her hood was blown back by the wind. Thus it was
revealed that she had followed the company, and joined them in the dark
before they crossed the river. They were dismayed, and none more than
Morwen. \'Go back! Go back! I command you!\' she cried.
]{#calibre_link-1592 .calibre_class_4}

[\'If the wife of Húrin can go forth against all counsel at the call of
kindred,\' said Niënor, \'then so also can Húrin\'s daughter. Mourning
you named me, but I will not mourn alone, for father, brother, and
mother. But of these you only have I known, and above all do I love. And
nothing that you fear not do I fear.\' ]{#calibre_link-1594
.calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-78 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[In truth little fear was seen in her face or her bearing. Tall and
strong she seemed; for of great stature were those of Hador\'s house,
and thus clad in Elvish raiment she matched well with the guards, being
smaller only than the greatest among them. ]{#calibre_link-1596
.calibre_class_4}

[\'What would you do?\' said Morwen. ]{#calibre_link-1598
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Go where you go,\' said Niënor. \'This choice indeed I bring. To lead
me back and bestow me safely in the keeping of Melian; for it is not
wise to refuse her counsel. ]{#calibre_link-1600 .calibre_class_4}

[Or to know that I shall go into peril, if you go.\' For in truth Niënor
had come most in hope that for fear and love of her her mother would
turn back; and Morwen was indeed torn in mind. ]{#calibre_link-1602
.calibre_class_4}

[\'It is one thing to refuse counsel,\' said she. \'It is another to
refuse the command of your mother. Go now back!\' ]{#calibre_link-1604
.calibre_class_4}

[\'No,\' said Niënor. \'It is long since I was a child. I have a will
and wisdom of my own, though until now it has not crossed yours. I go
with you. Rather to Doriath, for reverence of those that rule it; but if
not, then westward. Indeed, if either of us should go on, it is I
rather, in the fullness of strength.\' ]{#calibre_link-1606
.calibre_class_4}

[Then Morwen saw in the grey eyes of Niënor the steadfastness of Húrin;
and she wavered, but she could not overcome her pride, and would not
(save the fair words) seem thus to be led back by her daughter, as one
old and doting. \'I go on, as I have purposed,\' she said. \'Come you
also, but against my will.\' ]{#calibre_link-1608 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Let it be so,\' said Niënor. ]{#calibre_link-1610 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Mablung said to his company: \'Truly, it is by lack of counsel not
of courage that Húrin\'s kin bring woe to others! Even so with Túrin;
yet not so with his fathers. But now they are all fey, and I like it
not. More do I dread this errand of the King than the hunting of the
Wolf. What is to be done?\' ]{#calibre_link-1612 .calibre_class_4}

[But Morwen, who had come ashore and now drew near, heard the last of
his words. \'Do as you are bidden by the King,\' said she. \'Seek for
tidings of Nargothrond, and of Túrin. For this end are we all come
together.\' ]{#calibre_link-1614 .calibre_class_4}

[\'It is yet a long way and dangerous,\' said Mablung. \'If you go
further, you shall both be horsed and go among the riders, and stray no
foot from them.\' ]{#calibre_link-1616 .calibre_class_4}

[Thus it was that with the full day they set forth, and passed slowly
and warily out of the country of reeds and low willows, and came to the
grey woods that covered much of the southern plain before Nargothrond.
All day they went due west, and saw nothing but desolation, and heard
nothing; for the lands were silent, and it seemed to Mablung that a
present fear lay upon them. That same way had Beren trodden years
before, and then the woods were filled with the hidden eyes of the
hunters; but now all the people of Narog were gone, and the Orcs, it
seemed, were not yet roaming so far southward. That night they encamped
in the grey wood without fire or light. ]{#calibre_link-1618
.calibre_class_4}

[The next two days they went on, and by evening of the third day from
Sirion they were come across the plain and were drawing near to the east
shores of Narog. Then so great an unease came upon Mablung that he
begged Morwen to go no further. But she laughed, and said: \'You will be
glad soon to be rid of us, as is likely enough. But you must endure us a
little longer. We are come too near now to turn back in fear.\'
]{#calibre_link-1620 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Mablung cried: \'Fey are you both, and foolhardy. You help not but
hinder any gathering of news. Now hear me! I was bidden not to stay you
with strength; but I was bidden also to guard you, as I might. In this
pass, one only can I do. And I will guard you. Tomorrow I will lead you
to Amon Ethir, the Spyhill, which is near; and there you shall sit under
guard, and go no further while I command here.\' Now Amon Ethir was a
mound as great as a hill that long ago Felagund had caused to be raised
with great labour in the plain before his Doors, a league east of Narog.
It was tree-grown, save on the summit, whence a wide view might be had
all ways of the roads that led to the great bridge of Nargothrond and of
the lands round about. To this hill they came late in the morning and
climbed up from the east. Then looking out towards the High Faroth,
brown and bare beyond the river, Mablung saw with elven-sight the
terraces of Nargothrond on the steep west bank, and as a small black
hole in the hill-wall the gaping Doors of Felagund. But he could hear no
sound, and he could see no sign of any foe, nor any token of the Dragon,
save the burning about the Doors that he had wrought in the day of the
sack. All lay quiet under a pale sun. ]{#calibre_link-1622
.calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-79 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Now therefore Mablung, as he had said, commanded his ten riders to keep
Morwen and Niënor on the hill-top, and not to stir thence until he
returned, unless some great peril arose: and if that befell, the riders
should set Morwen and Niënor in their midst and flee as swiftly as they
might, east-away towards Doriath, sending one ahead to bring news and
seek aid. ]{#calibre_link-1624 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Mablung took the other score of his company, and they crept down
from the hill; and then passing into the fields westward, where trees
were few, they scattered and made each his way, daring but stealthy, to
the banks of Narog. Mablung himself took the middle way, going towards
the bridge, and so came to its hither end and found it all broken down;
and the deep-cloven river, running wild after rains far away northward,
was foaming and roaring among the fallen stones. ]{#calibre_link-1626
.calibre_class_4}

[But Glaurung lay there, just within the shadow of the great passage
that led inward from the ruined Doors, and he had long been aware of the
spies, though few other eyes in Middle-earth would have discerned them.
But the glance of his fell eyes was keener than that of the eagles, and
outreached the far sight of the Elves; and indeed he knew also that some
remained behind and sat upon the bare top of Amon Ethir.
]{#calibre_link-1628 .calibre_class_4}

[Thus, even as Mablung crept among the rocks, seeking whether he could
ford the wild river upon the fallen stones of the bridge, suddenly
Glaurung came forth with a great blast of fire, and crawled down into
the stream. Then straightway there was a vast hissing and huge vapours
arose, and Mablung and his followers that lurked near were engulfed in a
blinding steam and foul stench; and the most fled as best they could
guess towards the Spyhill. But as Glaurung was passing over Narog,
Mablung drew aside and lay under a rock, and remained; for it seemed to
him that he had an errand yet to do. He knew now indeed that Glaurung
abode in Nargothrond, but he was bidden also to learn the truth
concerning Húrin\'s son, if he might; and in the stoutness of his heart,
therefore, he purposed to cross the river, as soon as Glaurung was gone,
and search the halls of Felagund. For he thought that all had been done
that could be for the keeping of Morwen and Niënor: the coming of
Glaurung would be marked, and even now the riders should be speeding
towards Doriath. ]{#calibre_link-1630 .calibre_class_4}

[Glaurung therefore passed Mablung by, a vast shape in the mist; and he
went swiftly, for he was a mighty Worm, and yet lithe. Then Mablung
behind him forded Narog in great peril; but the watchers upon Amon Ethir
beheld the issuing of the Dragon, and were dismayed. At once they bade
Morwen and Niënor mount, without debate, and prepared to flee eastward
as they were bidden. But even as they came down from the hill into the
plain, an ill wind blew the great vapours upon them, bringing a stench
that no horses would endure. Then, blinded by the fog and in mad terror
of the dragon-reek, the horses soon became ungovernable, and went wildly
this way and that; and the guards were dispersed, and were dashed
against trees to great hurt, or sought vainly one for another. The
neighing of the horses and the cries of the riders came to the ears of
Glaurung; and he was well pleased. ]{#calibre_link-1632
.calibre_class_4}

[One of the Elf-riders, striving with his horse in the fog, saw suddenly
the Lady Morwen passing near, a grey wraith upon a mad steed, but she
vanished in the mist, crying *Niënor,* and they saw her no more.
]{#calibre_link-1634 .calibre_class_4}

[But when the blind terror came upon the riders, Niënor\'s horse,
running wild, stumbled, and she was thrown. Falling softly into grass
she was unhurt; but when she got to her feet she was alone: lost in the
mist without horse or companion. ]{#calibre_link-1636 .calibre_class_4}

[Her heart did not fail her, and she took thought; and it seemed to her
vain to go towards this cry or that, for cries were all about her, but
growing ever fainter. Better it seemed to her in such case to seek again
for the hill: thither doubtless Mablung would come before he went away,
if only to be sure that none of his company had remained there.
]{#calibre_link-1638 .calibre_class_4}

[Therefore walking at guess she found the hill, which was indeed close
at hand, by the rising of the ground before her feet; and slowly she
climbed the path that led up from the east. And as she climbed so the
fog grew thinner, until she came at last out into the sunlight on the
bare summit. Then she stepped forward and looked westward. And there
right before her was the great head of Glaurung, who had even then crept
up from the other side; and before she was aware her eyes had looked in
the fell spirit of his eyes, and they were terrible, being filled with
the fell spirit of Morgoth, his master. ]{#calibre_link-1640
.calibre_class_4}

[Strong was the will and heart of Niënor, and she strove against
Glaurung; but he put forth his power against her. \'What seek you
here?\' he said. ]{#calibre_link-1642 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-80 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[And constrained to answer she said: \'I do but seek one Túrin that
dwelt here a while. But he is dead, maybe.\' ]{#calibre_link-1644
.calibre_class_4}

[\'I know not,\' said Glaurung. \'He was left here to defend the women
and weaklings; but when I came he deserted them and fled. A boaster but
a craven, it seems. Why seek you such a one?\' ]{#calibre_link-1646
.calibre_class_4}

[\'You lie,\' said Niënor. \'The children of Húrin at least are not
craven. We fear you not.\' ]{#calibre_link-1648 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Glaurung laughed, for so was Húrin\'s daughter revealed to his
malice. \'Then you are fools, both you and your brother,\' said he.
\'And your boast shall be made vain. For I am Glaurung!\'
]{#calibre_link-1650 .calibre_class_4}

[Then he drew her eyes into his, and her will swooned. And it seemed to
her that the sun sickened and all became dim about her; and slowly a
great darkness drew down on her and in that darkness there was
emptiness; she knew nothing, and heard nothing, and remembered nothing.
]{#calibre_link-1652 .calibre_class_4}

[Long Mablung explored the halls of Nargothrond, as well he might for
the darkness and the stench; but he found no living thing there: nothing
stirred among the bones, and none answered his cries. At last, being
oppressed by the horror of the place, and fearing the return of
Glaurung, he came back to the Doors. The sun was sinking west, and the
shadows of the Faroth behind lay dark on the terraces and the wild river
below; but away beneath Amon Ethir he descried, as it seemed, the evil
shape of the Dragon. Harder and more perilous was the return over Narog
in such haste and fear; and scarcely had he reached the east shore and
crept aside under the bank when Glaurung drew nigh. But he was slow now
and stealthy; for all the fires in him were burned low: great power had
gone out of him, and he would rest and sleep in the dark. Thus he
writhed through the water and slunk up to the Doors like a huge snake,
ashen-grey, sliming the ground with his belly. ]{#calibre_link-1654
.calibre_class_4}

[But he turned before he went in and looked back eastward, and there
came from him the laughter of Morgoth, dim but horrible, as an echo of
malice out of the black depths far away. And this voice, cold and low,
came after: \'There you lie like a vole under the bank, Mablung the
mighty! Ill do you run the errands of Thingol. Haste you now to the hill
and see what is become of your charge!\' ]{#calibre_link-1656
.calibre_class_4}

[Then Glaurung passed into his lair, and the sun went down and grey
evening came chill over the land. But Mablung hastened back to Amon
Ethir, and as he climbed to the top the stars came out in the east.
Against them he saw there standing, dark and still, a figure as it were
an image of stone. Thus Niënor stood, and heard nothing that he said,
and made him no answer. But when at last he took her hand, she stirred,
and suffered him to lead her away; and while he held her she followed,
but if he loosed her, she stood still. ]{#calibre_link-1658
.calibre_class_4}

[Then great was Mablung\'s grief and bewilderment; but no other choice
had he but to lead Niënor so upon the long eastward way, without help or
company. Thus they passed away, walking like dreamers, out into the
night-shadowed plain. And when morning returned Niënor stumbled and
fell, and lay still; and Mablung sat beside her in despair.
]{#calibre_link-1660 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Not for nothing did I dread this errand,\' he said. \'For it will be
my last, it seems. With this unlucky child of Men I shall perish in the
wilderness, and my name shall be held in scorn in Doriath: if any
tidings indeed are ever heard of our fate. All else doubtless are slain,
and she alone spared, but not in mercy.\' ]{#calibre_link-1662
.calibre_class_4}

[Thus they were found by three of the company that had fled from Narog
at the coming of Glaurung, and after much wandering, when the mist had
passed, went back to the hill; and finding it empty they had begun to
seek their way home. Hope then returned to Mablung; and they went on now
together steering northward and eastward, for there was no road back
into Doriath in the south, and since the fall of Nargothrond the
ferry-wards were forbidden to set any across save those that came from
within. ]{#calibre_link-1664 .calibre_class_4}

[Slow was their journey, as for those that lead a weary child. But ever
as they passed further from Nargothrond and drew nearer to Doriath, so
little by little strength returned to Niënor, and she would walk hour by
hour obediently, led by the hand. Yet her wide eyes saw nothing, and her
ears heard no words, and her lips spoke no words. ]{#calibre_link-1666
.calibre_class_4}

[And now at length after many days they came nigh to the west border of
Doriath, somewhat south of the Teiglin; for they intended to pass the
fences of the little land of Thingol beyond Sirion and so come to the
guarded bridge near the inflowing of Esgalduin. There a while they
halted; and they laid Niënor on a couch of grass, and she closed her
eyes, as she had not yet done, and it seemed that she slept. Then the
Elves rested also, and for very weariness were unheedful. Thus they were
assailed at unawares by a band of orc-hunters, such as now roamed much
in that region, as nigh to the fences of Doriath as they dared to go. In
the midst of the affray suddenly Niënor leapt up from her couch, as one
waking out of sleep to an alarm by night, and with a cry she sped away
into the forest. Then the Orcs turned and gave chase, and the Elves
after them. But a strange change had come upon Niënor and now she outran
them all, flying like a deer among the trees with her hair streaming in
the wind of her speed. The Orcs indeed Mablung and his companions
swiftly overtook, and they slew them one and all, and hastened on. But
by then Niënor had passed away like a wraith; and neither sight nor slot
of her could they find, though they hunted far northward and searched
for many days. ]{#calibre_link-1668 .calibre_class_4}
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-81 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Then at last Mablung returned to Doriath bowed with grief and with
shame. \'Choose you a new master of your hunters, lord,\' he said to the
King. \'For I am dishonoured.\' ]{#calibre_link-1670 .calibre_class_4}

[But Melian said: \'It is not so, Mablung. You did all that you could,
and none other among the King\'s servants would have done so much. But
by ill chance you were matched against a power too great for you, too
great indeed for all that now dwell in Middle-earth.\'
]{#calibre_link-1672 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I sent you to win tidings, and that you have done,\' said Thingol.
\'It is no fault of yours that those whom your tidings touch nearest are
now beyond hearing. Grievous indeed is this end of all Húrin\'s kin, but
it lies not at your door.\' ]{#calibre_link-1674 .calibre_class_4}

[For not only was Niënor now run witless into the wild, but Morwen also
was lost. Neither then nor after did any certain news of her fate come
to Doriath or to Dor-lómin. Nonetheless Mablung would not rest, and with
a small company he went into the wild and for three years wandered far,
from Ered Wethrin even to the Mouths of Sirion, seeking for sign or
tidings of the lost. ]{#calibre_link-1676 .calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-82 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000025.jpg){.calibre29
shapes="_x0000_i1052"}]{#calibre_link-1678 .calibre_class_5}

[But as for Niënor, she ran on into the wood, hearing the shouts of
pursuit come behind; and her clothing she tore off, casting away her
garments one by one as she fled, until she went naked; and all that day
still she ran, as a beast that is hunted to heart-bursting, and dare not
stay or draw breath. But at evening suddenly her madness passed. She
stood still a moment as in wonder, and then, in a swoon of utter
weariness, she fell as one stricken down into a deep brake of fern. And
there amid the old bracken and the swift fronds of spring she lay and
slept, heedless of all. ]{#calibre_link-1680 .calibre_class_3}

[In the morning she woke, and rejoiced in the light as one first called
to life; and all things that she saw seemed to her new and strange, and
she had no names for them. For behind her lay only an empty darkness,
through which came no memory of anything she had ever known, nor any
echo of any word. A shadow of fear only she remembered, and so she was
wary, and sought ever for hidings: she would climb into trees or slip
into thickets, swift as a squirrel or fox, if any sound or shadow
frightened her; and thence she would peer long through the leaves with
shy eyes, before she went on again. ]{#calibre_link-1682
.calibre_class_3}

[Thus going forward in the way she first ran, she came to the river
Teiglin, and stayed her thirst; but no food she found, nor knew how to
seek it, and she was famished and cold. And since the trees across the
water seemed closer and darker (as indeed they were, being the eaves of
Brethil forest) she crossed over at last, and came to a green mound and
there cast herself down: for she was spent, and it seemed to her that
the darkness that lay behind her was overtaking her again, and the sun
going dark. ]{#calibre_link-1684 .calibre_class_3}

[But indeed it was a black storm that came up out of the South, laden
with lightning and great rain; and she lay there cowering in terror of
the thunder, and the dark rain smote her nakedness, and she watched
without words as a wild thing that is trapped. ]{#calibre_link-1686
.calibre_class_3}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-83 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Now it chanced that some of the woodmen of Brethil came by in that hour
from a foray against Orcs, hastening over the Crossings of Teiglin to a
shelter that was near; and there came a great flash of lightning, so
that the Haudh-en-Elleth was lit as with a white flame. Then Turambar
who led the men started back and covered his eyes, and trembled; for it
seemed that he saw the wraith of a slain maiden that lay on the grave of
Finduilas. ]{#calibre_link-1688 .calibre_class_4}

[But one of the men ran to the mound, and called to him: \'Hither, lord!
Here is a young woman lying, and she lives!\' and Turambar coming lifted
her, and the water dripped from her drenched hair, but she closed her
eyes and quivered and strove no more. Then marvelling that she lay thus
naked Turambar cast his cloak about her and bore her away to the
hunters\' lodge in the woods. There they lit a fire and wrapped
coverlets about her, and she opened her eyes and looked upon them; and
when her glance fell on Turambar a light came in her face and she put
out a hand towards him, for it seemed to her that she had found at last
something that she had sought in the darkness, and she was comforted.
But Turambar took her hand, and smiled, and said: \'Now, lady, will you
not tell us your name and your kin, and what evil has befallen you?\'
]{#calibre_link-1690 .calibre_class_4}

[Then she shook her head, and said nothing, but began to weep; and they
troubled her no more, until she had eaten hungrily of what food they
could give her. And when she had eaten she sighed, and laid her hand
again in Turambar\'s; and he said: \'With us you are safe. Here you may
rest this night, and in the morning we will lead you to our homes up in
the high forest. But we would know your name and your kin, so that we
may find them, maybe, and bring them news of you. Will you not tell
us?\' But again she made no answer, and wept. ]{#calibre_link-1692
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Do not be troubled!\' said Turambar. \'Maybe the tale is too sad yet
to tell. But I will give you a name, and call you ]{#calibre_link-1694
.calibre_class_4}

[Níniel, Maid of Tears.\' And at that name she looked up, and she shook
her head, but said: \'Níniel.\' And that was the first word that she
spoke after her darkness, and it was her name among the woodmen ever
after. ]{#calibre_link-1696 .calibre_class_4}

[In the morning they bore Níniel towards Ephel Brandir, and the road
went steeply up until it came to a place where it must cross the
tumbling stream of Celebros. There a bridge of wood had been built, and
below it the stream went over a lip of worn stone, and fell down by many
foaming steps into a rocky bowl far below; and all the air was filled
with spray like rain. There was a wide green sward at the head of the
falls, and birches grew about it, but over the bridge there was a wide
view towards the ravines of Teiglin some two miles to the west. There
the air was ever cool, and there wayfarers in summer would rest and
drink of the cold water. Dimrost, the Rainy Stair, those falls were
called, but after that day Nen Girith, the Shuddering Water; for
Turambar and his men halted there, but as soon as Níniel came to that
place she grew cold and shivered, and they could not warm her or comfort
her. Therefore they hastened on their way; but before they came to Ephel
Brandir Níniel was wandering in a fever. ]{#calibre_link-1698
.calibre_class_4}

[Long she lay in her sickness, and Brandir used all his skill in her
healing, and the wives of the woodmen watched over her by night and by
day. But only when Turambar stayed near her would she lie at peace, or
sleep without moaning; and this thing all marked that watched her:
throughout all her fever, though often she was much troubled, she
murmured never a word in any tongue of Elves or of Men. And when health
slowly returned to her, and she waked, and began to eat again, then as
with a child the women of Brethil must teach her to speak, word by word.
But in this learning she was quick and took great delight, as one that
finds again treasures, great and small, that were mislaid; and when at
length she had learned enough to speak with her friends she would say:
\'What is the name of this thing? For in my darkness I lost it.\' And
when she was able to go about again, she would seek the house of
Brandir; for she was most eager to learn the names of all living things,
and he knew much of such matters; and they would walk together in the
gardens and the glades. ]{#calibre_link-1700 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Brandir grew to love her; and when she grew strong she would lend
him her arm for his lameness, and she called him her brother. But to
Turambar her heart was given, and only at his coming would she smile,
and only when he spoke gaily would she laugh. ]{#calibre_link-1702
.calibre_class_4}
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-84 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[One evening of the golden autumn they sat together, and the sun set the
hillside and the houses of Ephel Brandir aglow, and there was a deep
quiet. Then Níniel said to him: \'Of all things I have now asked the
name, save you. What are you called?\' ]{#calibre_link-1704
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Turambar,\' he answered. ]{#calibre_link-1706 .calibre_class_4}

[Then she paused as if listening for some echo; but she said: \'And what
does that say, or is it just the name for you alone?\'
]{#calibre_link-1708 .calibre_class_4}

[\'It means,\' said he, \'Master of the Dark Shadow. For I also, Níniel,
had my darkness, in which dear things were lost; but now I have overcome
it, I deem.\' ]{#calibre_link-1710 .calibre_class_4}

[\'And did you also flee from it, running, until you came to these fair
woods?\' she said. \'And when did you escape, Turambar?\'
]{#calibre_link-1712 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Yes,\' he answered. \'I fled for many years. And I escaped when you
did so. For it was dark when you came, Níniel, but ever since it has
been light. And it seems to me that what I long sought in vain has come
to me.\' And as he went back to his house in the twilight, he said to
himself: \'Haudh-en-Elleth! From the green mound she came. Is that a
sign, and how shall I read it?\' ]{#calibre_link-1714 .calibre_class_4}

[Now that golden year waned and passed to a gentle winter, and there
came another bright year. There was peace in Brethil, and the woodmen
held themselves quiet and went not abroad, and they heard no tidings of
the lands that lay about them. For the Orcs that at that time came
southward to the dark reign of Glaurung, or were sent to spy on the
borders of Doriath, shunned the Crossings of Teiglin, and passed
westward far beyond the river. ]{#calibre_link-1716 .calibre_class_4}

[And now Níniel was fully healed, and was grown fair and strong, and
Turambar restrained himself no longer, but asked her in marriage. Then
Níniel was glad; but when Brandir heard of it his heart was sick within
him, and he said to her: \'Be not in haste! Think me not unkindly, if I
counsel you to wait.\' ]{#calibre_link-1718 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Nothing that you do is done unkindly,\' she said. \'But why then do
you give me such counsel, wise brother?\' ]{#calibre_link-1720
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Wise brother?\' he answered. \'Lame brother, rather, unloved and
unlovely. And I scarce know why. Yet there lies a shadow on this man,
and I am afraid.\' ]{#calibre_link-1722 .calibre_class_4}

[\'There was a shadow,\' said Níniel, \'for so he told me. But he has
escaped from it, even as I. And is he not worthy of love? Though he now
holds himself at peace, was he not once the greatest captain, from whom
all our enemies would flee, if they saw him?\' ]{#calibre_link-1724
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Who told you this?\' said Brandir. ]{#calibre_link-1726
.calibre_class_4}

[\'It was Dorlas,\' she said. \'Does he not speak truth?\'
]{#calibre_link-1728 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Truth indeed,\' said Brandir, but he was ill pleased, for Dorlas was
chief of that party that wished for war on the Orcs. And yet he sought
still for reasons to delay Níniel; and he said therefore: \'The truth,
but not the whole truth; for he was the Captain of Nargothrond, and came
before out of the North, and was (it is said) son of Húrin of Dor-lómin
of the warlike House of Hador.\' And Brandir, seeing the shadow that
passed over her face at that name, misread her, and said more: \'Indeed,
Níniel, well may you think that such a one is likely ere long to go back
to war, far from this land, maybe. And if so, how long will you endure
it? Have a care, for I forebode that if Turambar goes again to battle,
then not he but the Shadow shall have the mastery.\'
]{#calibre_link-1730 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Ill would I endure it,\' she answered; \'but unwedded no better than
wedded. And a wife, maybe, would better restrain him, and hold off the
shadow.\' Nonetheless she was troubled by the words of Brandir, and she
bade Turambar wait yet a while. And he wondered and was downcast; but
when he learned from Níniel that Brandir had counselled her to wait he
was ill pleased. ]{#calibre_link-1732 .calibre_class_4}

[But when the next spring came he said to Níniel: \'Time passes. We have
waited, and now I will wait no longer. Do as your heart bids you, Níniel
most dear, but see: this is the choice before me. I will go back now to
war in the wild; or I will wed you, and go never to war again - save
only to defend you, if some evil assails our home.\'
]{#calibre_link-1734 .calibre_class_4}

[Then she was glad indeed, and she plighted her troth, and at the
mid-summer they were wedded; and the woodmen made a great feast, and
they gave them a fair house which they had built for them upon Amon
Obel. There they dwelt in happiness, but Brandir was troubled, and the
shadow on his heart grew deeper.[ 
]{.calibre_class_6}]{#calibre_link-1736 .calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-85 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000026.jpg){.calibre30
shapes="_x0000_i1053"}]{#calibre_link-1738 .calibre_class_5}

[Now the power and malice of Glaurung grew apace, and he waxed fat, and
he gathered Orcs to him, and ruled as a dragon-king, and all the realm
of Nargothrond that had been was laid under him. And before this year
ended, the third of Turambar\'s dwelling among the woodmen, he began to
assail their land, which for a while had had peace; for indeed it was
well known to Glaurung and to his Master that in Brethil there abode a
remnant of free men, the last of the Three Houses to defy the power of
the North. And this they would not brook; for it was the purpose of
Morgoth to subdue all Beleriand and to search out its every corner, so
that none in any hole or hiding might live that were not thrall to him.
Thus, whether Glaurung guessed where Túrin was hidden, or whether (as
some hold) he had indeed for that time escaped from the eye of Evil that
pursued him, is of little matter. For in the end the counsels of Brandir
must prove vain, and at the last two choices only could there be for
Turambar: to sit deedless until he was found, driven forth like a rat;
or to go forth soon to battle, and be revealed. ]{#calibre_link-1740
.calibre_class_3}

[But when tidings of the coming of the Orcs were first brought to Ephel
Brandir, he did not go forth and yielded to the prayers of Níniel. For
she said: \'Our homes are not yet assailed, as your word was. It is said
that the Orcs are not many. And Dorlas told me that before you came such
affrays were not seldom, and the woodmen held them off.\'
]{#calibre_link-1742 .calibre_class_3}

[But the woodmen were worsted, for these Orcs were of a fell breed,
fierce and cunning; and indeed they came with a purpose to invade the
Forest of Brethil, not as before passing through its eaves on other
errands, or hunting in small bands. Therefore Dorlas and his men were
driven back with loss, and the Orcs came over Teiglin and roamed far
into the woods. And Dorlas came to Turambar and showed his wounds, and
he said: \'See, lord, now is the time of our need come upon us, after a
false peace, even as I foreboded. ]{#calibre_link-1744 .calibre_class_3}
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-86 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Did you not ask to be counted one of our people, and no stranger? Is
this peril not yours also? For our homes will not remain hidden, if the
Orcs come further into our land.\' ]{#calibre_link-1746
.calibre_class_4}

[Therefore Turambar arose, and took up again his sword Gurthang, and he
went to battle; and when the woodmen learned this they were greatly
heartened, and they gathered to him, till he had a force of many
hundreds. Then they hunted through the forest and slew all the Orcs that
crept there, and hung them on the trees near the Crossings of Teiglin.
And when a new host came against them, they trapped it, and being
surprised both by the numbers of the woodmen and by the terror of the
Black Sword that had returned, the Orcs were routed and slain in great
number. Then the woodmen made great pyres and burned the bodies of the
soldiers of Morgoth in heaps, and the smoke of their vengeance rose
black into heaven, and the wind bore it away westward. But few living
went back to Nargothrond with these tidings. ]{#calibre_link-1748
.calibre_class_4}

[Then Glaurung was wrathful indeed; but for a while he lay still and
pondered what he had heard. Thus the winter passed in peace, and men
said: \'Great is the Black Sword of Brethil, for all our enemies are
overcome.\' And Níniel was comforted, and she rejoiced in the renown of
Turambar; but he sat in thought, and he said in his heart: \'The die is
cast. Now comes the test, in which my boast shall be made good, or fail
utterly. I will flee no more. Turambar indeed I will be, and by my own
will and prowess I will surmount my doom - or fall. But falling or
riding, Glaurung at least I will slay.\' ]{#calibre_link-1750
.calibre_class_4}

[Nonetheless he was unquiet, and he sent out men of daring as scouts far
afield. For indeed, though no word was said, he now ordered things as he
would, as if he were lord of Brethil, and no man heeded Brandir.
]{#calibre_link-1752 .calibre_class_4}

[Spring came hopefully, and men sang at their work. But in that spring
Níniel conceived, and she became pale and wan, and all her happiness was
dimmed. And soon after there came strange tidings, from the men that had
gone abroad beyond Teiglin, that there was a great burning far out in
the woods of the plain towards Nargothrond, and men wondered what it
might be. ]{#calibre_link-1754 .calibre_class_4}

[But before long there came more reports: that the fires drew ever
northward, and that indeed Glaurung himself made them. For he had left
Nargothrond, and was abroad again on some errand. Then the more foolish
or more hopeful said: \'His army is destroyed, and now at last he sees
wisdom, and is going back whence he came.\' And others said: \'Let us
hope that he will pass us by.\' But Turambar had no such hope, and knew
that Glaurung was coming to seek him. Therefore though he masked his
mind because of Níniel, he pondered ever by day and by night what
counsel he should take; and spring turned towards summer.
]{#calibre_link-1756 .calibre_class_4}

[A day came when two men returned to Ephel Brandir in terror, for they
had seen the Great Worm himself. \'In truth, lord,\' they said, \'he
draws now near to Teiglin, and turns not aside. He lay in the midst of a
great burning, and the trees smoked about him. The stench of him is
scarce to be endured. And all the long leagues back to Nargothrond his
foul swath lies, we deem, in a line that swerves not, but points
straight to us. What is to be done?\' ]{#calibre_link-1758
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Little,\' said Turambar, \'but to that little I have already given
thought. The tidings you bring give me hope rather than dread; for if
indeed he goes straight, as you say, and does not swerve, then I have
some counsel for hardy hearts.\' The men wondered, for he said no more
at that time; but they took heart from his steadfast bearing.
]{#calibre_link-1760 .calibre_class_4}

[Now the river Teiglin ran in this manner. It flowed down from Ered
Wethrin swift as Narog, but at first between low shores, until after the
Crossings, gathering power from other streams, it clove a way through
the feet of the highlands upon which stood the Forest of Brethil.
Thereafter it ran in deep ravines, whose great sides were like walls of
rock, but pent at the bottom the waters flowed with great force and
noise. And right in the path of Glaurung there lay now one of these
gorges, by no means the deepest, but the narrowest, just north of the
inflow of Celebros. Therefore Turambar sent out three hardy men to keep
watch from the brink on the movements of the Dragon; but he himself
would ride to the high fall of Nen Girith, where news could find him
swiftly, and whence he himself could look far across the lands.
]{#calibre_link-1762 .calibre_class_4}

[But first he gathered the woodmen together in Ephel Brandir and spoke
to them, saying: \'Men of Brethil, a deadly peril has come upon us,
which only great hardihood shall turn aside. But in this matter numbers
will avail little; we must use cunning, and hope for good fortune. If we
went up against the Dragon[  ]{.calibre_class_6}]{#calibre_link-1764
.calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-87 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000027.jpg){.calibre8
shapes="_x0000_i1054"}]{#calibre_link-1766 .calibre_class_5}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-88 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[with all our strength, as against an army of Orcs, we should but offer
ourselves all to death, and so leave our wives and kin defenceless.
Therefore I say that you should stay here, and prepare for flight. For
if Glaurung comes, then you must abandon this place, and scatter far and
wide; and so may some escape and live. For certainly, if he can, he will
destroy it, and all that he espies; but afterwards he will not abide
here. In Nargothrond lies all his treasure, and there are the deep halls
in which he can lie safe, and grow.\' ]{#calibre_link-1768
.calibre_class_4}

[Then the men were dismayed, and were utterly downcast, for they trusted
in Turambar, and had looked for more hopeful words. But he said: \'Nay,
that is the worst. And it shall not come to pass, if my counsel and
fortune are good. For I do not believe that this Dragon is
unconquerable, though he grows greater in strength and malice with the
years. I know somewhat of him. His power is rather in the evil spirit
that dwells within him than in the might of his body, great though that
be. For hear now this tale that I was told by some that fought in the
year of the Nirnaeth, when I and most that hear me were children. In
that field the Dwarves withstood him and Azaghâl of Belegost pricked him
so deep that he fled back to Angband. But here is a thorn sharper and
longer than the knife of Azaghâl.\' ]{#calibre_link-1770
.calibre_class_4}

[And Turambar swept Gurthang from its sheath and stabbed with it up
above his head, and it seemed to those that looked on that a flame leapt
from Turambar\'s hand many feet into the air. Then they gave a great
cry: \'The Black Thorn of Brethil!\' ]{#calibre_link-1772
.calibre_class_4}

[\'The Black Thorn of Brethil,\' said Turambar: \'well may he fear it.
For know this: it is the doom of this Dragon (and all his brood, it is
said) that how great so ever be his armour of horn, harder than iron,
below he must go with the belly of a snake. Therefore, Men of Brethil, I
go now to seek the belly of Glaurung, by what means I may. Who will come
with me? I need but a few with strong arms and stronger hearts.\'
]{#calibre_link-1774 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Dorlas stood forth and said: \'I will go with you, lord: for I
would ever go forward rather than wait for a foe.\' ]{#calibre_link-1776
.calibre_class_4}

[But no others were so swift to the call, for the dread of Glaurung lay
on them, and the tale of the scouts that had seen him had gone about and
grown in the telling. Then Dorlas cried out: \'Hearken, Men of Brethil,
it is now well seen that for the evil of our times the counsels of
Brandir were vain. There is no escape by hiding. Will none of you take
the place of the son of Handir, that the house of Haleth be not put to
shame?\' Thus Brandir, who sat indeed in the high-seat of the lord of
the assembly, but unheeded, was scorned, and he was bitter in his heart;
for Turambar did not rebuke Dorlas. But one Hunthor, Brandir\'s kinsman,
arose and said: \'You do evilly, Dorlas, to speak thus to the shame of
your lord, whose limbs by ill hazard cannot do as his heart would.
Beware lest the contrary be seen in you at some turn! And how can it be
said that his counsels were vain, when they were never taken? You, his
liege, have ever set them at naught. I say to you that Glaurung comes
now to us, as to Nargothrond before, because our deeds have betrayed us,
as he feared. But since this woe is now come, with your leave, son of
Handir, I will go on behalf of Haleth\'s house.\' ]{#calibre_link-1778
.calibre_class_4}

[Then Turambar said: \'Three is enough! You twain will I take. But,
lord, I do not scorn you. See! We must go in great haste, and our task
will need strong limbs. I deem that your place is with your people. For
you are wise, and are a healer; and it may be that there will be great
need of wisdom and healing ere long.\' But these words, though fair
spoken, did but embitter Brandir the more, and he said to Hunthor: \'Go
then, but not with my leave. For a shadow lies on this man, and it will
lead you to evil.\' ]{#calibre_link-1780 .calibre_class_4}

[Now Turambar was in haste to go; but when he came to Níniel to bid her
farewell, she clung to him, weeping grievously. \'Go not forth,
Turambar, I beg!\' she said. \'Challenge not the shadow that you have
fled from! Nay, nay, flee still, and take me with you, far away!\'
]{#calibre_link-1782 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Níniel most dear,\' he answered, \'we cannot flee further, you and I.
We are hemmed in this land. And even should I go, deserting the people
that befriended us, I could but take you forth into the houseless wild,
to your death and the death of our child. A hundred leagues lie between
us and any land that is yet beyond the reach of the Shadow. But take
heart, Níniel. For I say to you: neither you nor I shall be slain by
this Dragon, nor by any foes of the North.\' Then Níniel ceased to weep
and fell silent, but her kiss was cold as they parted.
]{#calibre_link-1784 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Turambar with Dorlas and Hunthor went away hotfoot to Nen Girith,
and when they came there the sun was westering and shadows were long;
and the last two of the scouts were there awaiting them.
]{#calibre_link-1786 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-89 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'You come not too soon, lord,\' said they. \'For the Dragon has come
on, and already when we left he had reached the brink of the Teiglin,
and glared across the water. He moves ever by night, and we may look
then for some stroke before tomorrow\'s dawn.\' ]{#calibre_link-1788
.calibre_class_4}

[Turambar looked out over the falls of Celebros and saw the sun going
down to its setting, and black spires of smoke rising by the borders of
the river. \'There is no time to lose,\' he said; \'yet these tidings
are good. For my fear was that he would seek about; and if he passed
northward and came to the Crossings and so to the old road in the
lowland, then hope would be dead. But now some fury of pride and malice
drives him headlong.\' But even as he spoke, he wondered, and mused in
his mind: \'Or can it be that one so evil and fell shuns the Crossings,
even as the Orcs? Haudh-en-Elleth! Does Finduilas lie still between me
and my doom?\' ]{#calibre_link-1790 .calibre_class_4}

[Then he turned to his companions and said: \'This task now lies before
us. We must wait yet a little, for too soon in this case were as ill as
too late. When dusk falls, we must creep down, with all stealth, to
Teiglin. But beware! For the ears of Glaurung are as keen as his eyes,
and they are deadly. If we reach the river unmarked, we must then climb
down into the ravine, and cross the water, and so come in the path that
he will take when he stirs.\' ]{#calibre_link-1792 .calibre_class_4}

[\'But how can he come forward so?\' said Dorlas. \'Lithe he may be, but
he is a great Dragon, and how shall he climb down the one cliff and up
the other, when part must again be climbing before the hinder part is
yet descended? And if he can so, what will it avail us to be in the wild
water below?\' ]{#calibre_link-1794 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Maybe he can so,\' answered Turambar, \'and indeed if he does, it
will go ill with us. But it is my hope from what we learn of him, and
from the place where he now lies, that his purpose is otherwise. He is
come to the brink of Cabed-en-Aras, over which, as you tell, a deer once
leaped from the huntsmen of Haleth. So great is he now that I think he
will seek to cast himself across there. That is all our hope, and we may
trust to it.\' ]{#calibre_link-1796 .calibre_class_4}

[Dorlas\' heart sank at these words; for he knew better than any all the
land of Brethil, and Cabed-en-Aras was a grim place indeed. On the east
side was a sheer cliff of some forty feet, bare but tree-grown at the
crown; on the other side was a bank somewhat less sheer and less high,
shrouded with hanging trees and bushes, but between them the water ran
fiercely between rocks, and though a man bold and sure-footed might ford
it by day, it was perilous to dare it at night. But this was the counsel
of Turambar, and it was useless to gainsay him. ]{#calibre_link-1798
.calibre_class_4}

[They set out therefore at dusk, and they did not go straight towards
the Dragon, but took first the path towards the Crossings; then, before
they came so far, they turned southward by a narrow track and passed
into the twilight of the woods above Teiglin. And as they drew near to
Cabed-en-Aras, step by step, halting often to listen, the reek of
burning came to them, and a stench that sickened them. But all was
deadly still, and there was no stir of air. The first stars glimmered in
the east before them, and faint spires of smoke rose straight and
unwavering against the last light in the west. ]{#calibre_link-1800
.calibre_class_4}

[Now when Turambar was gone Níniel stood silent as a stone; but Brandir
came to her and said: \'Níniel, fear not the worst until you must. But
did I not counsel you to wait?\' ]{#calibre_link-1802 .calibre_class_4}

[\'You did so,\' she answered. \'Yet how would that profit me now? For
love may abide and suffer unwedded.\' ]{#calibre_link-1804
.calibre_class_4}

[\'That I know,\' said Brandir. \'Yet wedding is not for nothing.\'
]{#calibre_link-1806 .calibre_class_4}

[\'No,\' said Níniel. Tor now I am two months gone with his child. But
it does not seem to me that my fear of loss is the more heavy to bear. I
understand you not.\' ]{#calibre_link-1808 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Nor I myself,\' said he. \'And yet I am afraid.\'
]{#calibre_link-1810 .calibre_class_4}

[\'What a comforter you are!\' she cried. \'But Brandir, friend: wedded
or unwedded, mother or maid, my dread is beyond enduring. The Master of
Doom is gone to challenge his doom far hence, and how shall I stay here
and wait for the slow coming of tidings, good or ill? This night, it may
be, he will meet with the Dragon, and how shall I stand or sit, or pass
the dreadful hours?\' ]{#calibre_link-1812 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I know not,\' said he, \'but somehow the hours must pass, for you and
for the wives of those that went with him.\' ]{#calibre_link-1814
.calibre_class_4}
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-90 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'Let them do as their hearts bid!\' she cried. \'But for me, I shall
go. The miles shall not lie between me ]{#calibre_link-1816
.calibre_class_3}

[and my lord\'s peril. I will go to meet the tidings!\'
]{#calibre_link-1818 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Brandir\'s dread grew black at her words, and he cried: \'That you
shall not do, if I may hinder it. For thus will you endanger all
counsel. The miles that lie between may give time for escape, if ill
befall.\' ]{#calibre_link-1820 .calibre_class_4}

[\'If ill befall, I shall not wish to escape,\' she said. \'And now your
wisdom is vain, and you shall not hinder me.\' And she stood forth
before the people that were still gathered in the open place of the
Ephel, and she cried: \'Men of Brethil! I will not wait here. If my lord
fails, then all hope is false. Your land and woods shall be burned
utterly, and all your houses laid in ashes, and none, none, shall
escape. Therefore why tarry here? Now I go to meet the tidings and
whatever doom may send. Let all those of like mind come with me!\'
]{#calibre_link-1822 .calibre_class_4}

[Then many were willing to go with her: the wives of Dorlas and Hunthor
because those whom they loved were gone with Turambar; others for pity
of Níniel and desire to befriend her; and many more that were lured by
the very rumour of the Dragon, in their hardihood or their folly
(knowing little of evil) thinking to see strange and glorious deeds. For
indeed so great in their minds had the Black Sword become that few could
believe that even Glaurung would conquer him. Therefore they set forth
soon in haste, a great company, towards a peril that they did not
understand; and going with little rest they came wearily at last, just
at nightfall, to Nen Girith but a little while after Turambar had
departed. But night is a cold counsellor, and many were now amazed at
their own rashness; and when they heard from the scouts that remained
there how near Glaurung was come, and the desperate purpose of Turambar,
their hearts were chilled, and they dared go no further. Some looked out
towards Cabed-en-Aras with anxious eyes, but nothing could they see, and
nothing hear save the cold voice of the falls. And Níniel sat apart, and
a great shuddering seized her. ]{#calibre_link-1824 .calibre_class_4}

[When Níniel and her company had gone, Brandir said to those that
remained: \'Behold how I am scorned, and all my counsel disdained!
Choose you another to lead you: for here I renounce both lordship and
people. Let Turambar be your lord in name, since already he has taken
all my authority. Let none seek of me ever again either counsel or
healing!\' And he broke his staff. To himself he thought: \'Now nothing
is left to me, save only my love of Níniel: therefore where she goes, in
wisdom or folly, I must go. In this dark hour nothing can be foreseen;
but it may well chance that even I could ward off some evil from her, if
I were nigh.\' ]{#calibre_link-1826 .calibre_class_4}

[He girt himself therefore with a short sword, as seldom before, and
took his crutch, and went with what speed he might out of the gate of
the Ephel, limping after the others down the long path to the west march
of Brethil. ]{#calibre_link-1828 .calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-91 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000028.jpg){.calibre31
shapes="_x0000_i1055"}]{#calibre_link-1830 .calibre_class_5}

[At last, even as full night closed over the land, Turambar and his
companions came to Cabed-en-Aras, and they were glad of the great noise
of the water; for though it promised peril below, it covered all other
sounds. Then Dorlas led them a little aside, southwards, and they
climbed down by a cleft to the cliff-foot; but there his heart quailed,
for many rocks and great stones lay in the river, and the water ran wild
about them, grinding its teeth. \'This is a sure way to death,\' said
Dorlas. ]{#calibre_link-1832 .calibre_class_3}

[\'It is the only way, to death or to life,\' said Turambar, \'and delay
will not make it seem more hopeful. Therefore follow me!\' And he went
on before them, and by skill and hardihood, or by fate, he came across,
and in the deep dark he turned to see who came after. A dark form stood
beside him. \'Dorlas?\' he said. ]{#calibre_link-1834 .calibre_class_3}

[\'No, it is I,\' said Hunthor. \'Dorlas failed at the crossing, I
think. For a man may love war, and yet dread many things. He sits
shivering on the shore, I guess; and may shame take him for his words to
my kinsman.\' ]{#calibre_link-1836 .calibre_class_3}

[Now Turambar and Hunthor rested a little, but soon the night chilled
them, for they were both drenched with water, and they began to seek a
way along the stream northwards towards the lodgement of Glaurung. There
the chasm grew darker and narrower, and as they felt their way forward
they could see a flicker above them as of smouldering fire, and they
heard the snarling of the Great Worm in his watchful sleep. Then they
groped for a way up, to come nigh under the brink; for in that lay all
their hope to come at their enemy beneath his guard. But so foul now was
the reek that their heads were dizzy, and they slipped as they
clambered, and clung to the tree-stems, and retched, forgetting in their
misery all fear save the dread of falling into the teeth of Teiglin.
]{#calibre_link-1838 .calibre_class_3}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-92 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Then Turambar said to Hunthor: \'We spend our waning strength to no
avail. For till we be sure where the Dragon will pass, it is vain to
climb.\' ]{#calibre_link-1840 .calibre_class_4}

[\'But when we know,\' said Hunthor, \'then there will be no time to
seek a way up out of the chasm.\' ]{#calibre_link-1842 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Truly,\' said Turambar. \'But where all lies on chance, to chance we
must trust.\' They halted therefore and waited, and out of the dark
ravine they watched a white star far above creep across the faint strip
of sky; and then slowly Turambar sank into a dream, in which all his
will was given to clinging, though a black tide sucked and gnawed at his
limbs. ]{#calibre_link-1844 .calibre_class_4}

[Suddenly there was a great noise and the walls of the chasm quivered
and echoed. Turambar roused himself, and said to Hunthor: \'He stirs.
The hour is upon us. Strike deep, for two must strike now for three!\'
]{#calibre_link-1846 .calibre_class_4}

[And with that Glaurung began his assault upon Brethil; and all passed
much as Turambar had hoped. For now the Dragon crawled with slow weight
to the edge of the cliff, and he did not turn aside, but made ready to
spring over the chasm with his great forelegs and then draw his bulk
after. Terror came with him; for he did not begin his passage right
above, but a little to the northward, and the watchers from beneath
could see the huge shadow of his head against the stars; and his jaws
gaped, and he had seven tongues of fire. Then he sent forth a blast, so
that all the ravine was filled with a red light, and black shadows
flying among the rocks; but the trees before him withered and went up in
smoke, and stones crashed down into the river. And thereupon he hurled
himself forward, and grappled the further cliff with his mighty claws,
and began to heave himself across. ]{#calibre_link-1848
.calibre_class_4}

[Now there was need to be bold and swift, for though Turambar and
Hunthor had escaped the blast, since they were not right in Glaurung\'s
path, they yet had to come at him, before he passed over, or all their
hope failed. Heedless of peril therefore Turambar clambered along the
cliff to come beneath him; but there so deadly was the heat and the
stench that he tottered and would have fallen if Hunthor, following
stoutly behind, had not seized his arm and steadied him.
]{#calibre_link-1850 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Great heart!\' said Turambar. \'Happy was the choice that took you
for a helper!\' But even as he spoke, a great stone hurtled from above
and smote Hunthor on the head, and he fell into the water, and so ended:
not the least valiant of the House of Haleth. Then Turambar cried:
\'Alas! It is ill to walk in my shadow! Why did I seek aid? For now you
are alone, O Master of Doom, as you should have known it must be. Now
conquer alone!\' ]{#calibre_link-1852 .calibre_class_4}

[Then he summoned to him all his will, and all his hatred of the Dragon
and his Master, and it seemed to him that suddenly he found a strength
of heart and of body that he had not known before; and he climbed the
cliff, from stone to stone, and root to root, until he seized at last a
slender tree that grew a little beneath the lip of the chasm, and though
its top was blasted it still held fast by its roots. And even as he
steadied himself in a fork of its boughs, the midmost parts of the
Dragon came above him, and swayed down with their weight almost upon his
head, ere Glaurung could heave them up. Pale and wrinkled was their
underside, and all dank with a grey slime, to which clung all manner of
dropping filth; and it stank of death. Then Turambar drew the Black
Sword of Beleg and stabbed upwards with all the might of his arm, and of
his hate, and the deadly blade, long and greedy, went into the belly
even to its hilts. ]{#calibre_link-1854 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Glaurung, feeling his death-pang, gave forth a scream, whereat all
the woods were shaken, and the watchers at Nen Girith were aghast.
Turambar reeled as from a blow, and slipped down, and his sword was torn
from his grasp, and clave to the belly of the Dragon. For Glaurung in a
great spasm bent up all his shuddering bulk and hurled it over the
ravine, and there upon the further shore he writhed, screaming, lashing
and coiling himself in his agony, until he had broken a great space all
about him, and lay there at last in a smoke and a ruin, and was still.
]{#calibre_link-1856 .calibre_class_4}

[Now Turambar clung to the roots of the tree, stunned and well-nigh
overcome. But he strove against himself and drove himself on, and half
sliding and half climbing he came down to the river, and dared again the
perilous crossing, crawling now on hands and feet, clinging, blinded
with spray, until he came over at last, and climbed wearily up the cleft
by which they had descended. Thus he came at length to the place of the
dying Dragon, and he looked on his stricken enemy without pity, and was
glad. ]{#calibre_link-1858 .calibre_class_4}

[There now Glaurung lay, with jaws agape; but all his fires were burned
out, and his evil eyes were closed. He was stretched out in his length,
and had rolled upon one side, and the hilts of Gurthang stood in his
belly. Then the heart of Turambar rose high within him, and though the
Dragon still breathed he would recover his sword, which if he prized it
before was now worth to him all the treasure of Nargothrond. True proved
the words spoken at its forging that nothing, great or small, should
live that once it had bitten. ]{#calibre_link-1860 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-93 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Therefore going up to his foe he set foot upon his belly, and seizing
the hilts of Gurthang he put forth his strength to withdraw it. And he
cried in mockery of Glaurung\'s words at Nargothrond: \'Hail, Worm of
Morgoth! Well met again! Die now and the darkness have you! Thus is
Túrin son of Húrin avenged.\' Then he wrenched out the sword, and even
as he did so a spout of black blood followed it, and fell upon his hand,
and his flesh was burned by the venom, so that he cried aloud at the
pain. Thereat Glaurung stirred and opened his baleful eyes and looked
upon Turambar with such malice that it seemed to him that he was smitten
by an arrow; and for that and for the anguish of his hand he fell in a
swoon, and lay as one dead beside the Dragon, and his sword was beneath
him. ]{#calibre_link-1862 .calibre_class_4}

[Now the screams of Glaurung came to the people at Nen Girith, and they
were filled with terror; and when the watchers beheld from afar the
great breaking and burning that the Dragon made in his throes, they
believed that he was trampling and destroying those that had assailed
him. Then indeed they wished the miles longer that lay between them; but
they dared not leave the high place where they were gathered, for they
remembered the words of Turambar that, if Glaurung conquered, he would
go first to Ephel Brandir. Therefore they watched in fear for any sign
of his movement, but none were so hardy as to go down and seek for
tidings in the place of the battle. And Níniel sat, and did not move,
save that she shuddered and could not still her limbs; for when she
heard the voice of Glaurung her heart died within her, and she felt her
darkness creeping upon her again. ]{#calibre_link-1864 .calibre_class_4}

[Thus Brandir found her. For he came at last to the bridge over
Celebros, slow and weary; all the long way alone he had limped on his
crutch, and it was five leagues at the least from his home. Fear for
Níniel had driven him on, and now the tidings that he learned were no
worse than he had dreaded. \'The Dragon has crossed the river,\' men
told him, \'and the Black Sword is surely dead, and those that went with
him.\' Then Brandir stood by Níniel, and guessed her misery, and he
yearned to her; but he thought nonetheless: \'The Black Sword is dead,
and Níniel lives.\' And he shuddered, for suddenly it seemed cold by the
waters of Nen Girith; and he cast his cloak about Níniel. But he found
no words to say; and she did not speak. ]{#calibre_link-1866
.calibre_class_4}

[Time passed, and still Brandir stood silent beside her, peering into
the night and listening; but he could see nothing, and could hear no
sound but the falling of the waters of Nen Girith, and he thought: \'Now
surely Glaurung has gone and has passed into Brethil.\' But he pitied
his people no more, fools that had flouted his counsel, and had scorned
him. \'Let the Dragon go to Amon Obel, and there will be time then to
escape, and to lead Níniel away.\' Whither, he scarce knew, for he had
never journeyed beyond Brethil. ]{#calibre_link-1868 .calibre_class_4}

[At last he bent down and touched Níniel on the arm, and said to her:
\'Time passes, Níniel! Come! It is time to go. If you will let me, I
will lead you.\' Then silently she arose, and took his hand, and they
passed over the bridge and went down the path to the Crossings of
Teiglin. But those that saw them moving as shadows in the dark knew not
who they were, and cared not. And when they had gone some little way
through the silent trees, the moon rose beyond Amon Obel, and the glades
of the forest were filled with a grey light. Then Níniel halted and said
to Brandir: \'Is this the way?\' ]{#calibre_link-1870 .calibre_class_4}

[And he answered: \'What is the way? For all our hope in Brethil is
ended. We have no way, save to escape the Dragon, and flee far from him
while there is yet time.\' ]{#calibre_link-1872 .calibre_class_4}

[Níniel looked at him in wonder and said: \'Did you not offer to lead me
to him? Or would you deceive me? The Black Sword was my beloved and my
husband, and only to find him do I go. What else could you think? Now do
as you will, but I must hasten.\' ]{#calibre_link-1874 .calibre_class_4}

[And even as Brandir stood a moment amazed, she sped from him; and he
called after her, crying: \'Wait, Níniel! Go not alone! You know not
what you will find. I will come with you!\' But she paid no heed to him,
and went now as though her blood burned her, which before had been cold;
and though he followed as he could she passed soon out of his sight.
Then he cursed his fate and his weakness; but he would not turn back.
]{#calibre_link-1876 .calibre_class_4}

[Now the moon rose white in the sky, and was near the full, and as
Níniel came down from the upland towards the land near the river, it
seemed to her that she remembered it, and feared it. For she was come to
the Crossings of Teiglin, and Haudh-en-Elleth stood there before her,
pale in the moonlight, with a black shadow cast athwart it; and out of
the mound came a great dread. ]{#calibre_link-1878 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-94 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Then she turned with a cry and fled south along the river, and cast her
cloak as she ran, as though casting off a darkness that clung to her;
and beneath she was all clad in white, and she shone in the moon as she
flitted among the trees. Thus Brandir above on the hill-side saw her,
and turned to cross her course, if he could; and finding by fortune the
narrow path that Turambar had used, for it left the more beaten road and
went steeply down southward to the river, he came at last close behind
her again. But though he called, she did not heed, or did not hear, and
soon once more she passed on ahead; and so they drew near to the woods
beside Cabed-en-Aras and the place of the agony of Glaurung.
]{#calibre_link-1880 .calibre_class_4}

[The moon was then riding in the south unclouded, and the light was cold
and clear. Coming to the edge of the ruin that Glaurung had wrought,
Níniel saw his body lying there, and his belly grey in the moon-sheen;
but beside him lay a man. Then forgetting her fear she ran on amid the
smouldering wrack and so came to Turambar. He was fallen on his side,
and his sword lay beneath him, but his face was wan as death in the
white light. Then she threw herself down by him weeping, and kissed him;
and it seemed to her that he breathed faintly, but she thought it but a
trickery of false hope, for he was cold, and did not move, nor did he
answer her. And as she caressed him she found that his hand was
blackened as if it had been scorched, and she washed it with her tears,
and tearing a strip from her raiment she bound it about. But still he
did not move at her touch, and she kissed him again, and cried aloud:
Turambar, Turambar, come back! Hear me! Awake! For it is Níniel. The
Dragon is dead, dead, and I alone am here by you.\' But he answered
nothing. Her cry Brandir heard, for he had come to the edge of the ruin;
but even as he stepped forward towards Níniel he was halted, and stood
still. For at the cry of Níniel Glaurung stirred for the last time, and
a quiver ran through all his body; and he opened his baleful eyes a
slit, and the moon gleamed in them, as gasping he spoke:
]{#calibre_link-1882 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Hail, Niënor, daughter of Húrin. We meet again ere we end. I give you
joy that you have found your brother at last. And now you shall know
him: a stabber in the dark, treacherous to foes, faithless to friends,
and a curse unto his kin, Túrin son of Húrin! But the worst of all his
deeds you shall feel in yourself.\' ]{#calibre_link-1884
.calibre_class_4}

[Then Niënor sat as one stunned, but Glaurung died; and with his death
the veil of his malice fell from her, and all her memory grew clearer
before her, from day unto day, neither did she forget any of those
things that had befallen her since she lay on Haudh-en-Elleth. And her
whole body shook with horror and anguish. But Brandir, who had heard
all, was stricken, and leaned against a tree. ]{#calibre_link-1886
.calibre_class_4}

[Then suddenly Niënor started to her feet, and stood pale as a wraith in
the moon, and looked down on Túrin, and cried: \'Farewell, O twice
beloved! *A Túrin Turambar turún\' ambartanen:* master of doom by doom
mastered! O happy to be dead!\' Then distraught with woe and the horror
that had overtaken her she fled wildly from that place; and Brandir
stumbled after her, crying: \'Wait! Wait, Níniel!\' ]{#calibre_link-1888
.calibre_class_4}

[One moment she paused, looking back with staring eyes. \'Wait?\' she
cried. \'Wait? That was ever your counsel. Would that I had heeded! But
now it is too late. And now I will wait no more upon Middle-earth.\' And
she sped on before him. ]{#calibre_link-1890 .calibre_class_4}

[Swiftly she came to the brink of Cabed-en-Aras, and there stood and
looked on the loud water crying: \'Water, water! Take now Níniel Niënor
daughter of Húrin; Mourning, Mourning daughter of Morwen! Take me and
bear me down to the Sea!\' ]{#calibre_link-1892 .calibre_class_4}

[With that she cast herself over the brink: a flash of white swallowed
in the dark chasm, a cry lost in the roaring of the river.
]{#calibre_link-1894 .calibre_class_4}

[The waters of Teiglin flowed on, but Cabed-en-Aras was no more: Cabed
Naeramarth, the Leap of Dreadful Doom, thereafter it was named by men;
for no deer would ever leap there again, and all living things shunned
it, and no man would walk upon its shore. Last of men to look down into
its darkness was Brandir son of Handir; and he turned away in horror,
for his heart quailed, and though he hated now his life, he could not
there take the death that he desired. Then his thought turned to Túrin
Turambar, and he cried: \'Do I hate you, or do I pity you? But you are
dead. I owe you no thanks, taker of all that I had or would have. But my
people owe you a debt. It is fitting that from me they should learn
it.\' ]{#calibre_link-1896 .calibre_class_4}
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-95 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[And so he began to limp back to Nen Girith, avoiding the place of the
Dragon with a shudder; and as he climbed the steep path again he came on
a man that peered through the trees, and seeing him drew back. But he
had marked his face in a gleam of the sinking moon. ]{#calibre_link-1898
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Ha, Dorlas!\' he cried. \'What news can you tell? How came you off
alive? And what of my kinsman?\' ]{#calibre_link-1900 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I know not,\' answered Dorlas sullenly. ]{#calibre_link-1902
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Then that is strange,\' said Brandir. ]{#calibre_link-1904
.calibre_class_4}

[\'If you will know,\' said Dorlas, \'the Black Sword would have us ford
the races of Teiglin in the dark. Is it strange that I could not? I am a
better man with an axe than some, but I am not goat-footed.\'
]{#calibre_link-1906 .calibre_class_4}

[\'So they went on without you to come at the Dragon?\' said Brandir.
\'But how when he passed over? At the least you would stay near, and
would see what befell.\' ]{#calibre_link-1908 .calibre_class_4}

[But Dorlas made no answer, and stared only at Brandir with hatred in
his eyes. Then Brandir understood, perceiving suddenly that this man had
deserted his companions, and unmanned by shame had then hidden in the
woods. \'Shame on you, Dorlas!\' he said. \'You are the begetter of our
woes: egging on the Black Sword, bringing the Dragon upon us, putting me
to scorn, drawing Hunthor to his death, and then you flee to skulk in
the woods!\' And as he spoke another thought entered his mind, and he
said in great anger: \'Why did you not bring tidings? It was the least
penance that you could do. Had you done so, the Lady Níniel would have
had no need to seek them herself. She need never have seen the Dragon.
She might have lived. Dorlas, I hate you!\' ]{#calibre_link-1910
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Keep your hate!\' said Dorlas. \'It is as feeble as all your
counsels. But for me the Orcs would have come and hung you as a
scarecrow in your garden. Take the name skulker to yourself!\' And with
that, being for his shame the readier to wrath, he aimed a blow at
Brandir with his great fist, and so ended his life, before the look of
amazement left his eyes: for Brandir drew his sword and hewed him his
death-blow. Then for a moment he stood trembling, sickened by the blood;
and casting down his sword he turned, and went on his way, bowed upon
his crutch. ]{#calibre_link-1912 .calibre_class_4}

[As Brandir came to Nen Girith the pallid moon was gone down, and the
night was fading; morning was opening in the east. The people that
cowered there still by the bridge saw him come like a grey shadow in the
dawn, and some called to him in wonder: \'Where have you been? Have you
seen her? For the Lady Níniel is gone.\' ]{#calibre_link-1914
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Yes,\' said Brandir, \'she is gone. Gone, gone, never to return! But
I am come to bring you tidings. Hear now, people of Brethil, and say if
there was ever such a tale as the tale that I bear! The Dragon is dead,
but dead also is Turambar at his side. And those are good tidings: yes,
both are good indeed.\' ]{#calibre_link-1916 .calibre_class_4}

[Then the people murmured, wondering at his speech, and some said that
he was mad; but Brandir cried: \'Hear me to the end! Níniel too is dead,
Níniel the fair whom you loved, whom I loved dearest of all. She leaped
from the brink of the Deer\'s Leap, and the teeth of Teiglin have taken
her. She is gone, hating the light of day. For this she learned before
she fled: Húrin\'s children were they both, sister and brother. The
Mormegil he was called, Turambar he named himself, hiding his past:
Túrin son of Húrin. Níniel we named her, not knowing her past: Niënor
she was, daughter of Húrin. To Brethil they brought their dark doom\'s
shadow. Here their doom has fallen, and of grief this land shall never
again be free. Call it not Brethil, not the land of the Halethrim, but
*Sarch nia chîn Húrin,* Grave of the Children of Húrin!\'
]{#calibre_link-1918 .calibre_class_4}

[Then though they did not understand yet how this evil had come to pass,
the people wept as they stood, and some said: \'A grave there is in
Teiglin for Níniel the beloved, a grave shall there be for Turambar,
most valiant of men. Our deliverer shall not be left to lie under the
sky. Let us go to him.\' ]{#calibre_link-1920 .calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-96 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000029.jpg){.calibre32
shapes="_x0000_i1056"}]{#calibre_link-1922 .calibre_class_5}

[Now even as Níniel fled away, Túrin stirred, and it seemed to him that
out of his deep darkness he heard her call to him far away; but as
Glaurung died, the black swoon left him, and he breathed deep again, and
sighed, and passed into a slumber of great weariness. But before dawn it
grew bitter cold, and he turned in his sleep, and the hilts of Gurthang
drove into his side, and suddenly he awoke. Night was going, and there
was a breath of morning in the air; and he sprang to his feet,
remembering his victory, and the burning venom on his hand. He raised it
up, and looked at it, and marvelled. For it was bound about with a strip
of white cloth, yet moist, and it was at ease; and he said to himself:
\'Why should one tend me so, and yet leave me here to lie cold amid the
wrack and the dragon-stench? What strange things have chanced?\'
]{#calibre_link-1924 .calibre_class_3}

[Then he called aloud, but there was no answer. All was black and drear
about him, and there was a reek of death. He stooped and lifted his
sword, and it was whole, and the light of its edges was undimmed. \'Foul
was the venom of Glaurung,\' he said, \'but you are stronger than I,
Gurthang. All blood will you drink. Yours is the victory. But come! I
must go seek for aid. My body is weary, and there is a chill in my
bones.\' ]{#calibre_link-1926 .calibre_class_3}

[Then he turned his back upon Glaurung and left him to rot; but as he
passed from that place each step seemed more heavy, and he thought: \'At
Nen Girith, maybe, I will find one of the scouts awaiting me. But would
I were soon in my own house, and might feel the gentle hands of Níniel,
and the good skill of Brandir!\' And so at last, walking wearily,
leaning on Gurthang, through the grey light of early day he came to Nen
Girith, and even as men were setting forth to seek his dead body, he
stood before the people. ]{#calibre_link-1928 .calibre_class_3}

[Then they gave back in terror, believing that it was his unquiet
spirit, and the women wailed and covered their eyes. But he said: \'Nay,
do not weep, but be glad! See! Do I not live? And have I not slain the
Dragon that you feared?\' ]{#calibre_link-1930 .calibre_class_3}

[Then they turned upon Brandir, and cried: \'Fool, with your false
tales, saying that he lay dead. Did we not say that you were mad?\' Then
Brandir was aghast, and stared at Túrin with fear in his eyes, and he
could say nothing. ]{#calibre_link-1932 .calibre_class_3}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-97 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[But Túrin said to him: \'It was you then that were there, and tended my
hand? I thank you. But your skill is failing, if you cannot tell swoon
from death.\' Then he turned to the people: \'Speak not so to him, fools
all of you. Which of you would have done better? At least he had the
heart to come down to the place of battle, while you sit wailing!
]{#calibre_link-1934 .calibre_class_4}

[\'But now, son of Handir, come! There is more that I would learn. Why
are you here, and all this people, whom I left at the Ephel? If I may go
into the peril of death for your sakes, may I not be obeyed when I am
gone? And where is Níniel? At the least I may hope that you did not
bring her hither, but left her where I bestowed her, in my house, with
true men to guard it?\' ]{#calibre_link-1936 .calibre_class_4}

[And when no one answered him, \'Come, say where is Níniel?\' he cried.
\'For her first I would see; and to her first will I tell the tale of
the deeds in the night.\' ]{#calibre_link-1938 .calibre_class_4}

[But they turned their faces from him, and Brandir said at last:
\'Níniel is not here.\' ]{#calibre_link-1940 .calibre_class_4}

[\'That is well then,\' said Túrin. \'Then I will go to my home. Is
there a horse to bear me? Or a bier would be better. I faint with my
labours.\' ]{#calibre_link-1942 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Nay, nay!\' said Brandir in anguish of heart. \'Your house is empty.
Níniel is not there. She is dead.\' ]{#calibre_link-1944
.calibre_class_4}

[But one of the women - the wife of Dorlas, who loved Brandir little -
cried shrilly: \'Pay no heed to him, lord! For he is crazed. He came
crying that you were dead, and called it good tidings. But you live. Why
then should his tale of Níniel be true: that she is dead, and yet
worse?\' ]{#calibre_link-1946 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin strode towards Brandir: \'So my death was good tidings?\' he
cried. \'Yes, ever you did begrudge her to me, that I knew. Now she is
dead, you say. And yet worse? What lie have you begotten in your malice,
Clubfoot? Would you slay us then with foul words, since you can wield no
other weapon?\' ]{#calibre_link-1948 .calibre_class_4}

[Then anger drove pity from Brandir\'s heart, and he cried: \'Crazed?
Nay, crazed are you, Black Sword of black doom! And all this dotard
people. I do not lie! Níniel is dead, dead, dead! Seek her in Teiglin!\'
]{#calibre_link-1950 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin stood still and cold. \'How do you know?\' he said softly.
\'How did you contrive it?\' ]{#calibre_link-1952 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I know because I saw her leap,\' answered Brandir. \'But the
contriving was yours. She fled from you, Túrin son of Húrin, and in
Cabed-en-Aras she cast herself, that she might never see you again.
Níniel! Níniel? Nay, Niënor daughter of Húrin.\' ]{#calibre_link-1954
.calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin seized him and shook him; for in those words he heard the
feet of his doom overtaking him, but in horror and fury his heart would
not receive them, as a beast hurt to death that will wound ere it dies
all that are near it. ]{#calibre_link-1956 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Yes, I am Túrin son of Húrin,\' he cried. \'So long ago you guessed.
But nothing do you know of Niënor my sister. Nothing! She dwells in the
Hidden Kingdom, and is safe. It is a lie of your own vile mind, to drive
my wife witless, and now me. You limping evil - would you dog us both to
death?\' ]{#calibre_link-1958 .calibre_class_4}

[But Brandir shook him off. \'Touch me not!\' he said. \'Stay your
raving. She that you name wife came to you and tended you, and you did
not answer her call. But one answered for you. Glaurung the Dragon, who
I deem bewitched you both to your doom. So he spoke, before he ended:
\"Niënor daughter of Húrin, here is your brother: treacherous to foes,
faithless to friends, a curse unto his kin, Túrin son of Húrin.\'\" Then
suddenly a fey laughter seized on Brandir. \'On their deathbed men will
speak true, they say,\' he cackled. \'And even a Dragon too, it seems.
Túrin son of Húrin, a curse unto your kin and unto all that harbour
you!\' ]{#calibre_link-1960 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin grasped Gurthang and a fell light was in his eyes. \'And
what shall be said of you, Clubfoot?\' he said slowly. \'Who told her
secretly behind my back my right name? Who brought her to the malice of
the Dragon? Who stood by and let her die? Who came hither to publish
this horror at the swiftest? Who would now gloat upon me? Do men speak
true before death? Then speak it now quickly.\' ]{#calibre_link-1962
.calibre_class_4}

[Then Brandir, seeing his death in Túrin\'s face, stood still and did
not quail, though he had no weapon but his crutch; and he said: \'All
that has chanced is a long tale to tell, and I am weary of you. But you
slander me, son of Húrin. Did Glaurung slander you? If you slay me, then
all shall see that he did not. Yet I do not fear to die, for then I will
go to seek Níniel whom I loved, and perhaps I may find her again beyond
the Sea.\' ]{#calibre_link-1964 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Seek Níniel!\' cried Túrin. \'Nay, Glaurung you shall find, and breed
lies together. You shall sleep with the ]{#calibre_link-1966
.calibre_class_4}
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-98 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[Worm, your soul\'s mate, and rot in one darkness!\' Then he lifted up
Gurthang and hewed Brandir, and smote him to death. But the people hid
their eyes from that deed, and as he turned and went from Nen Girith
they fled from him in terror. ]{#calibre_link-1968 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin went as one witless through the wild woods, now cursing
Middle-earth and all the life of Men, now calling upon Níniel. But when
at last the madness of his grief left him he sat awhile and pondered all
his deeds, and he heard himself crying: \'She dwells in the Hidden
Kingdom, and is safe!\' And he thought that now, though all his life was
in ruin, he must go thither; for all the lies of Glaurung had ever led
him astray. Therefore he arose and went to the Crossings of Teiglin, and
as he passed by Haudh-en-Elleth he cried: \'Bitterly have I paid, O
Finduilas! that ever I gave heed to the Dragon. Send me now counsel!\'
]{#calibre_link-1970 .calibre_class_4}

[But even as he cried out he saw twelve huntsmen well-armed that came
over the Crossings, and they were Elves; and as they drew near he knew
one, for it was Mablung, chief huntsman of Thingol. And Mablung hailed
him, crying: \'Túrin! Well met at last. I seek you, and glad I am to see
you living, though the years have been heavy on you.\'
]{#calibre_link-1972 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Heavy!\' said Túrin. \'Yes, as the feet of Morgoth. But if you are
glad to see me living, you are the last in Middle-earth. Why so?\'
]{#calibre_link-1974 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Because you were held in honour among us,\' answered Mablung; \'and
though you have escaped many perils, I feared for you at the last. I
watched the coming forth of Glaurung, and I thought that he had
fulfilled his wicked purpose and was returning to his Master. But he
turned towards Brethil, and at the same time I learned from wanderers in
the land that the Black Sword of Nargothrond had appeared there again,
and the Orcs shunned its borders as death. Then I was filled with dread,
and I said: \"Alas! Glaurung goes where his Orcs dare not, to seek out
Túrin.\" Therefore I came hither as swift as might be, to warn you and
aid you.\' ]{#calibre_link-1976 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Swift, but not swift enough,\' said Túrin. \'Glaurung is dead.\'
]{#calibre_link-1978 .calibre_class_4}

[Then the Elves looked at him in wonder, and said: \'You have slain the
Great Worm! Praised for ever shall your name be among Elves and Men!\'
]{#calibre_link-1980 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I care not,\' said Túrin. \'For my heart also is slain. But since you
come from Doriath, give me news of my kin. For I was told in Dor-lómin
that they had fled to the Hidden Kingdom.\' ]{#calibre_link-1982
.calibre_class_4}

[The Elves made no answer, but at length Mablung spoke: \'They did so
indeed, in the year before the coming of the Dragon. But they are not
there now, alas!\' Then Túrin\'s heart stood still, hearing the feet of
doom that would pursue him to the end. \'Say on!\' he cried. \'And be
swift!\' ]{#calibre_link-1984 .calibre_class_4}

[\'They went out into the wild seeking you,\' said Mablung. \'It was
against all counsel; but they would go to Nargothrond, when it was known
that you were the Black Sword; and Glaurung came forth, and all their
guard were scattered. Morwen none have seen since that day; but Niënor
had a spell of dumbness upon her, and fled north into the woods like a
wild deer, and was lost.\' Then to the wonder of the Elves Túrin laughed
loud and shrill. \'Is not that a jest?\' he cried. \'O the fair Niënor!
So she ran from Doriath to the Dragon, and from the Dragon to me. What a
sweet grace of fortune! Brown as a berry she was, dark was her hair;
small and slim as an Elf-child, none could mistake her!\'
]{#calibre_link-1986 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Mablung was amazed, and he said: \'But some mistake is here. Not
such was your sister. She was tall, and her eyes were blue, her hair
fine gold, the very likeness in woman\'s form of Húrin her father. You
cannot have seen her!\' ]{#calibre_link-1988 .calibre_class_4}

[\'Can I not, can I not, Mablung?\' cried Túrin. \'But why no! For see,
I am blind! Did you not know? Blind, blind, groping since childhood in a
dark mist of Morgoth! Therefore leave me! Go, go! Go back to Doriath,
and may winter shrivel it! A curse upon Menegroth! And a curse on your
errand! This only was wanting. Now comes the night!\'
]{#calibre_link-1990 .calibre_class_4}

[Then he fled from them, like the wind, and they were filled with wonder
and fear. But Mablung said: \'Some strange and dreadful thing has
chanced that we know not. Let us follow him and aid him if we may: for
now he is fey and witless.\' ]{#calibre_link-1992 .calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  --
  --
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-99 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[![](images/000030.jpg){.calibre8
shapes="_x0000_i1057"}]{#calibre_link-1994 .calibre_class_5}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-100 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[But Túrin sped far before them, and came to Cabed-en-Aras, and stood
still; and he heard the roaring of the water, and saw that all the trees
near and far were withered, and their sere leaves fell mournfully, as
though winter had come in the first days of summer. ]{#calibre_link-1996
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Cabed-en-Aras, Cabed Naeramarth!\' he cried. \'I will not defile your
waters where Níniel was washed. For all my deeds have been ill, and the
latest the worst.\' ]{#calibre_link-1998 .calibre_class_4}

[Then he drew forth his sword, and said: \'Hail Gurthang, iron of death,
you alone now remain! But what lord or loyalty do you know, save the
hand that wields you? From no blood will you shrink. Will you take Túrin
Turambar? Will you slay me swiftly?\' ]{#calibre_link-2000
.calibre_class_4}

[And from the blade rang a cold voice in answer: \'Yes, I will drink
your blood, that I may forget the blood of Beleg my master, and the
blood of Brandir slain unjustly. I will slay you swiftly.\'
]{#calibre_link-2002 .calibre_class_4}

[Then Túrin set the hilts upon the ground, and cast himself upon the
point of Gurthang, and the black blade took his life.
]{#calibre_link-2004 .calibre_class_4}

[But Mablung came and looked on the hideous shape of Glaurung lying
dead, and he looked upon Túrin and was grieved, thinking of Húrin as he
had seen him in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad, and the dreadful doom of his
kin. As the Elves stood there, men came down from Nen Girith to look
upon the Dragon, and when they saw to what end the life of Túrin
Turambar had come they wept; and the Elves learning at last the reason
of Túrin\'s words to them were aghast. Then Mablung said bitterly: \'I
also have been meshed in the doom of the Children of Húrin, and thus
with words have slain one that I loved.\' ]{#calibre_link-2006
.calibre_class_4}

[Then they lifted up Túrin, and saw that his sword was broken asunder.
So passed all that he possessed. ]{#calibre_link-2008 .calibre_class_4}

[With toil of many hands they gathered wood and piled it high and made a
great burning and destroyed the body of the Dragon, until he was but
black ash and his bones beaten to dust, and the place of that burning
was ever bare and barren thereafter. But Túrin they laid in a high mound
where he had fallen, and the shards of Gurthang were set beside him. And
when all was done, and the minstrels of Elves and Men had made lament,
telling of the valour of Turambar and the beauty of Níniel, a great grey
stone was brought and set upon the mound; and thereon the Elves carved
in the Runes of Doriath: ]{#calibre_link-2010 .calibre_class_4}

[TÚRIN TURAMBAR DAGNIR GLAURUNGA ]{#calibre_link-2012 .calibre_class_3}

[and beneath they wrote also: ]{#calibre_link-2014 .calibre_class_4}

[NIËNOR NÍNIEL ]{#calibre_link-2016 .calibre_class_3}

[But she was not there, nor was it ever known whither the cold waters of
Teiglin had taken her. ]{#calibre_link-2018 .calibre_class_4}

*[Here ends the Tale of the Children of Húrin, longest of all the lays
of Beleriand. ]{#calibre_link-2020
.calibre_class_3}*[]{#calibre_link-2021 .calibre_class_3}

[After the deaths of Túrin and Niënor Morgoth released Húrin from
bondage in furtherance of his evil purpose. In the course of his
wanderings he reached the Forest of Brethil, and came up in the evening
from the Crossings of Teiglin to the place of the burning of Glaurung
and the great stone standing on the brink of Cabed Naeramarth. Of what
befell there this is told. ]{#calibre_link-2023 .calibre_class_4}

[But Húrin did not look at the stone, for he knew what was written
there; and his eyes had seen that he was not alone. Sitting in the
shadow of the stone there was a figure bent over its knees. Some
homeless wanderer broken with age it seemed, too wayworn to heed his
coming; but its rags were the remnants of a woman\'s garb. At length as
Húrin stood there silent she cast back her tattered hood and lifted up
her face slowly, haggard and hungry as a long-hunted wolf. Grey she was,
sharp-nosed with broken teeth, and with a lean hand she clawed at the
cloak upon her breast. But suddenly her eyes looked into his, and then
Húrin knew her; for though they were wild now and full of fear, a light
still gleamed in them hard to endure: the elven-light that long ago had
earned her her name, Eledhwen, proudest of mortal women in the days of
old. ]{#calibre_link-2025 .calibre_class_4}
:::

:::: {#calibre_link-101 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[\'Eledhwen! Eledhwen!\' Húrin cried; and she rose and stumbled forward,
and he caught her in his arms. ]{#calibre_link-2027 .calibre_class_4}

[\'You come at last,\' she said. \'I have waited too long.\'
]{#calibre_link-2029 .calibre_class_4}

[\'It was a dark road. I have come as I could,\' he answered.
]{#calibre_link-2031 .calibre_class_4}

[\'But you are late,\' she said, \'too late. They are lost.\'
]{#calibre_link-2033 .calibre_class_4}

[\'I know,\' he said. \'But you are not.\' ]{#calibre_link-2035
.calibre_class_4}

[\'Almost,\' she said. \'I am spent utterly. I shall go with the sun.
They are lost.\' She clutched at his cloak. \'Little time is left,\' she
said. \'If you know, tell me! How did she find him?\'
]{#calibre_link-2037 .calibre_class_4}

[But Húrin did not answer, and he sat beside the stone with Morwen in
his arms; and they did not speak again. The sun went down, and Morwen
sighed and clasped his hand and was still; and Húrin knew that she had
died. ]{#calibre_link-2039 .calibre_class_4}

::: calibre_class_7
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  [![](images/000031.jpg){.calibre33 shapes="_x0000_i1058"}]{#calibre_link-2041 .calibre_class_5}
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-102 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
**[APPENDIX ]{#calibre_link-2043
.calibre_class_2}**[]{#calibre_link-2044 .calibre_class_2}

**[(1) ]{#calibre_link-2046 .calibre_class_3}**[]{#calibre_link-2047
.calibre_class_3}

**[THE EVOLUTION OF THE GREAT TALES ]{#calibre_link-2049
.calibre_class_3}**[]{#calibre_link-2050 .calibre_class_3}

[These interrelated but independent stories had from far back stood out
from the long and complex history of Valar, Elves and Men in Valinor and
the Great Lands; and in the years that followed his abandonment of the
*Lost Tales* before they were completed my father turned away from prose
composition and began work on a long poem with the title *Túrin son of
Húrin and Glórund the Dragon,* later changed in a revised version to
*The Children of Húrin.* This was in the earlier 1920s, when he held
appointments at the University of Leeds. For this poem he employed the
ancient English alliterative metre (the verse form of *Beowulf* and
other Anglo-Saxon poetry), imposing on modern English the demanding
patterns of stress and \'initial rhyme\' observed by the old poets: a
skill in which he achieved great mastery, in very different modes, from
the dramatic dialogue of *The Homecoming of Bëorhtnoth* to the elegy for
the men who died in the battle of the Pelennor Fields. The alliterative
*Children of Húrin* was by far the longest of his poems in this metre,
running to well over two thousand lines; yet he conceived it on so
lavish a scale that even so he had reached no further in the narrative
than the assault of the Dragon on Nargothrond when he abandoned it. With
so much more of the *Lost Tale* still to come it would have needed on
this scale many more thousands of lines; while a second version,
abandoned at an earlier point in the narrative, is about double the
length of the first version to that same point. ]{#calibre_link-2052
.calibre_class_4}

[In that part of the legend of the Children of Húrin that my father
achieved in the alliterative poem the old story in *The Book of Lost
Tales* was substantially extended and elaborated. Most notably, it was
now that the great underground fortress-city of Nargothrond emerged, and
the wide lands of its dominion (a central element not only in the legend
of Túrin and Niënor but in the history of the Elder Days of
Middle-earth), with a description of the farmlands of the Elves of
Nargothrond that gives a rare suggestion of the \'arts of peace\' in the
ancient world, such glimpses being few and far between. Coming south
along the river Narog Túrin and his companion (Gwindor in the text in
this book) found the lands near the entrance to Nargothrond to all
appearance deserted: ]{#calibre_link-2054 .calibre_class_4}

[... *they came to a country kindly tended;* ]{#calibre_link-2056
.calibre_class_4}

*[through flowery frith and fair acres ]{#calibre_link-2058
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2059 .calibre_class_4}

*[they fared, and found of folk empty ]{#calibre_link-2061
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2062 .calibre_class_4}

*[the leas and leasows and the lawns of Narog, ]{#calibre_link-2064
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2065 .calibre_class_4}

*[the teeming tilth by trees enfolded ]{#calibre_link-2067
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2068 .calibre_class_4}

*[twixt hills and river. The hoes unrecked ]{#calibre_link-2070
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2071 .calibre_class_4}

*[in the fields were flung, and fallen ladders ]{#calibre_link-2073
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2074 .calibre_class_4}

*[in the long grass lay of the lush orchards; ]{#calibre_link-2076
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2077 .calibre_class_4}

*[every tree there turned its tangled head ]{#calibre_link-2079
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2080 .calibre_class_4}

*[and eyed them secretly, and the ears listened ]{#calibre_link-2082
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2083 .calibre_class_4}

*[of the nodding grasses; though noontide glowed ]{#calibre_link-2085
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2086 .calibre_class_4}

*[on land and leaf, their limbs were chilled. ]{#calibre_link-2088
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2089 .calibre_class_4}

[And so the two travellers came to the doors of Nargothrond, in the
gorge of the Narog: ]{#calibre_link-2091 .calibre_class_4}

*[there steeply stood the strong shoulders ]{#calibre_link-2093
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2094 .calibre_class_4}

*[of the hills, o\'erhanging the hurrying water; ]{#calibre_link-2096
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2097 .calibre_class_4}

*[there shrouded in trees a sheer terrace, ]{#calibre_link-2099
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2100 .calibre_class_4}

*[wide and winding, worn to smoothness, ]{#calibre_link-2102
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2103 .calibre_class_4}

*[was fashioned in the face of the falling slope. ]{#calibre_link-2105
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2106 .calibre_class_4}

*[Doors there darkly dim gigantic ]{#calibre_link-2108
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2109 .calibre_class_4}

*[were hewn in the hillside; huge their timbers, ]{#calibre_link-2111
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2112 .calibre_class_4}

*[and their posts and lintels of ponderous stone. ]{#calibre_link-2114
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2115 .calibre_class_4}

[Seized by Elves they were haled through the portal, which closed behind
them: ]{#calibre_link-2117 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-103 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
*[Ground and grumbled on its great hinges ]{#calibre_link-2119
.calibre_class_3}*[]{#calibre_link-2120 .calibre_class_3}

*[the door gigantic; with din ponderous ]{#calibre_link-2122
.calibre_class_3}*[]{#calibre_link-2123 .calibre_class_3}

*[it clanged and closed like clap of thunder, ]{#calibre_link-2125
.calibre_class_3}*[]{#calibre_link-2126 .calibre_class_3}

*[and echoes awful in empty corridors ]{#calibre_link-2128
.calibre_class_3}*[]{#calibre_link-2129 .calibre_class_3}

*[there ran and rumbled under roofs unseen; ]{#calibre_link-2131
.calibre_class_3}*[]{#calibre_link-2132 .calibre_class_3}

*[the light was lost. Then led them on ]{#calibre_link-2134
.calibre_class_3}*[]{#calibre_link-2135 .calibre_class_3}

*[down long and winding lanes of darkness ]{#calibre_link-2137
.calibre_class_3}*[]{#calibre_link-2138 .calibre_class_3}

*[their guards guiding their groping feet, ]{#calibre_link-2140
.calibre_class_3}*[]{#calibre_link-2141 .calibre_class_3}

*[till the faint flicker of fiery torches ]{#calibre_link-2143
.calibre_class_3}*[]{#calibre_link-2144 .calibre_class_3}

*[flared before them; fitful murmur ]{#calibre_link-2146
.calibre_class_3}*[]{#calibre_link-2147 .calibre_class_3}

*[as of many voices in meeting thronged ]{#calibre_link-2149
.calibre_class_3}*[]{#calibre_link-2150 .calibre_class_3}

*[they heard as they hastened. High sprang the roof.
]{#calibre_link-2152 .calibre_class_3}*[]{#calibre_link-2153
.calibre_class_3}

*[Round a sudden turning they swung amazed, ]{#calibre_link-2155
.calibre_class_3}*[]{#calibre_link-2156 .calibre_class_3}

*[and saw a solemn silent conclave, ]{#calibre_link-2158
.calibre_class_3}*[]{#calibre_link-2159 .calibre_class_3}

*[where hundreds hushed in huge twilight ]{#calibre_link-2161
.calibre_class_3}*[]{#calibre_link-2162 .calibre_class_3}

*[neath distant domes darkly vaulted ]{#calibre_link-2164
.calibre_class_3}*[]{#calibre_link-2165 .calibre_class_3}

*[them wordless waited. ]{#calibre_link-2167
.calibre_class_3}*[]{#calibre_link-2168 .calibre_class_3}

[But in the text of *The Children of Húrin* given in this book we are
told no more than this (p. 51): ]{#calibre_link-2170 .calibre_class_3}

[And now they arose, and departing from Eithel Ivrin they journeyed
southward along the banks of Narog, until they were taken by scouts of
the Elves and brought as prisoners to the hidden stronghold. Thus did
Túrin come to Nargothrond. ]{#calibre_link-2172 .calibre_class_4}

[How did this come about? In what follows I shall try to answer that
question. ]{#calibre_link-2174 .calibre_class_4}

[It seems virtually certain that all that my father wrote of his
alliterative poem on Túrin was accomplished at Leeds, and that he
abandoned it at the end of 1924 or early in 1925; but why he did so must
remain unknown. What he then turned to is however not mysterious: in the
summer of 1925 he embarked on a new poem in a wholly different metre,
octosyllabic rhyming couplets, entitled *The Lay of Leithian* \'Release
from Bondage\'. Thus he took up now another of the tales that he
described years later, in 1951, as I have already noted, as full in
treatment, independent, and yet linked to \'the general history\'; for
the subject of *The Lay of Leithian* is the legend of Beren and Lúthien.
He worked on this second long poem for six years, and in its turn
abandoned it, in September 1931, having written more than 4000 lines. As
does the alliterative *Children of Húrin* which it succeeded and
supplanted, this poem represents a substantial advance in the evolution
of the legend from the original *Lost Tale* of Beren and Lúthien.
]{#calibre_link-2176 .calibre_class_4}

[While *The Lay of Leithian* was in progress, in 1926, he wrote a
\'Sketch of the Mythology\', expressly intended for R.W. Reynolds, who
had been his teacher at King Edward\'s school in Birmingham, \'to
explain the background of the alliterative version of Túrin and the
Dragon\'. This brief manuscript, which would run to some twenty printed
pages, was avowedly written as a synopsis, in the present tense and in a
succinct style; and yet it was the starting-point of the subsequent
\'Silmarillion\' versions (though that name was not yet given). But
while the entire mythological conception was set out in this text, the
tale of Túrin has very evidently pride of place - and indeed the title
in the manuscript is \'Sketch of the mythology with especial reference
to the \"Children of Húrin\"\', in keeping with his purpose in writing
it. ]{#calibre_link-2178 .calibre_class_4}

[In 1930 there followed a much more substantial work, the *Quenta
Noldorinwa* (the History of the Noldor: for the history of the Noldorin
Elves is the central theme of \'The Silmarillion\'). This was directly
derived from the \'Sketch\', and while much enlarging the earlier text
and writing in a more finished manner, my father nonetheless still saw
the *Quenta* very much as a *summarising* work, an epitome of far richer
narrative conceptions: as is in any case clearly shown by the sub-title
that he gave to it, in which he declared that it was \'a *brief history*
\[of the Noldor\] drawn from the Book of Lost Tales\'.
]{#calibre_link-2180 .calibre_class_4}

[It is to be borne in mind that at that time the *Quenta* represented
(if only in a somewhat bare structure) the full extent of my father\'s
\'imagined world\'. It was not the history of the First Age, as it
afterwards became, for there was as yet no Second Age, nor Third Age;
there was no Numenor, no hobbits, and of course no Ring. The history
ended with the Great Battle, in which Morgoth was finally defeated by
the other Gods (the Valar), and by them \'thrust through the Door of
Timeless Night into the Void, beyond the Walls of the World\'; and my
father wrote at the end of the *Quenta:* \'Such is *the end of the
tales* of the days before the days in the Northern regions of the
Western world.\' ]{#calibre_link-2182 .calibre_class_4}

[Thus it will seem strange indeed that the *Quenta* of 1930 was
nonetheless the only completed text (after the \'Sketch\') of \'The
Silmarillion\' that he ever made; but as was so often the case, external
pressures governed the evolution of his work. The *Quenta* was followed
later in the 1930s by a new version in a beautiful manuscript, bearing
at last the title *Quenta Silmarillion, History of the Silmarilli.* This
was, or was to be, much longer than the preceding *Quenta Noldorinwa,*
but the conception of the work as essentially a *summarising* of myths
and legends (themselves of an altogether different nature and scope if
fully told) was by no means lost, and is again defined in the title:
\'The *Quenta Silmarillion* ... This is a *history in brief* drawn from
many older tales; for all the matters that it contains were of old, and
still are among the Eldar of the West, recounted more fully in other
histories and songs.\' ]{#calibre_link-2184 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-104 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[It seems at least probable that my father\'s view of *The Silmarillion*
did actually arise from the fact that what may be called the *\'Quenta*
phase\' of the work in the 1930s began in a condensed synopsis serving a
particular purpose, but then underwent expansion and refinement in
successive stages until it lost the appearance of a synopsis, but
nonetheless retaining, from the form of its origin, a characteristic
\'evenness\' of tone. I have written elsewhere that \'the compendious or
epitomising form and manner of *The Silmarillion,* with its suggestion
of ages of poetry and \"lore\" behind it, strongly evokes a sense of
\"untold tales\", even in the telling of them; \"distance\" is never
lost. There is no narrative urgency, the pressure and fear of the
immediate and unknown event. We do not actually see the Silmarils as we
see the Ring.\' ]{#calibre_link-2186 .calibre_class_4}

[However, the *Quenta Silmarillion* in this form came to an abrupt and,
as it turned out, a decisive end in 1937. *The Hobbit* was published by
George Allen and Unwin on 21 September of that year, and not long
afterwards, at the invitation of the publisher, my father sent in a
number of his manuscripts, which were delivered in London on 15 November
1937. Among these was the *Quenta Silmarillion,* so far as it then went,
ending in the middle of a sentence at the foot of a page. But while it
was gone he continued the narrative in draft form as far as Túrin\'s
flight from Doriath and his taking up the life of an outlaw:
]{#calibre_link-2188 .calibre_class_4}

[passing the borders of the realm he gathered to himself a company of
such houseless and desperate folk as could be found in those evil days
lurking in the wild; and their hands were turned against all who came in
their path, Elves, Men, or Orcs. ]{#calibre_link-2190 .calibre_class_4}

[This is the forerunner of the passage, in the text in this book p. 28,
at the beginning of *Túrin among the Outlaws.* ]{#calibre_link-2192
.calibre_class_4}

[My father had reached these words when the *Quenta Silmarillion* and
the other manuscripts were returned to him; and three days later, on 19
December 1937, he wrote to Allen and Unwin saying: \'I have written the
first chapter of a new story about Hobbits - \"A long expected
party\".\' ]{#calibre_link-2194 .calibre_class_4}

[It was at this point that the continuous and evolving tradition of *The
Silmarillion* in the summarising, *Quenta* mode came to an end, brought
down in full flight, at Túrin\'s departure from Doriath. The further
history from that point remained during the years that followed in the
simple, compressed, and undeveloped form of the *Quenta* of 1930,
frozen, as it were, while the great structures of the Second and Third
Ages arose with the writing of *The Lord of the Rings.* But that further
history was of cardinal importance in the ancient legends, for the
concluding stories (deriving from the original *Book of Lost Tales)*
told of the disastrous history of Húrin, father of Túrin, after Morgoth
released him, and of the ruin of the Elvish kingdoms of Nargothrond,
Doriath, and Gondolin, of which Gimli chanted in the mines of Moria many
thousands of years afterwards. ]{#calibre_link-2196 .calibre_class_4}

*[The world was fair, the mountains tall, In Elder Days before the fall
Of mighty kings in Nargothrond And Gondolin, who now beyond The Western
Seas have passed away... ]{#calibre_link-2198
.calibre_class_4}*[]{#calibre_link-2199 .calibre_class_4}

[And this was to be the crown and completion of the whole: the doom of
the Noldorin Elves in their long struggle against the power of Morgoth,
and the parts that Húrin and Túrin played in that history; ending with
the tale of Eärendil, who escaped from the burning ruin of Gondolin.
]{#calibre_link-2201 .calibre_class_4}

[When, many years later, early in 1950, *The Lord of the Rings* was
finished, my father turned with energy and confidence to \'the Matter of
the Elder Days\', now become \'the First Age\'; and in the years
immediately following he took out many old manuscripts from where they
had long lain. Turning to *The Silmarillion,* he covered at this time
the beautiful manuscript of the *Quenta Silmarillion* with corrections
and expansions; but that revision ceased in 1951 before he reached the
story of Túrin, where the *Quenta Silmarillion* was abandoned in 1937
with the advent of \'the new story about Hobbits\'. ]{#calibre_link-2203
.calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-105 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[He began a revision of the *Lay of Leithian* (the poem in rhyming verse
telling the story of Beren and Lúthien that was abandoned in 1931) that
soon became almost a new poem, of much greater accomplishment; but this
petered out and was ultimately abandoned. He embarked on what was to be
a long saga of Beren and Lúthien in prose, closely based on the
rewritten form of the Lay; but that too was abandoned. Thus his desire,
shown in successive attempts, to render the first of the \'great tales\'
on the scale that he sought was never fulfilled. ]{#calibre_link-2205
.calibre_class_4}

[At that time also he turned again at last to the \'great tale\' of the
Fall of Gondolin, still extant only in the *Lost Tale* from some
thirty-five years before and in the few pages devoted to it in the
*Quenta Noldorinwa* of 1930. This was to be the presentation, when he
was at the height of his powers, in close narrative and in all its
bearings, of the extraordinary tale that he had read to the Essay
Society of his college at Oxford in 1920, and which remained throughout
his life a vital element in his imagination of the Elder Days. The
special link with the tale of Túrin lies in the brothers Húrin, father
of Túrin, and Huor, father of Tuor. Húrin and Huor in their youth
entered the Elvish city of Gondolin, hidden within a circle of high
mountains, as is told in *The Children of Húrin* (p. 2); and afterwards,
in the battle of Unnumbered Tears, they met again with Turgon, King of
Gondolin, and he said to them (p. 10): \'Not long now can Gondolin
remain hidden, and being discovered it must fall.\' And Huor replied:
\'Yet if it stands only a little while, then out of your house shall
come the hope of Elves and Men. This I say to you, lord, with the eyes
of death: though we part here for ever, and I shall not look on your
white walls again, from you and from me a new star shall arise.\'
]{#calibre_link-2207 .calibre_class_4}

[This prophecy was fulfilled when Tuor, first cousin to Túrin, came to
Gondolin and wedded Idril, daughter of Turgon; for their son was
Eärendil: the \'new star\', \'hope of Elves and Men\', who escaped from
Gondolin. In the prose saga of *The Fall of Gondolin* that was to be,
begun probably in 1951, my father recounted the journey of Tuor and his
Elvish companion, Voronwë, who guided him; and on the way, alone in the
wilderness, they heard a cry in the woods: ]{#calibre_link-2209
.calibre_class_4}

[And as they waited one came through the trees, and they saw that he was
a tall Man, armed, clad in black, with a long sword drawn; and they
wondered, for the blade of the sword also was black, but the edges shone
bright and cold. ]{#calibre_link-2211 .calibre_class_4}

[That was Túrin, hastening from the sack of Nargothrond (pp. 59-60); but
Tuor and Voronwë did not speak to him as he passed, and \'they knew not
that Nargothrond had fallen, and this was Túrin son of Húrin, the
Blacksword. Thus only for a moment, and never again, did the paths of
those kinsmen, Túrin and Tuor, draw together.\' ]{#calibre_link-2213
.calibre_class_4}

[In the new tale of Gondolin my father brought Tuor to the high place in
the Encircling Mountains from where the eye could travel across the
plain to the Hidden City; and there, grievously, he stopped, and never
went further. And so in *The Fall of Gondolin* likewise he failed of his
purpose; and we see neither Nargothrond nor Gondolin with his later
vision. ]{#calibre_link-2215 .calibre_class_4}

[I have said elsewhere that \'with the completion of the great
\"intrusion\" and departure of *The Lord of the Rings,* it seems that he
returned to the Elder Days with a desire to take up again the far more
ample scale with which he had begun long before, in *The Book of Lost
Tales.* The completion of the *Quenta Silmarillion* remained an aim; but
the \"great tales\", vastly developed from their original forms, *from
which its later chapters should be derived,* were never achieved.\'
These remarks are true of the \'great tale\' of *The Children of Húrin*
as well; but in this case my father achieved much more, even though he
was never able to bring a substantial part of the later and hugely
extended version to final and finished form. ]{#calibre_link-2217
.calibre_class_4}

[At the same time as he turned again to the *Lay of Leithian* and *The
Fall of Gondolin* he began his new work on *The Children of Húrin,* not
with Túrin\'s childhood, but with the latter part of the story, the
culmination of his disastrous history after the destruction of
Nargothrond. This is the text in this book from *The Return of Túrin to
Dor-lómin* (p. 61) to his death. Why my father should have proceeded in
this way, so unlike his usual practice of starting again at the
beginning, I cannot explain. But in this case he left also among his
papers a mass of later but undated writing concerned with the story from
Túrin\'s birth to the sack of Nargothrond, with great elaboration of the
old versions and expansion into narrative previously unknown.
]{#calibre_link-2219 .calibre_class_4}

[By far the greater part of this work, if not all of it, belongs to the
time following the actual publication of *The Lord of the Rings,* In
those years *The Children of Húrin* became for him the dominant story of
the end of the Elder Days, and for a long time he devoted all his
thought to it. But he found it hard now to impose a firm narrative
structure as the tale grew in complexity of character and event; and
indeed in one long passage the story is contained in a patchwork of
disconnected drafts and plot-outlines. ]{#calibre_link-2221
.calibre_class_4}

[Yet *The Children of Húrin* in its latest form is the chief narrative
fiction of Middle-earth after the conclusion of *The Lord of the Rings;*
and the life and death of Túrin is portrayed with a convincing power and
an immediacy scarcely to be found elsewhere among the peoples of
Middle-earth. For this reason I have attempted in this book, after long
study of the manuscripts, to form a text that provides a continuous
narrative from start to finish, without the introduction of any elements
that are not authentic in conception. ]{#calibre_link-2223
.calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-106 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
**[(2) ]{#calibre_link-2225 .calibre_class_4}**[]{#calibre_link-2226
.calibre_class_4}

**[THE COMPOSITION OF THE TEXT ]{#calibre_link-2228
.calibre_class_4}**[]{#calibre_link-2229 .calibre_class_4}

[In *Unfinished Tales,* published more than a quarter of a century ago,
I presented a partial text of the long version of this tale, known as
the *Narn,* from the Elvish title *Narn i Chîn Húrin,* the Tale of the
Children of Húrin. But that was one element in a large book of various
content, and the text was very incomplete, in keeping with the general
purpose and nature of the book: for I omitted a number of substantial
passages (and one of them very long) where the *Narn* text and that in
the much briefer version in *The Silmarillion* are very similar, or
where I decided that no distinctive \'long\' text could be provided.
]{#calibre_link-2231 .calibre_class_4}

[The form of the *Narn* in this book therefore differs in a number of
ways from that in *Unfinished Tales,* some of them deriving from the far
more thorough study of the formidable complex of manuscripts that I made
after that book was published. This led me to different conclusions
about the relations and sequence of some of the texts, chiefly in the
extremely confusing evolution of the legend in the period of \'Túrin
among the Outlaws\'. A description and explanation of the composition of
this new text of *The Children of Húrin* follows here.
]{#calibre_link-2233 .calibre_class_4}

[An important element in all this is the peculiar status of the
published *Silmarillion;* for as I have mentioned in the first part of
this Appendix my father abandoned the *Quenta Silmarillion* at the point
that he had reached (Túrin\'s becoming an outlaw after his flight from
Doriath) when he began *The Lord of the Rings* in 1937. In the formation
of a narrative for the published work I made much use of *The Annals of
Beleriand,* originally a \'Tale of Years\', but which in successive
versions grew and expanded into annalistic narrative in parallel with
the successive \'Silmarillion\' manuscripts, and which extended to the
freeing of Húrin by Morgoth after the deaths of Túrin and Niënor.
]{#calibre_link-2235 .calibre_class_4}

[Thus the first passage that I omitted from the version of the *Narn i
Chîn Húrin* in *Unfinished Tales* (p. 58 and note 1) is the account of
the sojourn of Húrin and Huor in Gondolin in their youth; and I did so
simply because the tale is told in *The Silmarillion* (pp. 158-9). But
my father did in fact write two versions: one of them was expressly
intended for the opening of the *Narn,* but was very closely based on a
passage in *The Annals of Beleriand,* and indeed for most of its length
differs little. In *The Silmarillion* I used both texts, but here I have
followed the *Narn* version. ]{#calibre_link-2237 .calibre_class_4}

[The second passage that I omitted from the *Narn* in *Unfinished Tales*
(pp. 65-6 and note 2) is the account of the Battle of Unnumbered Tears,
an omission made for the same reason; and here again my father wrote two
versions, one in the *Annals,* and a second, much later but with the
*Annals* text in front of him, and for the most part closely followed.
This second narrative of the great battle was, again, expressly intended
as a constituent element in the *Narn* (the text is headed *Narn II,*
i.e. the second section of the *Narn),* and states at the outset (p. 8
in the text in this book): \'Here there shall be recounted only those
deeds which bear upon the fate of the House of Hador and the children of
Húrin the Steadfast.\' In pursuit of this my father retained from the
*Annals* account only the description of the \'westward battle\' and the
destruction of the host of Fingon; and by this simplification and
reduction of the narrative he altered the course of the battle as told
in the *Annals.* In *The Silmarillion* I of course followed the
*Annals,* though with some features taken from the *Narn* version; but
in this book I have kept to the text that my father thought appropriate
to the *Narn* as a whole. ]{#calibre_link-2239 .calibre_class_4}

[From *Túrin in Doriath* the new text is a good deal changed in relation
to that in *Unfinished Tales.* There is here a range of writing, much of
it very rough, concerned with the same narrative elements at different
stages of development, and in such a case it is obviously possible to
take different views on how the original material should be treated. I
have come to think that when I composed the text in *Unfinished Tales* I
allowed myself more editorial freedom than was necessary. In this book I
have reconsidered the original manuscripts and reconstituted the text,
in many (usually very minor) places restoring the original words,
introducing sentences or brief passages that should not have been
omitted, correcting a few errors, and making different choices among the
original readings. ]{#calibre_link-2241 .calibre_class_4}

[As regards the structure of the narrative in this period of Túrin\'s
life, from his flight out of Doriath to the lair of the outlaws on Amon
Rûdh, my father had certain narrative \'elements\' in mind: the trial of
Túrin before Thingol; the gifts of Thingol and Melian to Beleg; the
maltreatment of Beleg by the outlaws in Túrin\'s absence; the meetings
of Túrin and Beleg. He moved these \'elements\' in relation to each
other, and placed passages of dialogue in different contexts; but found
it difficult to compose them into a settled \'plot\' - \'to find out
what really happened\'. But it seems now clear to me, after much further
study, that my father did achieve a satisfying structure and sequence
for this part of the story before he abandoned it; and also that the
narrative in much reduced form that I composed for the published
*Silmarillion* conforms to this - but with one difference.
]{#calibre_link-2243 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-107 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[In *Unfinished Tales* there is a third gap in the narrative on p. 96:
the story breaks off at the point where Beleg, having at last found
Túrin among the outlaws, cannot persuade him to return to Doriath (pp. n
5-19 in the new text), and does not take up again until the outlaws
encounter the Petty-dwarves. Here I referred again to *The Silmarillion*
for the filling of the gap, noting that there follows in the story
Beleg\'s farewell to Túrin and his return to Menegroth \'where he
received the sword Anglachel from Thingol and *lembas* from Melian\'.
But it is in fact demonstrable that my father rejected this; for \'what
really happened\' was that Thingol gave Anglachel to Beleg after the
trial of Túrin, when Beleg first set off to find him. In the present
text therefore the gift of the sword is placed at that point (p. 25-26),
and there is no mention there of the gift of *lembas.* In the later
passage, when Beleg returned to Menegroth after the finding of Túrin,
there is of course no reference to Anglachel in the new text, but only
to Melian\'s gift. ]{#calibre_link-2245 .calibre_class_4}

[This is a convenient point to notice that I have omitted from the text
two passages that I included in *Unfinished Tales* but which are
parenthetical to the narrative: these are the history of how the
Dragon-helm came into the possession of Hador of Dor-lómin *(Unfinished
Tales,* p. 75), and the origin of Saeros *(Unfinished Tales,* p. 77). It
seems, incidentally, certain from a closer understanding of the
relations of the manuscripts that my father rejected the name *Saeros*
and replaced it by *Orgol,* which by \'linguistic accident\' coincides
with Old English *orgol, orgel* \'pride\'. But it seems to me too late
now to remove *Saeros.* ]{#calibre_link-2247 .calibre_class_4}

[The major lacuna in the narrative as given in *Unfinished Tales* (p.
104) is filled in the new text, from the end of the section *Of Mîm the
Dwarf* and through *The Land of Bow and Helm, The Death of Beleg, Túrin
in Nargothrond,* and *The Fall of Nargothrond.* ]{#calibre_link-2249
.calibre_class_4}

[There is a complex relationship in this part of the \'Túrin saga\'
between the original manuscripts, the story as it is told in *The
Silmarillion,* the disconnected passages collected in the appendix to
the *Narn* in *Unfinished Tales,* and the new text in this book. I have
always supposed that it was my father\'s general intention, in the
fullness of time, when he had achieved to his satisfaction the \'great
tale\' of Túrin, to derive from it a much briefer form of the story in
what one may call \'the *Silmarillion* mode\'. But of course this did
not happen; and so I undertook, now more than thirty years ago, the
strange task of trying to simulate what he did not do: the writing of a
\'Silmarillion\' version of the latest form of the story, but deriving
this from the heterogeneous materials of the \'long version\', the
*Narn.* That is Chapter 21 in the published *Silmarillion.*
]{#calibre_link-2251 .calibre_class_4}

[Thus the text in this book that fills the long gap in the story in
*Unfinished Tales* is derived from the same original materials as is the
corresponding passage in *The Silmarillion* (pp. 204-15), but they are
used for a different purpose in each case, and in the new text with a
better understanding of the labyrinth of drafts and notes and their
sequence. Much in the original manuscripts that was omitted or
compressed in *The Silmarillion* remains available; but where there was
nothing to be added to the *Silmarillion* version (as in the tale of the
death of Beleg, derived from the *Annals of Beleriand)* that version is
simply repeated. ]{#calibre_link-2253 .calibre_class_4}

[In the result, while I have had to introduce bridging passages here and
there in the piecing together of different drafts, there is no element
of extraneous \'invention\' of any kind, however slight, in the longer
text here presented. The text is nonetheless artificial, as it could not
be otherwise: the more especially since this great body of manuscript
represents a continual evolution in the actual story. Drafts that are
essential to the formation of an uninterrupted narrative may in fact
belong to an earlier stage. Thus, to give an example from an earlier
point, a primary text for the story of the coming of Túrin\'s band to
the hill of Amon Rûdh, the dwelling place that they found upon it and
their life there, and the ephemeral success of the land of Dor-Cúarthol,
was written before there was any suggestion of the Petty-dwarves; and
indeed a fully-developed description of Mîm\'s house beneath the summit
appears before Mîm himself. ]{#calibre_link-2255 .calibre_class_4}

[In the remainder of the story, from Túrin\'s return to Dor-lómin, to
which my father gave a finished form, there are naturally very few
differences from the text in *Unfinished Tales.* But there are two
matters of detail in the account of the attack on Glaurung at
Cabed-en-Aras where I have emended the original words and which should
be explained. ]{#calibre_link-2257 .calibre_class_4}

[The first concerns the geography. It is said (p. 82) that when Túrin
and his companions set out from Nen Girith on the fateful evening they
did not go straight towards the Dragon, lying on the further side of the
ravine, but took first the path towards the Crossings of Teiglin; and
\'then, before they came so far, they turned southward by a narrow
track\' and went through the woods above the river towards
Cabed-en-Aras. As they approached, in the original text of the passage,
\'the first stars glimmered in the east behind them\'.
]{#calibre_link-2259 .calibre_class_4}

[When I prepared the text for *Unfinished Tales* I did not observe that
this could not be right, since they were certainly not moving in a
westerly direction, but east, or southeast, away from the Crossings, and
the first stars in the east must have been before them, not behind them.
When discussing this in *The War of the Jewels* (1994, p. 157) I
accepted the suggestion that the \'narrow track\' going southward turned
again westward to reach the Teiglin. But this seems to me now to be
improbable, as being without point in the narrative, and that a much
simpler solution is to emend \'behind them\' to \'before them\', as I
have done in the new text. ]{#calibre_link-2261 .calibre_class_4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-108 .calibre_class_ lang="EN-US"}
[The sketch map that I drew in *Unfinished Tales* (p. 149) to illustrate
the lie of the land is not in fact well oriented. It is seen from my
father\'s map of Beleriand, and is so reproduced in my map for *The
Silmarillion,* that Amon Obel was almost due east from the Crossings of
Teiglin (\'the moon rose beyond Amon Obel\', p. 86), and the Teiglin was
flowing south-east or south-southeast in the ravines. I have now redrawn
the sketch map, and have entered also the approximate place of
Cabed-en-Aras (it is said in the text, p. 79, that \'right in the path
of Glaurung there lay now one of these gorges, by no means the deepest,
but the narrowest, just north of the inflow of Celebros\').
]{#calibre_link-2263 .calibre_class_4}

[The second matter concerns the story of the slaying of Glaurung at the
crossing of the ravine. There are here a draft and a final version. In
the draft, Túrin and his companions climbed up the further side of the
chasm until they came beneath the brink; they hung there as the night
passed, and Túrin \'strove with dark dreams of dread in which all his
will was given to clinging and holding\'. When day came Glaurung
prepared to cross at a point \'many paces to the northward\', and so
Túrin had to climb down to the river-bed and then up the cliff again to
get beneath the Dragon\'s belly. ]{#calibre_link-2265 .calibre_class_4}

[In the final version (p. 84-85) Túrin and Hunthor were only part way up
the further side when Túrin said that they were wasting their strength
in climbing up now, before they knew where Glaurung would cross; \'they
halted therefore and waited\'. It is not said that they descended from
where they were when they ceased to climb, and the passage concerning
Túrin\'s dream \'in which all his will was given to clinging\' reappears
from the draft text. But in the revised story there was no need for them
to cling: they could and surely would have descended to the bottom and
waited there. In fact, this is what they did: it is said in the final
text (*Unfinished Tales,* p. 134) that they were not standing in
Glaurung\'s path and that Túrin \'clambered along the water-edge to come
beneath him\'. It seems then that the final story carries an unneeded
trait from the previous draft. To give it coherence I have emended (p.
86) \'since they were not standing right in Glaurung\'s path\' to
\'since they were not right in Glaurung\'s path\', and \'clambered along
the water-edge\' to \'clambered along the cliff. ]{#calibre_link-2267
.calibre_class_4}

[These are small matters in themselves, but they clarify what are
perhaps the most sharply visualised scenes in the legends of the Elder
Days, and one of the greatest events. ]{#calibre_link-2269
.calibre_class_4}[]{#calibre_link-2270 .calibre_class_9}
:::
