---
title: "Freedom from the Known"
author: "J. Krishnamurti"
voice: "Krishnamurti"
voice_role: "Spiritual Philosopher - Radical Questioning"
tradition: "Independent Spiritual Philosophy"
period: "20th Century"
region: "India/International"
genre: "Spiritual Philosophy"
form: "Philosophical Discourse"
mode: "Direct Inquiry"
work_type: "Primary Source"
source_type: "Complete Work"
source_quality: "Original Text"
chamber_integration: "June 2025"
significance: "Radical spiritual questioning, freedom from conditioning, choiceless awareness"
tags:
  - spiritual-philosophy
  - radical-questioning
  - freedom
  - conditioning
  - awareness
  - self-inquiry
  - consciousness
  - transformation
related_voices:
  - Ramana Maharshi
  - Nisargadatta Maharaj
  - Alan Watts
  - D.T. Suzuki
chamber_position: "Third Ring - Working Galleries - Spiritual Philosophy"
amphitheatre_status: "New voice - expands spiritual philosophy"
acquisition_priority: "Phase 1 Eastern philosophy completion"
status: "source-aware"
---

# Freedom from the Known

*J. Krishnamurti*

---

*Chamber Note: Adds essential voice of radical spiritual questioning to the Chamber, providing non-traditional approach to consciousness, conditioning, and freedom. Critical for examining assumptions in spiritual and philosophical inquiry.*::::

:::: {#calibre_link-2 .calibre}
::: section
 

 

[This book has been written at Krishnamurti's suggestion and has his
approval. The words have been chosen from a number of his recent talks
(in English), taped and previously unpublished, to audiences in various
parts of the world. Their selection and the order in which they are
presented are my responsibility.]{.s1}

[M.L.]{.s1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-3 .calibre}
::: section
[CONTENTS]{.s1}

 

[[I. Man's Search---The Tortured Mind---The Traditional Approach---The
Trap of Respectability---The Human Being and the Individual---The Battle
of Existence---The Basic Nature of
Man---Responsibility---Truth---Self-transformation---Dissipation of
Energy---Freedom from Authority](#calibre_link-4){.calibre3}\
]{.s1}

 

[[II. Learning About Ourselves---Simplicity and
Humility---Conditioning](#calibre_link-5){.calibre3}\
]{.s1}

 

[[III. Consciousness---The Totality of
Life---Awareness](#calibre_link-6){.calibre3}\
]{.s1}

 

[[IV. Pursuit of Pleasure---Desire---Perversion by
Thought---Memory---Joy](#calibre_link-7){.calibre3}\
]{.s1}

 

[[V. Self-concern---Craving for Position---Fears and Total
Fear---Fragmentation of Thought---Ending of
Fear](#calibre_link-8){.calibre3}\
]{.s1}

 

[[VI. Violence---Anger---Justification and Condemnation---The Ideal and
the Actual](#calibre_link-9){.calibre3}\
]{.s1}

 

[[VII.
Relationship---Conflict---Society---Poverty---Drugs---Dependence---Comparison---Desire---Ideals---Hypocrisy](#calibre_link-10){.calibre3}\
]{.s1}

 

[[VIII. Freedom---Revolt---Solitude---Innocence---Living with Ourselves
as We Are](#calibre_link-11){.calibre3}\
]{.s1}

 

[[IX. Time---Sorrow---Death](#calibre_link-12){.calibre3}\
]{.s1}

 

[[X. Love](#calibre_link-13){.calibre3}\
]{.s1}

 

[[XI. To Look and to
Listen---Art---Beauty---Austerity---Images---Problems---Space](#calibre_link-14){.calibre3}\
]{.s1}

 

[[XII. The Observer and the Observed](#calibre_link-15){.calibre3}\
]{.s1}

 

[[XIII. What is Thinking?---Ideas and Action---Challenge---Matter---The
Beginning of Thought](#calibre_link-16){.calibre3}\
]{.s1}

 

[[XIV. The Burdens of Yesterday---The Quiet
Mind---Communication---Achievement---Discipline---Silence---Truth and
Reality](#calibre_link-17){.calibre3}\
]{.s1}

 

[[XV.
Experience---Satisfaction---Duality---Meditation](#calibre_link-18){.calibre3}\
]{.s1}

 

[[XVI. Total Revolution---The Religious
Mind---Energy---Passion](#calibre_link-19){.calibre3}\
]{.s1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-4 .calibre}
::: section
[I]{.s1}

 

*[Man's Search---The Tortured Mind---The Traditional Approach---The Trap
of Respectability---The Human Being and the Individual---The Battle of
Existence---The Basic Nature of
Man---Responsibility---Truth---Self-transformation---Dissipation of
Energy---Freedom from Authority]{.s1}*

 

[Man has throughout the ages been seeking something beyond himself,
beyond material welfare---something we call truth or God or reality, a
timeless state---something that cannot be disturbed by circumstances, by
thought or by human corruption.]{.s1}

[Man has always asked the question: what is it all about? Has life any
meaning at all? He sees the enormous confusion of life, the brutalities,
the revolts, the wars, the endless divisions of religion, ideology and
nationality, and with a sense of deep abiding frustration he asks, what
is one to do, what is this thing we call living, is there anything
beyond it?]{.s1}

[And not finding this nameless thing of a thousand names which he has
always sought, he has cultivated faith---faith in a saviour or an
ideal---and faith invariably breeds violence.]{.s1}

[In this constant battle which we call living, we try to set a code of
conduct according to the society in which we are brought up, whether it
be a Communist society or a so-called free society; we accept a standard
of behaviour as part of our tradition as Hindus or Muslims or Christians
or whatever we happen to be. We look to someone to tell us what is right
or wrong behaviour, what is right or wrong thought, and in following
this pattern our conduct and our thinking become mechanical, our
responses automatic. We can observe this very easily in ourselves.]{.s1}

[For centuries we have been spoon-fed by our teachers, by our
authorities, by our books, our saints. We say, 'Tell me all about
it---what lies beyond the hills and the mountains and the earth?' and we
are satisfied with their descriptions, which means that we live on words
and our life is shallow and empty. We are secondhand people. We have
lived on what we have been told, either guided by our inclinations, our
tendencies, or compelled to accept by circumstances and environment. We
are the result of all kinds of influences and there is nothing new in
us, nothing that we have discovered for ourselves; nothing original,
pristine, clear.]{.s1}

[Throughout theological history we have been assured by religious
leaders that if we perform certain rituals, repeat certain prayers or
mantras, conform to certain patterns, suppress our desires, control our
thoughts, sublimate our passions, limit our appetites and refrain from
sexual indulgence, we shall, after sufficient torture of the mind and
body, find something beyond this little life. And that is what millions
of so-called religious people have done through the ages, either in
isolation, going off into the desert or into the mountains or a cave or
wandering from village to village with a begging bowl, or, in a group,
joining a monastery, forcing their minds to conform to an established
pattern. But a tortured mind, a broken mind, a mind which wants to
escape from all turmoil, which has denied the outer world and been made
dull through discipline and conformity---such a mind, however long it
seeks, will find only according to its own distortion.]{.s1}

 

[So to discover whether there actually is or is not something beyond
this anxious, guilty, fearful, competitive existence, it seems to me
that one must have a completely different approach altogether. The
traditional approach is from the periphery inwards, and through time,
practice and renunciation, gradually to come upon that inner flower,
that inner beauty and love---in fact to do everything to make oneself
narrow, petty and shoddy; peel off little by little; take time; tomorrow
will do, next life will do---and when at last one comes to the centre
one finds there is nothing there, because one's mind has been made
incapable, dull and insensitive.]{.s1}

[Having observed this process, one asks oneself, is there not a
different approach altogether---that is, is it not possible to explode
from the centre?]{.s1}

[The world accepts and follows the traditional approach. The primary
cause of disorder in ourselves is the seeking of reality promised by
another; we mechanically follow somebody who will assure us a
comfortable spiritual life. It is a most extraordinary thing that
although most of us are opposed to political tyranny and dictatorship,
we inwardly accept the authority, the tyranny, of another to twist our
minds and our way of life. So if we completely reject, not
intellectually but actually, all so-called spiritual authority, all
ceremonies, rituals and dogmas, it means that we stand alone and are
already in conflict with society; we cease to be respectable human
beings. A respectable human being cannot possibly come near to that
infinite, immeasurable, reality.]{.s1}

[You have now started by denying something absolutely false---the
traditional approach---but if you deny it as a reaction you will have
created another pattern in which you will be trapped; if you tell
yourself intellectually that this denial is a very good idea but do
nothing about it, you cannot go any further. If you deny it, however,
because you understand the stupidity and immaturity of it, if you reject
it with tremendous intelligence, because you are free and not
frightened, you will create a great disturbance in yourself and around
you but you will step out of the trap of respectability. Then you will
find that you are no longer seeking. That is the first thing to
learn---not to seek. When you seek you are really only
window-shopping.]{.s1}

 

[The question of whether or not there is a God or truth or reality, or
whatever you like to call it, can never be answered by books, by
priests, philosophers or saviours. Nobody and nothing can answer the
question but you yourself and that is why you must know yourself.
Immaturity lies only in total ignorance of self. To understand yourself
is the beginning of wisdom.]{.s1}

[And what is yourself, the individual you? I think there is a difference
between the human being and the individual. The individual is a local
entity, living in a particular country, belonging to a particular
culture, particular society, particular religion. The human being is not
a local entity. He is everywhere. If the individual merely acts in a
particular corner of the vast field of life, then his action is totally
unrelated to the whole. So one has to bear in mind that we are talking
of the whole not the part, because in the greater the lesser is, but in
the lesser the greater is not. The individual is the little conditioned,
miserable, frustrated entity, satisfied with his little gods and his
little traditions, whereas a human being is concerned with the total
welfare, the total misery and total confusion of the world.]{.s1}

 

[We human beings are what we have been for millions of
years---colossally greedy, envious, aggressive, jealous, anxious and
despairing, with occasional flashes of joy and affection. We are a
strange mixture of hate, fear and gentleness; we are both violence and
peace. There has been outward progress from the bullock cart to the jet
plane but psychologically the individual has not changed at all, and the
structure of society throughout the world has been created by
individuals. The outward social structure is the result of the inward
psychological structure of our human relationships, for the individual
is the result of the total experience, knowledge and conduct of man.
Each one of us is the storehouse of all the past. The individual is the
human who is all mankind. The whole history of man is written in
ourselves.]{.s1}

[Do observe what is actually taking place within yourself and outside
yourself in the competitive culture in which you live with its desire
for power, position, prestige, name, success and all the rest of
it---observe the achievements of which you are so proud, this whole
field you call living in which there is conflict in every form of
relationship, breeding hatred, antagonism, brutality and endless wars.
This field, this life, is all we know, and being unable to understand
the enormous battle of existence we are naturally afraid of it and find
escape from it in all sorts of subtle ways. And we are frightened also
of the unknown---frightened of death, frightened of what lies beyond
tomorrow. So we are afraid of the known and afraid of the unknown. That
is our daily life and in that there is no hope, and therefore every form
of philosophy, every form of theological concept, is merely an escape
from the actual reality of what is.]{.s1}

 

[All outward forms of change brought about by wars, revolutions,
reformations, laws and ideologies have failed completely to change the
basic nature of man and therefore of society. As human beings living in
this monstrously ugly world, let us ask ourselves, can this society,
based on competition, brutality and fear, come to an end? Not as an
intellectual conception, not as a hope, but as an actual fact, so that
the mind is made fresh, new and innocent and can bring about a different
world altogether? It can only happen, I think, if each one of us
recognizes the central fact that we, as individuals, as human beings, in
whatever part of the world we happen to live or whatever culture we
happen to belong to, are totally responsible for the whole state of the
world.]{.s1}

[We are each one of us responsible for every war because of the
aggressiveness of our own lives, because of our nationalism, our
selfishness, our gods, our prejudices, our ideals, all of which divide
us. And only when we realize, not intellectually but actually, as
actually as we would recognize that we are hungry or in pain, that you
and I are responsible for all this existing chaos, for all the misery
throughout the entire world because we have contributed to it in our
daily lives and are part of this monstrous society with its wars,
divisions, its ugliness, brutality and greed---only then will we
act.]{.s1}

 

[But what can a human being do---what can you and I do---to create a
completely different society? We are asking ourselves a very serious
question. Is there anything to be done at all? What *can* we do? Will
somebody tell us? People *have* told us. The so-called spiritual
leaders, who are supposed to understand these things better than we do,
have told us by trying to twist and mould us into a new pattern, and
that hasn't led us very far; sophisticated and learned men have told us
and that has led us no further. We have been told that all paths lead to
truth---you have your path as a Hindu and someone else has his path as a
Christian and another as a Muslim, and they all meet at the same
door---which is, when you look at it, so obviously absurd. Truth has no
path, and that is the beauty of truth, it is living. A dead thing has a
path to it because it is static, but when you see that truth is
something living, moving, which has no resting place, which is in no
temple, mosque or church, which no religion, no teacher, no philosopher,
nobody can lead you to---then you will also see that this living thing
is what you actually are---your anger, your brutality, your violence,
your despair, the agony and sorrow you live in. In the understanding of
all this is the truth, and you can understand it only if you know how to
look at those things in your life. And you cannot look through an
ideology, through a screen of words, through hopes and fears.]{.s1}

[So you see that you cannot depend upon anybody. There is no guide, no
teacher, no authority. There is only you---your relationship with others
and with the world---there is nothing else. When you realize this, it
either brings great despair, from which comes cynicism and bitterness,
or, in facing the fact that you and nobody else are responsible for the
world and for yourself, for what you think, what you feel, how you act,
all self-pity goes. Normally we thrive on blaming others, which is a
form of self-pity.]{.s1}

 

[Can you and I, then, bring about in ourselves without any outside
influence, without any persuasion, without any fear of punishment---can
we bring about in the very essence of our being a total revolution, a
psychological mutation, so that we are no longer brutal, violent,
competitive, anxious, fearful, greedy, envious and all the rest of the
manifestations of our nature which have built up the rotten society in
which we live our daily lives?]{.s1}

[It is important to understand from the very beginning that I am not
formulating any philosophy or any theological structure of ideas or
theological concepts. It seems to me that all ideologies are utterly
idiotic. What is important is not a philosophy of life but to observe
what is actually taking place in our daily life, inwardly and outwardly.
If you observe very closely what is taking place and examine it, you
will see that it is based on an intellectual conception, and the
intellect is not the whole field of existence; it is a fragment, and a
fragment, however cleverly put together, however ancient and
traditional, is still a small part of existence whereas we have to deal
with the totality of life. And when we look at what is taking place in
the world we begin to understand that there is no outer and inner
process; there is only one unitary process, it is a whole, total
movement, the inner movement expressing itself as the outer and the
outer reacting again on the inner. To be able to look at this seems to
me all that is needed, because if we know how to look, then the whole
thing becomes very clear, and to look needs no philosophy, no teacher.
Nobody need tell you how to look. You just look.]{.s1}

[Can you then, seeing this whole picture, seeing it not verbally but
actually, can you easily, spontaneously, transform yourself? That is the
real issue. Is it possible to bring about a complete revolution in the
psyche?]{.s1}

 

[I wonder what your reaction is to such a question? You may say, 'I
don't want to change', and most people don't, especially those who are
fairly secure socially and economically or who hold dogmatic beliefs and
are content to accept themselves and things as they are or in a slightly
modified form. With those people we are not concerned. Or you may say
more subtly, 'Well, it's too difficult, it's not for me', in which case
you will have already blocked yourself, you will have ceased to enquire
and it will be no use going any further. Or else you may say, 'I see the
necessity for a fundamental inward change in myself but how am I to
bring it about? Please show me the way, help me towards it.' If you say
that, then what you are concerned with is not change itself; you are not
really interested in a fundamental revolution: you are merely searching
for a method, a system, to bring about change.]{.s1}

[If I were foolish enough to give you a system and if you were foolish
enough to follow it, you would merely be copying, imitating, conforming,
accepting, and when you do that you have set up in yourself the
authority of another and hence there is conflict between you and that
authority. You feel you must do such and such a thing because you have
been told to do it and yet you are incapable of doing it. You have your
own particular inclinations, tendencies and pressures which conflict
with the system you think you ought to follow and therefore there is a
contradiction. So you will lead a double life between the ideology of
the system and the actuality of your daily existence. In trying to
conform to the ideology, you suppress yourself---whereas what is
actually true is not the ideology but what you are. If you try to study
yourself according to another you will always remain a secondhand human
being.]{.s1}

[A man who says, 'I want to change, tell me how to', seems very earnest,
very serious, but he is not. He wants an authority whom he hopes will
bring about order in himself. But can authority ever bring about inward
order? Order imposed from without must always breed disorder. You may
see the truth of this intellectually but can you actually apply it so
that your mind no longer projects any authority, the authority of a
book, a teacher, a wife or husband, a parent, a friend or of society?
Because we have always functioned within the pattern of a formula, the
formula becomes the ideology and the authority; but the moment you
really see that the question, 'How can I change?' sets up a new
authority, you have finished with authority for ever.]{.s1}

[Let us state it again clearly: I see that I must change completely from
the roots of my being; I can no longer depend on any tradition because
tradition has brought about this colossal laziness, acceptance and
obedience; I cannot possibly look to another to help me to change, not
to any teacher, any God, any belief, any system, any outside pressure or
influence. What then takes place?]{.s1}

[First of all, can you reject all authority? If you can it means that
you are no longer afraid. Then what happens? When you reject something
false which you have been carrying about with you for generations, when
you throw off a burden of any kind, what takes place? You have more
energy, haven't you? You have more capacity, more drive, greater
intensity and vitality. If you do not feel this, then you have not
thrown off the burden, you have not discarded the dead weight of
authority.]{.s1}

[But when you have thrown it off and have this energy in which there is
no fear at all---no fear of making a mistake, no fear of doing right or
wrong---then is not that energy itself the mutation? We need a
tremendous amount of energy and we dissipate it through fear but when
there is this energy which comes from throwing off every form of fear,
that energy itself produces the radical inward revolution. You do not
have to do a thing about it.]{.s1}

[So you are left with yourself, and that is the actual state for a man
to be who is very serious about all this; and as you are no longer
looking to anybody or anything for help, you are already free to
discover. And when there is freedom, there is energy; and when there is
freedom it can never do anything wrong. Freedom is entirely different
from revolt. There is no such thing as doing right or wrong when there
is freedom. You *are* free and from that centre you act. And hence there
is no fear, and a mind that has no fear is capable of great love. And
when there is love it can do what it will.]{.s1}

 

[What we are now going to do, therefore, is to learn about ourselves,
not according to me or to some analyst or philosopher---because if we
learn about ourselves according to someone else, we learn about *them*,
not ourselves---we are going to learn what we actually are.]{.s1}

[Having realized that we can depend on no outside authority in bringing
about a total revolution within the structure of our own psyche, there
is the immensely greater difficulty of rejecting our own inward
authority, the authority of our own particular little experiences and
accumulated opinions, knowledge, ideas and ideals. You had an experience
yesterday which taught you something and what it taught you becomes a
new authority---and that authority of yesterday is as destructive as the
authority of a thousand years. To understand ourselves needs no
authority either of yesterday or of a thousand years because we are
living things, always moving, flowing, never resting. When we look at
ourselves with the dead authority of yesterday we will fail to
understand the living movement and the beauty and quality of that
movement.]{.s1}

[To be free of all authority, of your own and that of another, is to die
to everything of yesterday, so that your mind is always fresh, always
young, innocent, full of vigour and passion. It is only in that state
that one learns and observes. And for this a great deal of awareness is
required, actual awareness of what is going on inside yourself, without
correcting it or telling it what it should or should not be, because the
moment you correct it you have established another authority, a
censor.]{.s1}

[So now we are going to investigate ourselves together---not one person
explaining while you read, agreeing or disagreeing with him as you
follow the words on the page, but taking a journey together, a journey
of discovery into the most secret corners of our minds. And to take such
a journey we must travel light; we cannot be burdened with opinions,
prejudices and conclusions---all that old furniture we have collected
for the last two thousand years and more. Forget all you know about
yourself; forget all you have ever thought about yourself; we are going
to start as if we knew nothing.]{.s1}

[It rained last night heavily, and now the skies are beginning to clear;
it is a new fresh day. Let us meet that fresh day as if it were the only
day. Let us start on our journey together with all the remembrance of
yesterday left behind---and begin to understand ourselves for the first
time.]{.s1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-5 .calibre}
::: section
[II]{.s1}

 

*[Learning About Ourselves---Simplicity and
Humility---Conditioning]{.s1}*

 

[If you think it is important to know about yourself only because I or
someone else has told you it is important, then I am afraid all
communication between us comes to an end. But if we agree that it is
vital that we understand ourselves completely, then you and I have quite
a different relationship, then we can explore together with a happy,
careful and intelligent enquiry.]{.s1}

[I do not demand your faith; I am not setting myself up as an authority.
I have nothing to teach you---no new philosophy, no new system, no new
path to reality; there is no path to reality any more than to truth. All
authority of any kind, especially in the field of thought and
understanding, is the most destructive, evil thing. Leaders destroy the
followers and followers destroy the leaders. You have to be your own
teacher and your own disciple. You have to question everything that man
has accepted as valuable, as necessary.]{.s1}

[If you do not follow somebody you feel very lonely. Be lonely then. Why
are you frightened of being alone? Because you are faced with yourself
as you are and you find that you are empty, dull, stupid, ugly, guilty
and anxious---a petty, shoddy, secondhand entity. Face the fact; look at
it, do not run away from it. The moment you run away fear begins.]{.s1}

[In enquiring into ourselves we are not isolating ourselves from the
rest of the world. It is not an unhealthy process. Man throughout the
world is caught up in the same daily problems as ourselves, so in
enquiring into ourselves we are not being in the least neurotic because
there is no difference between the individual and the collective. That
is an actual fact. I have created the world as I am. So don't let us get
lost in this battle between the part and the whole.]{.s1}

[I must become aware of the total field of my own self, which is the
consciousness of the individual and of society. It is only then, when
the mind goes beyond this individual and social consciousness, that I
can become a light to myself that never goes out.]{.s1}

[Now where do we begin to understand ourselves? Here am I, and how am I
to study myself, observe myself, see what is actually taking place
inside myself? I can observe myself only in relationship because all
life is relationship. It is no use sitting in a corner meditating about
myself. I cannot exist by myself. I exist only in relationship to
people, things and ideas, and in studying my relationship to outward
things and people, as well as to inward things, I begin to understand
myself. Every other form of understanding is merely an abstraction and I
cannot study myself in abstraction; I am not an abstract entity;
therefore I have to study myself in actuality---as *I am*, not as I wish
to be.]{.s1}

 

[Understanding is not an intellectual process. Accumulating knowledge
about yourself and learning about yourself are two different things, for
the knowledge you accumulate about yourself is always of the past and a
mind that is burdened with the past is a sorrowful mind. Learning about
yourself is not like learning a language or a technology or a
science---then you obviously have to accumulate and remember; it would
be absurd to begin all over again---but in the psychological field
learning about yourself is always in the present and knowledge is always
in the past, and as most of us live in the past and are satisfied with
the past, knowledge becomes extraordinarily important to us. That is why
we worship the erudite, the clever, the cunning. But if you are learning
all the time, learning every minute, learning by watching and listening,
learning by seeing and doing, then you will find that learning is a
constant movement without the past.]{.s1}

[If you say you will learn gradually about yourself, adding more and
more, little by little, you are not studying yourself now as you are but
through acquired knowledge. Learning implies a great sensitivity. There
is no sensitivity if there is an idea, which is of the past, dominating
the present. Then the mind is no longer quick, pliable, alert. Most of
us are not sensitive even physically. We overeat, we do not bother about
the right diet, we oversmoke and drink so that our bodies become gross
and insensitive; the quality of attention in the organism itself is made
dull. How can there be a very alert, sensitive, clear mind if the
organism itself is dull and heavy? We may be sensitive about certain
things that touch us personally but to be completely sensitive to all
the implications of life demands that there be no separation between the
organism and the psyche. It is a total movement.]{.s1}

[To understand anything you must live with it, you must observe it, you
must know all its content, its nature, its structure, its movement. Have
you ever tried living with yourself? If so, you will begin to see that
yourself is not a static state, it is a fresh living thing. And to live
with a living thing your mind must also be alive. And it cannot be alive
if it is caught in opinions, judgements and values.]{.s1}

[In order to observe the movement of your own mind and heart, of your
whole being, you must have a free mind, not a mind that agrees and
disagrees, taking sides in an argument, disputing over mere words, but
rather following with an intention to understand---a very difficult
thing to do because most of us don't know how to look at, or listen to,
our own being any more than we know how to look at the beauty of a river
or listen to the breeze among the trees.]{.s1}

[When we condemn or justify we cannot see clearly, nor can we when our
minds are endlessly chattering; then we do not observe *what is*; we
look only at the projections we have made of ourselves. Each of us has
an image of what we think we are or what we should be, and that image,
that picture, entirely prevents us from seeing ourselves as we actually
are.]{.s1}

[It is one of the most difficult things in the world to look at anything
simply. Because our minds are very complex we have lost the quality of
simplicity. I don't mean simplicity in clothes or food, wearing only a
loincloth or breaking a record fasting or any of that immature nonsense
the saints cultivate, but the simplicity that can look directly at
things without fear---that can look at ourselves as we actually are
without any distortion---to say when we lie we lie, not cover it up or
run away from it.]{.s1}

[Also in order to understand ourselves we need a great deal of humility.
If you start by saying, 'I know myself', you have already stopped
learning about yourself; or if you say, 'There is nothing much to learn
about myself because I am just a bundle of memories, ideas, experiences
and traditions', then you have also stopped learning about yourself. The
moment you have achieved anything you cease to have that quality of
innocence and humility; the moment you have a conclusion or start
examining from knowledge, you are finished, for then you are translating
every living thing in terms of the old. Whereas if you have no foothold,
if there is no certainty, no achievement, there is freedom to look, to
achieve. And when you look with freedom it is always new. A confident
man is a dead human being.]{.s1}

 

[But how can we be free to look and learn when our minds from the moment
we are born to the moment we die are shaped by a particular culture in
the narrow pattern of the 'me'? For centuries we have been conditioned
by nationality, caste, class, tradition, religion, language, education,
literature, art, custom, convention, propaganda of all kinds, economic
pressure, the food we eat, the climate we live in, our family, our
friends, our experiences---every influence you can think of---and
therefore our responses to every problem are conditioned.]{.s1}

[Are you aware that you are conditioned? That is the first thing to ask
yourself, not how to be free of your conditioning. You may never be free
of it, and if you say, 'I must be free of it', you may fall into another
trap of another form of conditioning. So are you aware that you are
conditioned? Do you know that even when you look at a tree and say,
'That is an oak tree', or 'that is a banyan tree', the naming of the
tree, which is botanical knowledge, has so conditioned your mind that
the word comes between you and actually seeing the tree? To come in
contact with the tree you have to put your hand on it and the word will
not help you to touch it.]{.s1}

[How do you know you are conditioned? What tells you? What tells you you
are hungry?---not as a theory but the actual fact of hunger? In the same
way, how do you discover the actual fact that you are conditioned? Isn't
it by your reaction to a problem, a challenge? You respond to every
challenge according to your conditioning and your conditioning being
inadequate will always react inadequately.]{.s1}

[When you become aware of it, does this conditioning of race, religion
and culture bring a sense of imprisonment? Take only one form of
conditioning, nationality, become seriously, completely aware of it and
see whether you enjoy it or rebel against it, and if you rebel against
it, whether you want to break through all conditioning. If you are
satisfied with your conditioning you will obviously do nothing about it,
but if you are not satisfied when you become aware of it, you will
realize that you never do anything without it. *Never!* And therefore
you are always living in the past with the dead.]{.s1}

 

[You will be able to see for yourself how you are conditioned only when
there is a conflict in the continuity of pleasure or the avoidance of
pain. If everything is perfectly happy around you, your wife loves you,
you love her, you have a nice house, nice children and plenty of money,
then you are not aware of your conditioning at all. But when there is a
disturbance---when your wife looks at someone else or you lose your
money or are threatened with war or any other pain or anxiety---then you
know you are conditioned. When you struggle against any kind of
disturbance or defend yourself against any outer or inner threat, then
you know you are conditioned. And as most of us are disturbed most of
the time, either superficially or deeply, that very disturbance
indicates that we are conditioned. So long as the animal is petted he
reacts nicely, but the moment he is antagonized the whole violence of
his nature comes out.]{.s1}

[We are disturbed about life, politics, the economic situation, the
horror, the brutality, the sorrow in the world as well as in ourselves,
and from that we realize how terribly narrowly conditioned we are. And
what shall we do? Accept that disturbance and live with it as most of us
do? Get used to it as one gets used to living with a backache? Put up
with it?]{.s1}

[There is a tendency in all of us to put up with things, to get used to
them, to blame them on circumstances. 'Ah, if things were right I would
be different', we say, or, 'Give me the opportunity and I will fulfil
myself', or, 'I am crushed by the injustice of it all', always blaming
our disturbances on others or on our environment or on the economic
situation.]{.s1}

[If one gets used to disturbance it means that one's mind has become
dull, just as one can get so used to beauty around one that one no
longer notices it. One gets indifferent, hard and callous, and one's
mind becomes duller and duller. If we do not get used to it we try to
escape from it by taking some kind of drug, joining a political group,
shouting, writing, going to a football match or to a temple or church or
finding some other form of amusement.]{.s1}

[Why is it that we escape from actual facts? We are afraid of death---I
am just taking that as an example---and we invent all kinds of theories,
hopes, beliefs, to disguise the fact of death, but the fact is still
there. To understand a fact we must look at it, not run away from it.
Most of us are afraid of living as well as of dying. We are afraid for
our family, afraid of public opinion, of losing our job, our security,
and hundreds of other things. The simple fact is that we are afraid, not
that we are afraid of this or that. Now why cannot we face that
fact?]{.s1}

[You can face a fact only in the present and if you never allow it to be
present because you are always escaping from it, you can never face it,
and because we have cultivated a whole network of escapes we are caught
in the habit of escape.]{.s1}

 

[Now, if you are at all sensitive, at all serious, you will not only be
aware of your conditioning but you will also be aware of the dangers it
results in, what brutality and hatred it leads to. Why, then, if you see
the danger of your conditioning, don't you act? Is it because you are
lazy, laziness being lack of energy? Yet you will not lack energy if you
see an immediate physical danger like a snake in your path, or a
precipice, or a fire. Why, then, don't you act when you see the danger
of your conditioning? If you saw the danger of nationalism to your own
security, wouldn't you act?]{.s1}

[The answer is you don't see. Through an intellectual process of
analysis you may see that nationalism leads to self-destruction but
there is no emotional content in that. Only when there is an emotional
content do you become vital.]{.s1}

[If you see the danger of your conditioning merely as an intellectual
concept, you will never do anything about it. In seeing a danger as a
mere idea there is conflict between the idea and action and that
conflict takes away your energy. It is only when you see the
conditioning *and* the danger of it *immediately*, and as you would see
a precipice, that you act. So *seeing is acting*.]{.s1}

[Most of us walk through life inattentively, reacting unthinkingly
according to the environment in which we have been brought up, and such
reactions create only further bondage, further conditioning, but the
moment you give your total attention to your conditioning you will see
that you are free from the past completely, that it falls away from you
naturally.]{.s1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-6 .calibre}
::: section
[III]{.s1}

 

*[Consciousness---The Totality of Life---Awareness]{.s1}*

 

[When you become aware of your conditioning you will understand the
whole of your consciousness. Consciousness is the total field in which
thought functions and relationships exist. All motives, intentions,
desires, pleasures, fears, inspirations, longings, hopes, sorrows, joys
are in that field. But we have come to divide the consciousness into the
active and the dormant, the upper and lower levels---that is, all the
daily thoughts, feelings and activities on the surface and below them
the so-called subconscious, the things with which we are not familiar,
which express themselves occasionally through certain intimations,
intuitions and dreams.]{.s1}

[We are occupied with one little corner of consciousness which is most
of our life; the rest, which we call the subconscious, with all its
motives, its fears, its racial and inherited qualities, we do not even
know how to get into. Now I am asking you, is there such a thing as the
subconscious at all? We use that word very freely. We have accepted that
there is such a thing and all the phrases and jargon of the analysts and
psychologists have seeped into the language; but is there such a thing?
And why is it that we give such extraordinary importance to it? It seems
to me that it is as trivial and stupid as the conscious mind---as
narrow, bigoted, conditioned, anxious and tawdry.]{.s1}

[So is it possible to be totally aware of the whole field of
consciousness and not merely a part, a fragment, of it? If you are able
to be aware of the totality, then you are functioning all the time with
your total attention, not partial attention. This is important to
understand because when you are being totally aware of the whole field
of consciousness there is no friction. It is only when you divide
consciousness, which is *all* thought, feeling and action, into
different levels that there is friction.]{.s1}

[We live in fragments. You are one thing at the office, another at home;
you talk about democracy and in your heart you are autocratic; you talk
about loving your neighbours, yet kill him with competition; there is
one part of you working, looking, independently of the other. Are you
aware of this fragmentary existence in yourself? And is it possible for
a brain that has broken up its own functioning, its own thinking, into
fragments---is it possible for such a brain to be aware of the whole
field? Is it possible to look at the whole of consciousness completely,
totally, which means to be a total human being?]{.s1}

[If, in order to try to understand the whole structure of the 'me', the
self, with all its extraordinary complexity, you go step by step,
uncovering layer by layer, examining every thought, feeling and motive,
you will get caught up in the analytical process which may take you
weeks, months, years---and when you admit time into the process of
understanding yourself, you must allow for every form of distortion
because the self is a complex entity, moving, living, struggling,
wanting, denying, with pressures and stresses and influences of all
sorts continually at work on it. So you will discover for yourself that
this is not the way; you will understand that the only way to look at
yourself is totally, immediately, without time; and you can see the
totality of yourself only when the mind is not fragmented. What you see
in totality is the truth.]{.s1}

[Now can you do that? Most of us cannot because most of us have never
approached the problem so seriously, because we have never really looked
at ourselves. Never. We blame others, we explain things away or we are
frightened to look. But when you look totally you will give your whole
attention, your whole being, everything of yourself, your eyes, your
ears, your nerves; you will attend with complete self-abandonment, and
then there is no room for fear, no room for contradiction, and therefore
no conflict.]{.s1}

 

[Attention is not the same thing as concentration. Concentration is
exclusion; attention, which is total awareness, excludes nothing. It
seems to me that most of us are not aware, not only of what we are
talking about but of our environment, the colours around us, the people,
the shape of the trees, the clouds, the movement of water. Perhaps it is
because we are so concerned with ourselves, with our own petty little
problems, our own ideas, our own pleasures, pursuits and ambitions that
we are not objectively aware. And yet we talk a great deal about
awareness. Once in India I was travelling in a car. There was a
chauffeur driving and I was sitting beside him. There were three
gentlemen behind discussing awareness very intently and asking me
questions about awareness, and unfortunately at that moment the driver
was looking somewhere else and he ran over a goat, and the three
gentlemen were still discussing awareness---totally unaware that they
had run over a goat. When this lack of attention was pointed out to
those gentlemen who were trying to be aware it was a great surprise to
them.]{.s1}

[And with most of us it is the same. We are not aware of outward things
or of inward things. If you want to understand the beauty of a bird, a
fly, or a leaf, or a person with all his complexities, you have to give
your whole attention which is awareness. And you can give your whole
attention only when you care, which means that you really love to
understand---then you give your whole heart and mind to find out.]{.s1}

[Such awareness is like living with a snake in the room; you watch its
every movement, you are very, very sensitive to the slightest sound it
makes. Such a state of attention is total energy; in such awareness the
totality of yourself is revealed in an instant.]{.s1}

 

[When you have looked at yourself so deeply you can go much deeper. When
we use the word 'deeper' we are not being comparative. We think in
comparisons---deep and shallow, happy and unhappy. We are always
measuring, comparing. Now is there such a state as the shallow and the
deep in oneself? When I say, 'My mind is shallow, petty, narrow,
limited', how do I know all these things? Because I have compared my
mind with your mind which is brighter, has more capacity, is more
intelligent and alert. Do I know my pettiness without comparison? When I
am hungry, I do not compare that hunger with yesterday's hunger.
Yesterday's hunger is an idea, a memory.]{.s1}

[If I am all the time measuring myself against you, struggling to be
like you, then I am denying what I am myself. Therefore I am creating an
illusion. When I have understood that comparison in any form leads only
to greater illusion and greater misery, just as when I analyse myself,
add to my knowledge of myself bit by bit, or identify myself with
something outside myself, whether it be the State, a saviour or an
ideology---when I understand that all such processes lead only to
greater conformity and therefore greater conflict---when I see all this
I put it completely away. Then my mind is no longer seeking. It is very
important to understand this. Then my mind is no longer groping,
searching, questioning. This does not mean that my mind is satisfied
with things as they are, but such a mind has no illusion. Such a mind
can then move in a totally different dimension. The dimension in which
we usually live, the life of every day which is pain, pleasure and fear,
has conditioned the mind, limited the nature of the mind, and when that
pain, pleasure and fear have gone (which does not mean that you no
longer have joy: joy is something entirely different from
pleasure)---then the mind functions in a different dimension in which
there is no conflict, no sense of 'otherness'.]{.s1}

[Verbally we can go only so far: what lies beyond cannot be put into
words because the word is not the thing. Up to now we can describe,
explain, but no words or explanations can open the door. What will open
the door is daily awareness and attention---awareness of how we speak,
what we say, how we walk, what we think. It is like cleaning a room and
keeping it in order. Keeping the room in order is important in one sense
but *totally* unimportant in another. There must be order in the room
but order will not open the door or the window. What will open the door
is not your volition or desire. You cannot possibly invite the *other*.
All that you can do is to keep the room in order, which is to be
virtuous for itself, not for what it will bring. To be sane, rational,
orderly. Then perhaps, if you are lucky, the window will open and the
breeze will come in. Or it may not. It depends on the state of your
mind. And that state of mind can be understood only by yourself, by
watching it and never trying to shape it, never taking sides, never
opposing, never agreeing, never justifying, never condemning, never
judging---which means watching it without any choice. And out of this
choiceless awareness perhaps the door will open and you will know what
that dimension is in which there is no conflict and no time.]{.s1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-7 .calibre}
::: section
[IV]{.s1}

 

*[Pursuit of Pleasure---Desire---Perversion by
Thought---Memory---Joy]{.s1}*

 

[We said in the last chapter that joy was something entirely different
from pleasure, so let us find out what is involved in pleasure and
whether it is at all possible to live in a world that does not contain
pleasure but a tremendous sense of joy, of bliss.]{.s1}

[We are all engaged in the pursuit of pleasure in some form or
other---intellectual, sensuous or cultural pleasure, the pleasure of
reforming, telling others what to do, of modifying the evils of society,
of doing good---the pleasure of greater knowledge, greater physical
satisfaction, greater experience, greater understanding of life, all the
clever, cunning things of the mind---and the ultimate pleasure is, of
course, to have God.]{.s1}

[Pleasure is the structure of society. From childhood until death we are
secretly, cunningly or obviously pursuing pleasure. So whatever our form
of pleasure is, I think we should be very clear about it because it is
going to guide and shape our lives. It is therefore important for each
one of us to investigate closely, hesitantly and delicately this
question of pleasure, for to find pleasure, and then nourish and sustain
it, is a basic demand of life and without it existence becomes dull,
stupid, lonely and meaningless.]{.s1}

[You may ask why then should life not be guided by pleasure? For the
very simple reason that pleasure must bring pain, frustration, sorrow
and fear, and, out of fear, violence. If you want to live that way, live
that way. Most of the world does, anyway, but if you want to be free
from sorrow you must understand the whole structure of pleasure.]{.s1}

[To understand pleasure is not to deny it. We are not condemning it or
saying it is right or wrong, but if we pursue it, let us do so with our
eyes open, knowing that a mind that is all the time seeking pleasure
must inevitably find its shadow, pain. They cannot be separated,
although we run after pleasure and try to avoid pain.]{.s1}

 

[Now, why is the mind always demanding pleasure? Why is it that we do
noble and ignoble things with the undercurrent of pleasure? Why is it we
sacrifice and suffer on the thin thread of pleasure? What is pleasure
and how does it come into being? I wonder if any of you have asked
yourself these questions and followed the answers to the very end?]{.s1}

[Pleasure comes into being through four stages---perception, sensation,
contact and desire. I see a beautiful motor car, say; then I get a
sensation, a reaction, from looking at it; then I touch it or imagine
touching it, and then there is the desire to own and show myself off in
it. Or I see a lovely cloud, or a mountain clear against the sky, or a
leaf that has just come in springtime, or a deep valley full of
loveliness and splendour, or a glorious sunset, or a beautiful face,
intelligent, alive, not self-conscious and therefore no longer
beautiful. I look at these things with intense delight and as I observe
them there is no observer but only sheer beauty like love. For a moment
I am absent with all my problems, anxieties and miseries---there is only
that marvellous thing. I can look at it with joy and the next moment
forget it, or else the mind steps in, and then the problem begins; my
mind thinks over what it has seen and thinks how beautiful it was; I
tell myself I should like to see it again many times. Thought begins to
compare, judge, and say, 'I must have it again tomorrow'. The continuity
of an experience that has given delight for a second is sustained by
thought.]{.s1}

[It is the same with sexual desire or any other form of desire. There is
nothing wrong with desire. To react is perfectly normal. If you stick a
pin in me I shall react unless I am paralysed. But then thought steps in
and chews over the delight and turns it into pleasure. Thought wants to
repeat the experience, and the more you repeat, the more mechanical it
becomes; the more you think about it, the more strength thought gives to
pleasure. So thought creates and sustains pleasure through desire, and
gives it continuity, and therefore the natural reaction of desire to any
beautiful thing is perverted by thought. Thought turns it into a memory
and memory is then nourished by thinking about it over and over
again.]{.s1}

[Of course, memory has a place at a certain level. In everyday life we
could not function at all without it. In its own field it must be
efficient but there is a state of mind where it has very little place. A
mind which is not crippled by memory has real freedom.]{.s1}

 

[Have you ever noticed that when you respond to something totally, with
all your heart, there is very little memory? It is only when you do not
respond to a challenge with your whole being that there is a conflict, a
struggle, and this brings confusion and pleasure or pain. And the
struggle breeds memory. That memory is added to all the time by other
memories and it is those memories which respond. Anything that is the
result of memory is old and therefore never free. There is no such thing
as freedom of thought. It is sheer nonsense.]{.s1}

[Thought is never new, for thought is the response of memory,
experience, knowledge. Thought, because it is old, makes this thing
which you have looked at with delight and felt tremendously for the
moment, old. From the old you derive pleasure, never from the new. There
is no time in the new.]{.s1}

[So if you can look at all things without allowing pleasure to creep
in---at a face, a bird, the colour of a sari, the beauty of a sheet of
water shimmering in the sun, or anything that gives delight---if you can
look at it without wanting the experience to be repeated, then there
will be no pain, no fear, and therefore tremendous joy.]{.s1}

[It is the struggle to repeat and perpetuate pleasure which turns it
into pain. Watch it in yourself. The very demand for the repetition of
pleasure brings about pain, because it is not the same as it was
yesterday. You struggle to achieve the same delight, not only to your
aesthetic sense but the same inward quality of the mind, and you are
hurt and disappointed because it is denied to you.]{.s1}

 

[Have you observed what happens to you when you are denied a little
pleasure? When you don't get what you want you become anxious, envious,
hateful. Have you noticed when you have been denied the pleasure of
drinking or smoking or sex or whatever it is---have you noticed what
battles you go through? And all that is a form of fear, isn't it? You
are afraid of not getting what you want or of losing what you have. When
some particular faith or ideology which you have held for years is
shaken or torn away from you by logic or life, aren't you afraid of
standing alone? That belief has for years given you satisfaction and
pleasure, and when it is taken away you are left stranded, empty, and
the fear remains until you find another form of pleasure, another
belief.]{.s1}

[It seems to me so simple and because it is so simple we refuse to see
its simplicity. We like to complicate everything. When your wife turns
away from you, aren't you jealous? Aren't you angry? Don't you hate the
man who has attracted her? And what is all that but fear of losing
something which has given you a great deal of pleasure, a companionship,
a certain quality of assurance and the satisfaction of possession?]{.s1}

[So if you understand that where there is a search for pleasure there
must be pain, live that way if you want to, but don't just slip into it.
If you want to end pleasure, though, which is to end pain, you must be
totally attentive to the whole structure of pleasure---not cut it out as
monks and sannyasis do, never looking at a woman because they think it
is a sin and thereby destroying the vitality of their
understanding---but seeing the whole meaning and significance of
pleasure. Then you will have tremendous joy in life. You cannot think
about joy. Joy is an immediate thing and by thinking about it, you turn
it into pleasure. Living in the present is the instant perception of
beauty and the great delight in it without seeking pleasure from
it.]{.s1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-8 .calibre}
::: section
[V]{.s1}

 

*[Self-concern---Craving for Position---Fears and Total
Fear---Frag­mentation of Thought---Ending of Fear]{.s1}*

 

[Before we go any further I would like to ask you what is your
fundamental, lasting interest in life? Putting all oblique answers aside
and dealing with this question directly and honestly, what would you
answer? Do you know?]{.s1}

[Isn't it yourself? Anyway, that is what most of us would say if we
answered truthfully. I am interested in my progress, my job, my family,
the little corner in which I live, in getting a better position for
myself, more prestige, more power, more domination over others and so
on. I think it would be logical, wouldn't it, to admit to ourselves that
that is what most of us are primarily interested in---'me' first?]{.s1}

[Some of us would say that it is wrong to be primarily interested in
ourselves. But what is wrong about it except that we seldom decently,
honestly, admit it? If we do, we are rather ashamed of it. So there it
is---one is fundamentally interested in oneself, and for various
ideological or traditional reasons one thinks it is wrong. But what one
*thinks* is irrelevant. Why introduce the factor of its being wrong?
That is an idea, a concept. What is a *fact* is that one is
fundamentally and lastingly interested in oneself.]{.s1}

[You may say that it is more satisfactory to help another than to think
about yourself. What is the difference? It is still self-concern. If it
gives you greater satisfaction to help others, you are concerned about
what will give you greater satisfaction. Why bring any ideological
concept into it? Why this double thinking? Why not say, 'What I really
want is satisfaction, whether in sex, or in helping others, or in
becoming a great saint, scientist or politician'? It is the same
process, isn't it? Satisfaction in all sorts of ways, subtle and
obvious, is what we want. When we say we want freedom we want it because
we think it may be wonderfully satisfying, and the ultimate
satisfaction, of course, is this peculiar idea of self-realization. What
we are really seeking is a satisfaction in which there is no
dissatisfaction at all.]{.s1}

[Most of us crave the satisfaction of having a position in society
because we are afraid of being nobody. Society is so constructed that a
citizen who has a position of respect is treated with great courtesy,
whereas a man who has no position is kicked around. Everyone in the
world wants a position, whether in society, in the family or to sit on
the right hand of God, and this position must be recognized by others,
otherwise it is no position at all. We must always sit on the platform.
Inwardly we are whirlpools of misery and mischief and therefore to be
regarded outwardly as a great figure is very gratifying. This craving
for position, for prestige, for power, to be recognized by society as
being outstanding in some way, is a wish to dominate others, and this
wish to dominate is a form of aggression. The saint who seeks a position
in regard to his saintliness is as aggressive as the chicken pecking in
the farmyard. And what is the cause of this aggressiveness? It is fear,
isn't it?]{.s1}

 

[Fear is one of the greatest problems in life. A mind that is caught in
fear lives in confusion, in conflict, and therefore must be violent,
distorted and aggressive. It dare not move away from its own patterns of
thinking, and this breeds hypocrisy. Until we are free from fear, climb
the highest mountain, invent every kind of God, we will always remain in
darkness.]{.s1}

[Living in such a corrupt, stupid society as we do, with the competitive
education we receive which engenders fear, we are all burdened with
fears of some kind, and fear is a dreadful thing which warps, twists and
dulls our days.]{.s1}

[There is physical fear but that is a response we have inherited from
the animals. It is psychological fears we are concerned with here, for
when we understand the deep-rooted psychological fears we will be able
to meet the animal fears, whereas to be concerned with the animal fears
first will never help us to understand the psychological fears.]{.s1}

[We are all afraid *about* something; there is no fear in abstraction,
it is always in relation *to* something. Do you know your own
fears---fear of losing your job, of not having enough food or money, or
what your neighbours or the public think about you, or not being a
success, of losing your position in society, of being despised or
ridiculed---fear of pain and disease, of domination, of never knowing
what love is or of not being loved, of losing your wife or children, of
death, of living in a world that is like death, of utter boredom, of not
living up to the image others have built about you, of losing your
faith---all these and innumerable other fears---do you know your own
particular fears? And what do you usually do about them? You run away
from them, don't you, or invent ideas and images to cover them? But to
run away from fear is only to increase it.]{.s1}

[One of the major causes of fear is that we do not want to face
ourselves as we are. So, as well as the fears themselves, we have to
examine the network of escapes we have developed to rid ourselves of
them. If the mind, in which is included the brain, tries to overcome
fear, to suppress it, discipline it, control it, translate it into terms
of something else, there is friction, there is conflict, and that
conflict is a waste of energy.]{.s1}

[The first thing to ask ourselves then is what *is* fear and how does it
arise? What do we mean by the word fear itself? I am asking myself what
is fear not what I am afraid of.]{.s1}

[I lead a certain kind of life; I think in a certain pattern; I have
certain beliefs and dogmas and I don't want those patterns of existence
to be disturbed because I have my roots in them. I don't want them to be
disturbed because the disturbance produces a state of unknowing and I
dislike that. If I am torn away from everything I know and believe, I
want to be reasonably certain of the state of things to which I am
going. So the brain cells have created a pattern and those brain cells
refuse to create another pattern which may be uncertain. The movement
from certainty to uncertainty is what I call fear.]{.s1}

[At the actual moment as I am sitting here I am not afraid; I am not
afraid in the present, nothing is happening to me, nobody is threatening
me or taking anything away from me. But beyond the actual moment there
is a deeper layer in the mind which is consciously or unconsciously
thinking of what might happen in the future or worrying that something
from the past may overtake me. So I am afraid of the past and of the
future. I have divided time into the past and the future. Thought steps
in, says, 'Be careful it does not happen again', or 'Be prepared for the
future. The future may be dangerous for you. You have got something now
but you may lose it. You may die tomorrow, your wife may run away, you
may lose your job. You may never become famous. You may be lonely. You
want to be quite sure of tomorrow.']{.s1}

[Now take your own particular form of fear. Look at it. Watch your
reactions to it. Can you look at it without any movement of escape,
justification, condemnation or suppression? Can you look at that fear
without the word which causes the fear? Can you look at death, for
instance, without the word which arouses the fear of death? The word
itself brings a tremor, doesn't it, as the word love has its own tremor,
its own image? Now is the image you have in your mind about death, the
memory of so many deaths you have seen and the associating of yourself
with those incidents---is it that image which is creating fear? Or are
you actually afraid of coming to an end, not of the image creating the
end? Is the word death causing you fear or the actual ending? If it is
the word or the memory which is causing you fear then it is not fear at
all.]{.s1}

[You were ill two years ago, let us say, and the memory of that pain,
that illness, remains, and the memory now functioning says, 'Be careful,
don't get ill, again'. So the memory with its associations is creating
fear, and that is not fear at all because actually at the moment you
have very good health. Thought, which is always old, because thought is
the response of memory and memories are always old---thought creates, in
time, the feeling that you are afraid which is not an actual fact. The
actual fact is that you are well. But the experience, which has remained
in the mind as a memory, rouses the thought, 'Be careful, don't fall ill
again'.]{.s1}

[So we see that thought engenders one kind of fear. But is there fear at
all apart from that? Is fear always the result of thought and, if it is,
is there any other form of fear? We are afraid of death---that is,
something that is going to happen tomorrow or the day after tomorrow, in
time. There is a distance between actuality and what will be. Now
thought has experienced this state; by observing death it says, 'I am
going to die.' Thought creates the fear of death, and if it doesn't is
there any fear at all?]{.s1}

[Is fear the result of thought? If it is, thought being always old, fear
is always old. As we have said, there is no new thought. If we recognize
it, it is already old. So what we are afraid of is the repetition of the
old---the thought of what *has been* projecting into the future.
Therefore thought is responsible for fear. This is so, you can see it
for yourself. When you are confronted with something immediately there
is no fear. It is only when thought comes in that there is fear.]{.s1}

[Therefore our question now is, is it possible for the mind to live
completely, totally, in the present? It is only such a mind that has no
fear. But to understand this, you have to understand the structure of
thought, memory and time. And in understanding it, understanding not
intellectually, not verbally, but actually with your heart, your mind,
your guts, you will be free from fear; then the mind can use thought
without creating fear.]{.s1}

[Thought, like memory, is, of course, necessary for daily living. It is
the only instrument we have for communication, working at our jobs and
so forth. Thought is the response to memory, memory which has been
accumulated through experience, knowledge, tradition, time. And from
this background of memory we react and this reaction is thinking. So
thought is essential at certain levels but when thought projects itself
psychologically as the future and the past, creating fear as well as
pleasure, the mind is made dull and therefore inaction is
inevitable.]{.s1}

[So I ask myself, 'Why, why, why, do I think about the future and the
past in terms of pleasure and pain, knowing that such thought creates
fear? Isn't it possible for thought psychologically to stop, for
otherwise fear will never end?']{.s1}

 

[One of the functions of thought is to be occupied all the time with
something. Most of us want to have our minds continually occupied so
that we are prevented from seeing ourselves as we actually are. We are
afraid to be empty. We are afraid to look at our fears.]{.s1}

[Consciously you can be aware of your fears but at the deeper levels of
your mind are you aware of them? And how are you going to find out the
fears that are hidden, secret? Is fear to be divided into the conscious
and the subconscious? This is a very important question. The specialist,
the psychologist, the analyst, have divided fear into deep and
superficial layers, but if you follow what the psychologist says or what
I say, you are understanding our theories, our dogmas, our knowledge,
you are not understanding yourself. You cannot understand yourself
according to Freud or Jung, or according to me. Other people's theories
have no importance whatever. It is of *yourself* that you must ask the
question, is fear to be divided into the conscious and subconscious? Or
is there only fear which you translate into different forms? There is
only one desire; there is only desire. You desire. The objects of desire
change, but desire is always the same. So perhaps in the same way there
is only fear. You are afraid of all sorts of things but there is only
one fear.]{.s1}

[When you realize that fear cannot be divided you will see that you have
put away altogether this problem of the subconscious and so have cheated
the psychologists and the analysts. When you understand that fear is a
single movement which expresses itself in different ways and when you
see the movement and not the object to which the movement goes, then you
are facing an immense question: how can you look at it without the
fragmentation which the mind has cultivated?]{.s1}

[There *is* only total fear, but how can the mind which thinks in
fragments observe this total picture? Can it? We have lived a life of
fragmentation, and can look at that total fear only through the
fragmentary process of thought. The whole process of the machinery of
thinking is to break up everything into fragments: I love you and I hate
you; you are my enemy, you are my friend; my peculiar idiosyncrasies and
inclinations, my job, my position, my prestige, my wife, my child, my
country and your country, my God and your God---all that is the
fragmentation of thought. And this thought looks at the total state of
fear, or tries to look at it, and reduces it to fragments. Therefore we
see that the mind can look at this total fear only when there is no
movement of thought.]{.s1}

 

[Can you watch fear without any conclusion, without any interference of
the knowledge you have accumulated about it? If you cannot, then what
you are watching is the past, not fear; if you can, then you are
watching fear for the first time without the interference of the
past.]{.s1}

[You can watch only when the mind is very quiet, just as you can listen
to what someone is saying only when your mind is not chattering with
itself, carrying on a dialogue with itself about its own problems and
anxieties. Can you in the same way look at your fear without trying to
resolve it, without bringing in its opposite, courage---actually look at
it and not try to escape from it? When you say, 'I must control it, I
must get rid of it, I must understand it', you are trying to escape from
it.]{.s1}

[You can observe a cloud or a tree or the movement of a river with a
fairly quiet mind because they are not very important to you, but to
watch yourself is far more difficult because there the demands are so
practical, the reactions so quick. So when you are directly in contact
with fear or despair, loneliness or jealousy, or any other ugly state of
mind, can you look at it so completely that your mind is quiet enough to
see it?]{.s1}

[Can the mind perceive fear and not the different forms of
fear---perceive total fear, not what you are afraid of? If you look
merely at the details of fear or try to deal with your fears one by one,
you will never come to the central issue which is to learn to live with
fear.]{.s1}

 

[To live with a living thing such as fear requires a mind and heart that
are extraordinarily subtle, that have no conclusion and can therefore
follow every movement of fear. Then if you observe and live with
it---and this doesn't take a whole day, it can take a minute or a second
to know the whole nature of fear---if you live with it so completely you
inevitably ask, 'Who is the entity who is living with fear? Who is it
who is observing fear, watching all the movements of the various forms
of fear as well as being aware of the central fact of fear? Is the
observer a dead entity, a static being, who has accumulated a lot of
knowledge and information about himself, and is it that dead thing who
is observing and living with the movement of fear? Is the observer the
past or is he a living thing?' What is your answer? Do not answer me,
answer yourself. Are you, the observer, a dead entity watching a living
thing or are you a living thing watching a living thing? Because in the
observer the two states exist.]{.s1}

[The observer is the censor who does not want fear; the observer is the
totality of all his experiences about fear. So the observer is separate
from that thing he calls fear; there is space between them; he is
forever trying to overcome it or escape from it and hence this constant
battle between himself and fear---this battle which is such a waste of
energy.]{.s1}

[As you watch, you learn that the observer is merely a bundle of ideas
and memories without any validity or substance, but that fear is an
actuality and that you are trying to understand a fact with an
abstraction which, of course, you cannot do. But, in fact, is the
observer who says, 'I am afraid', any different from the thing observed
which is fear? The observer *is* fear and when that is realized there is
no longer any dissipation of energy in the effort to get rid of fear,
and the time-space interval between the observer and the observed
disappears. When you see that you are a part of fear, not separate from
it---that *you are* fear---then you cannot do anything about it; then
fear comes totally to an end.]{.s1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-9 .calibre}
::: section
[VI]{.s1}

 

*[Violence---Anger---Justification and Condemnation---The Ideal and the
Actual]{.s1}*

 

[Fear, pleasure, sorrow, thought and violence are all interrelated. Most
of us take pleasure in violence, in disliking somebody, hating a
particular race or group of people, having antagonistic feelings towards
others. But in a state of mind in which all violence has come to an end
there is a joy which is very different from the pleasure of violence
with its conflicts, hatreds and fears.]{.s1}

[Can we go to the very root of violence and be free from it? Otherwise
we shall live everlastingly in battle with each other. If that is the
way you want to live---and apparently most people do---then carry on; if
you say, 'Well, I'm sorry, violence can never end', then you and I have
no means of communication, you have blocked yourself; but if you say
there might be a different way of living, then we shall be able to
communicate with each other.]{.s1}

[So let us consider together, those of us who can communicate, whether
it is at all possible totally to end every form of violence in ourselves
and still live in this monstrously brutal world. I think it is possible.
I don't want to have a breath of hate, jealousy, anxiety or fear in me.
I want to live completely at peace. Which doesn't mean that I want to
die. I want to live on this marvellous earth, so full, so rich, so
beautiful. I want to look at the trees, flowers, rivers, meadows, women,
boys and girls, and at the same time live completely at peace with
myself and with the world. What can I do?]{.s1}

[If we know how to look at violence, not only outwardly in society---the
wars, the riots, the national antagonisms and class conflicts---but also
in ourselves, then perhaps we shall be able to go beyond it.]{.s1}

[Here is a very complex problem. For centuries upon centuries man has
been violent; religions have tried to tame him throughout the world and
none of them have succeeded. So if we are going into the question we
must, it seems to me, be at least very serious about it because it will
lead us into quite a different domain, but if we want merely to play
with the problem for intellectual entertainment we shall not get very
far.]{.s1}

[You may feel that you yourself are very serious about the problem but
that as long as so many other people in the world are not serious and
are not prepared to do anything about it, what is the good of your doing
anything? I don't care whether they take it seriously or not. I take it
seriously, that is enough. I am not my brother's keeper. I myself, as a
human being, feel very strongly about this question of violence and I
will see to it that in myself I am not violent---but I cannot tell you
or anybody else, 'Don't be violent.' It has no meaning---unless you
yourself want it. So if you yourself really want to understand this
problem of violence let us continue on our journey of exploration
together.]{.s1}

 

[Is this problem of violence out there or here? Do you want to solve the
problem in the outside world or are you questioning violence itself as
it is in you? If you are free of violence in yourself the question
arises, 'How am I to live in a world full of violence, acquisitiveness,
greed, envy, brutality? Will I not be destroyed?' That is the inevitable
question which is invariably asked. When you ask such a question it
seems to me you are not actually living peacefully. If you live
peacefully you will have no problem at all. You may be imprisoned
because you refuse to join the army or shot because you refuse to
fight---but that is not a problem; you will be shot. It is
extraordinarily important to understand this.]{.s1}

[We are trying to understand violence as a fact, not as an idea, as a
fact which exists in the human being, and the human being is myself. And
to go into the problem I must be *completely* vulnerable, open, to it. I
must expose myself to myself---not necessarily expose myself to you
because you may not be interested---but I must be in a state of mind
that demands to see this thing right to the end and at no point stops
and says I will go no further.]{.s1}

[Now it must be obvious to me that I am a violent human being. I have
experienced violence in anger, violence in my sexual demands, violence
in hatred, creating enmity, violence in jealousy and so on---I have
experienced it, I have known it, and I say to myself, 'I want to
understand this whole problem not just one fragment of it expressed in
war, but this aggression in man which also exists in the animals and of
which I am a part.']{.s1}

[Violence is not merely killing another. It is violence when we use a
sharp word, when we make a gesture to brush away a person, when we obey
because there is fear. So violence isn't merely organized butchery in
the name of God, in the name of society or country. Violence is much
more subtle, much deeper, and we are enquiring into the very depths of
violence.]{.s1}

[When you call yourself an Indian or a Muslim or a Christian or a
European, or anything else, you are being violent. Do you see why it is
violent? Because you are separating yourself from the rest of mankind.
When you separate yourself by belief, by nationality, by tradition, it
breeds violence. So a man who is seeking to understand violence does not
belong to any country, to any religion, to any political party or
partial system; he is concerned with the total understanding of
mankind.]{.s1}

[Now there are two primary schools of thought with regard to violence,
one which says, 'Violence is innate in man' and the other which says,
'Violence is the result of the social and cultural heritage in which man
lives.' We are not concerned with which school we belong to---it is of
no importance. What is important is the *fact* that we are violent, not
the reason for it.]{.s1}

 

[One of the most common expressions of violence is anger. When my wife
or sister is attacked I say I am righteously angry; when my country is
attacked, my ideas, my principles, my way of life, I am righteously
angry. I am also angry when my habits are attacked or my petty little
opinions. When you tread on my toes or insult me I get angry, or if you
run away with my wife and I get jealous, that jealousy is called
righteous because she is my property. And all this anger is morally
justified. But to kill for my country is also justified. So when we are
talking about anger, which is a part of violence, do we look at anger in
terms of righteous and unrighteous anger according to our own
inclinations and environmental drive, or do we see only anger? Is there
righteous anger ever? Or is there only anger? There is no good influence
or bad influence, only influence, but when you are influenced by
something which doesn't suit me I call it an evil influence.]{.s1}

[The moment you protect your family, your country, a bit of coloured rag
called a flag, a belief, an idea, a dogma, the thing that you demand or
that you hold, that very protection indicates anger. So can you look at
anger without any explanation or justification, without saying, 'I must
protect my goods', or 'I was right to be angry', or 'How stupid of me to
be angry'? Can you look at anger as if it were something by itself? Can
you look at it completely objectively, which means neither defending it
nor condemning it? Can you?]{.s1}

[Can I look at you if I am antagonistic to you or if I am thinking what
a marvellous person you are? I can see you only when I look at you with
a certain care in which neither of these things is involved. Now, can I
look at anger in the same way, which means that I am vulnerable to the
problem, I do not resist it, I am watching this extraordinary phenomenon
without any reaction to it?]{.s1}

[It is very difficult to look at anger dispassionately because it is a
part of me, but that is what I am trying to do. Here I am, a violent
human being, whether I am black, brown, white or purple. I am not
concerned with whether I have inherited this violence or whether society
has produced it in me; all I am concerned with is whether it is at all
possible to be free from it. To be free from violence means everything
to me. It is more important to me than sex, food, position, for this
thing is corrupting me. It is destroying me and destroying the world,
and I want to understand it, I want to be beyond it. I feel responsible
for all this anger and violence in the world. I feel responsible---it
isn't just a lot of words---and I say to myself, 'I can do something
only if I am beyond anger myself, beyond violence, beyond nationality'.
And this feeling I have that I must understand the violence in myself
brings tremendous vitality and passion to find out.]{.s1}

[But to be beyond violence I cannot suppress it, I cannot deny it, I
cannot say, 'Well, it is a part of me and that's that', or 'I don't want
it'. I have to look at it, I have to study it, I must become very
intimate with it and I cannot become intimate with it if I condemn it or
justify it. We do condemn it, though; we do justify it. Therefore I am
saying, stop for the time being condemning it or justifying it.]{.s1}

 

[Now, if you want to stop violence, if you want to stop wars, how much
vitality, how much of yourself, do you give to it? Isn't it important to
you that your children are killed, that your sons go into the army where
they are bullied and butchered? Don't you care? My God, if that doesn't
interest you, what does? Guarding your money? Having a good time? Taking
drugs? Don't you see that this violence in yourself is destroying your
children? Or do you see it only as some abstraction?]{.s1}

[All right then, if you are interested, attend with all your heart and
mind to find out. Don't just sit back and say, 'Well, tell us all about
it'. I point out to you that you cannot look at anger nor at violence
with eyes that condemn or justify and that if this violence is not a
burning problem to you, you cannot put those two things away. So first
you have to learn; you have to learn how to look at anger, how to look
at your husband, your wife, your children; you have to listen to the
politician, you have to learn why you are not objective, why you condemn
or justify. You have to learn that you condemn and justify because it is
part of the social structure you live in, your conditioning as a German
or an Indian or a Negro or an American or whatever you happen to have
been born, with all the dulling of the mind that this conditioning
results in. To learn, to discover, something fundamental you must have
the capacity to go deeply. If you have a blunt instrument, a dull
instrument, you cannot go deeply. So what we are doing is sharpening the
instrument, which is the mind---the mind which has been made dull by all
this justifying and condemning. You can penetrate deeply only if your
mind is as sharp as a needle and as strong as a diamond.]{.s1}

[It is no good just sitting back and asking, 'How am I to get such a
mind?' You have to want it as you want your next meal, and to have it
you must see that what makes your mind dull and stupid is this sense of
invulnerability which has built walls round itself and which is part of
this condemnation and justification. If the mind can be rid of that,
then you can look, study, penetrate, and perhaps come to a state that is
totally aware of the whole problem.]{.s1}

 

[So let us come back to the central issue---is it possible to eradicate
violence in ourselves? It is a form of violence to say, 'You haven't
changed, why haven't you?' I am not doing that. It doesn't mean a thing
to me to convince you of *anything*. It is your life, not my life. The
way you live is your affair. I am asking whether it is possible for a
human being living psychologically in any society to clear violence from
himself inwardly? If it is, the very process will produce a different
way of living in this world.]{.s1}

[Most of us have accepted violence as a way of life. Two dreadful wars
have taught us nothing except to build more and more barriers between
human beings---that is, between you and me. But for those of us who want
to be rid of violence, how is it to be done? I do not think anything is
going to be achieved through analysis, either by ourselves or by a
professional. We might be able to modify ourselves slightly, live a
little more quietly with a little more affection, but in itself it will
not give total perception. But I must know how to analyse which means
that in the process of analysis my mind becomes extraordinarily sharp,
and it is that quality of sharpness, of attention, of seriousness, which
will give total perception. One hasn't the eyes to see the whole thing
at a glance; this clarity of the eye is possible only if one can see the
details, *then jump*.]{.s1}

 

[Some of us, in order to rid ourselves of violence, have used a concept,
an ideal, called non-violence, and we think by having an ideal of the
opposite to violence, non-violence, we can get rid of the fact, the
actual---but we cannot. We have had ideals without number, all the
sacred books are full of them, yet we are still violent---so why not
deal with violence itself and forget the word altogether?]{.s1}

[If you want to understand the actual you must give your whole
attention, all your energy, to it. That attention and energy are
distracted when you create a fictitious, ideal world. So can you
completely banish the ideal? The man who is really serious, with the
urge to find out what truth is, what love is, has no concept at all. He
lives only in *what is*.]{.s1}

[To investigate the fact of your own anger you must pass no judgement on
it, for the moment you conceive of its opposite you condemn it and
therefore you cannot see it as it is. When you say you dislike or hate
someone that is a fact, although it sounds terrible. If you look at it,
go into it completely, it ceases, but if you say, 'I must not hate; I
must have love in my heart', then you are living in a hypocritical world
with double standards. To live completely, fully, in the moment is to
live with what is, the actual, without any sense of condemnation or
justification---then you understand it so totally that you are finished
with it. When you see clearly the problem is solved.]{.s1}

[But can you see the face of violence clearly---the face of violence not
only outside you but inside you, which means that you are totally free
from violence because you have not admitted ideology through which to
get rid of it? This requires very deep meditation not just a verbal
agreement or disagreement.]{.s1}

[You have now read a series of statements but have you really
understood? Your conditioned mind, your way of life, the whole structure
of the society in which you live, prevent you from looking at a fact and
being entirely free from it *immediately*. You say, 'I will think about
it; I will consider whether it is possible to be free from violence or
not. I will try to be free.' That is one of the most dreadful statements
you can make, 'I will try'. There is no trying, no doing your best.
Either you do it or you don't do it. You are admitting time while the
house is burning. The house is burning as a result of the violence
throughout the world and in yourself and you say, 'Let me think about
it. Which ideology is best to put out the fire?' When the house is on
fire, do you argue about the colour of the hair of the man who brings
the water?]{.s1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-10 .calibre}
::: section
[VII]{.s1}

 

*[Relationship---Conflict---Society---Poverty---Drugs---Dependence---Comparison---Desire---Ideals---Hypocrisy]{.s1}*

 

[The cessation of violence, which we have just been considering, does
not necessarily mean a state of mind which is at peace with itself and
therefore at peace in all its relationships.]{.s1}

[Relationship between human beings is based on the image-forming,
defensive mechanism. In all our relationships each one of us builds an
image about the other and these two images have relationship, not the
human beings themselves. The wife has an image about the
husband---perhaps not consciously but nevertheless it is there---and the
husband has an image about the wife. One has an image about one's
country and about oneself, and we are always strengthening these images
by adding more and more to them. And it is these images which have
relationship. The actual relationship between two human beings or
between many human beings completely ends when there is the formation of
images.]{.s1}

[Relationship based on these images can obviously never bring about
peace in the relationship because the images are fictitious and one
cannot live in an abstraction. And yet that is what we are all doing:
living in ideas, in theories, in symbols, in images which we have
created about ourselves and others and which are not realities at all.
All our relationships, whether they be with property, ideas or people,
are based essentially on this image-forming, and hence there is always
conflict.]{.s1}

[How is it possible then to be completely at peace within ourselves and
in all our relationships with others? After all, life is a movement in
relationship, otherwise there is no life at all, and if that life is
based on an abstraction, an idea, or a speculative assumption, then such
abstract living must inevitably bring about a relationship which becomes
a battlefield. So is it at all possible for man to live a completely
orderly inward life without any form of compulsion, imitation,
suppression or sublimation? Can he bring about such order within himself
that it is a living quality not held within the framework of ideas---an
inward tranquillity which knows no disturbance at any moment---not in
some fantastic mythical abstract world but in the daily life of the home
and the office?]{.s1}

[I think we should go into this question very carefully because there is
not one spot in our consciousness untouched by conflict. In all our
relationships, whether with the most intimate person or with a neighbour
or with society, this conflict exists---conflict being contradiction, a
state of division, separation, a duality. Observing ourselves and our
relationships to society we see that at all levels of our being there is
conflict---minor or major conflict which brings about very superficial
responses or devastating results.]{.s1}

 

[Man has accepted conflict as an innate part of daily existence because
he has accepted competition, jealousy, greed, acquisitiveness and
aggression as a natural way of life. When we accept such a way of life
we accept the structure of society as it is and live within the pattern
of respectability. And that is what most of us are caught in because
most of us want to be terribly respectable. When we examine our own
minds and hearts, the way we think, the way we feel and how we act in
our daily lives, we observe that as long as we conform to the pattern of
society, life must be a battlefield. If we do not accept it---and no
religious person can possibly accept such a society---then we will be
completely free from the psychological structure of society.]{.s1}

[Most of us are rich with the things of society. What society has
created in us and what we have created in ourselves, are greed, envy,
anger, hate, jealousy, anxiety---and with all these we are very rich.
The various religions throughout the world have preached poverty. The
monk assumes a robe, changes his name, shaves his head, enters a cell
and takes a vow of poverty and chastity; in the East he has one
loincloth, one robe, one meal a day---and we all respect such poverty.
But those men who have assumed the robe of poverty are still inwardly,
psychologically, rich with the things of society because they are still
seeking position and prestige; they belong to this order or that order,
this religion or that religion; they still live in the divisions of a
culture, a tradition. That is not poverty. Poverty is to be completely
free of society, though one may have a few more clothes, a few more
meals---good God, who cares? But unfortunately in most people there is
this urge for exhibitionism.]{.s1}

[Poverty becomes a marvellously beautiful thing when the mind is free of
society. One must become poor inwardly for then there is no seeking, no
asking, no desire, no---nothing! It is only this inward poverty that can
see the truth of a life in which there is no conflict at all. Such a
life is a benediction not to be found in any church or any temple.]{.s1}

 

[How is it possible then to free ourselves from the psychological
structure of society, which is to free ourselves from the essence of
conflict? It is not difficult to trim and lop off certain branches of
conflict, but we are asking ourselves whether it is possible to live in
complete inward and therefore outward tranquillity? Which does not mean
that we shall vegetate or stagnate. On the contrary, we shall become
dynamic, vital, full of energy.]{.s1}

[To understand and to be free of any problem we need a great deal of
passionate and sustained energy, not only physical and intellectual
energy but an energy that is not dependent on any motive, any
psychological stimulus or drug. If we are dependent on any stimulus that
very stimulus makes the mind dull and insensitive. By taking some form
of drug we may find enough energy temporarily to see things very clearly
but we revert to our former state and therefore become dependent on that
drug more and more. So all stimulation, whether of the church or of
alcohol or of drugs or of the written or spoken word, will inevitably
bring about dependence, and that dependence prevents us from seeing
clearly for ourselves and therefore from having vital energy.]{.s1}

[We all unfortunately depend psychologically on something. Why do we
depend? Why is there this urge to depend? We are taking this journey
together; you are not waiting for me to tell you the causes of your
dependence. If we enquire together we will both discover and therefore
that discovery will be your own, and hence, being yours, it will give
you vitality.]{.s1}

[I discover for myself that I depend on something---an audience, say,
which will stimulate me. I derive from that audience, from addressing a
large group of people, a kind of energy. And therefore I depend on that
audience, on those people, whether they agree or disagree. The more they
disagree the more vitality they give me. If they agree it becomes a very
shallow, empty thing. So I discover that I need an audience because it
is a very stimulating thing to address people. Now why? Why do I depend?
Because in myself I am shallow, in myself I have nothing, in myself I
have no source which is always full and rich, vital, moving, living. So
I depend. I have discovered the cause.]{.s1}

[But will the discovery of the cause free me from being dependent? The
discovery of the cause is merely intellectual, so obviously it does not
free the mind from its dependency. The mere intellectual acceptance of
an idea, or the emotional acquiescence in an ideology, cannot free the
mind from being dependent on something which will give it stimulation.
What frees the mind from dependence is seeing the whole structure and
nature of stimulation and dependence and how that dependence makes the
mind stupid, dull and inactive. Seeing the totality of it alone frees
the mind.]{.s1}

[So I must enquire into what it means to see totally. As long as I am
looking at life from a particular point of view or from a particular
experience I have cherished, or from some particular knowledge I have
gathered, which is my background, which is the 'me', I cannot see
totally. I have discovered intellectually, verbally, through analysis,
the cause of my dependence, but whatever thought investigates must
inevitably be fragmentary, so I can see the totality of something only
when thought does not interfere.]{.s1}

[Then I see the fact of my dependence; I see actually *what is*. I see
it without any like or dislike; I do not want to get rid of that
dependence or to be free from the cause of it. I observe it, and when
there is observation of this kind I see the whole picture, not a
fragment of the picture, and when the mind sees the whole picture there
is freedom. Now I have discovered that there is a dissipation of energy
when there is fragmentation. I have found the very source of the
dissipation of energy.]{.s1}

 

[You may think there is no waste of energy if you imitate, if you accept
authority, if you depend on the priest, the ritual, the dogma, the party
or on some ideology, but the following and acceptance of an ideology,
whether it is good or bad, whether it is holy or unholy, is a
fragmentary activity and therefore a cause of conflict, and conflict
will inevitably arise so long as there is a division between 'what
should be' and 'what is', and any conflict is a dissipation of
energy.]{.s1}

[If you put the question to yourself, 'How am I to be free from
conflict?', you are creating another problem and hence you are
increasing conflict, whereas if you just see it as a fact---see it as
you would see some concrete object---clearly, directly---then you will
understand essentially the truth of a life in which there is no conflict
at all.]{.s1}

[Let us put it another way. We are always comparing what we are with
what we should be. The should-be is a projection of what we think we
ought to be. Contradiction exists when there is comparison, not only
with something or somebody, but with what you were yesterday, and hence
there is conflict between what has been and what is. There is *what is*
only when there is no comparison at all, and to live with what is, is to
be peaceful. Then you can give your whole attention without any
distraction to what is within yourself---whether it be despair,
ugliness, brutality, fear, anxiety, loneliness---and live with it
completely; then there is no contradiction and hence no conflict.]{.s1}

[But all the time we are comparing ourselves---with those who are richer
or more brilliant, more intellectual, more affectionate, more famous,
more this and more that. The 'more' plays an extraordinarily important
part in our lives; this measuring ourselves all the time against
something or someone is one of the primary causes of conflict.]{.s1}

[Now why is there any comparison at all? Why do you compare yourself
with another? This comparison has been taught from childhood. In every
school A is compared with B, and A destroys himself in order to be like
B. When you do not compare at all, when there is no ideal, no opposite,
no factor of duality, when you no longer struggle to be different from
what you are---what has happened to your mind? Your mind has ceased to
create the opposite and has become highly intelligent, highly sensitive,
capable of immense passion, because effort is a dissipation of
passion---passion which is vital energy---and you cannot do anything
without passion.]{.s1}

[If you do not compare yourself with another you will be what you are.
Through comparison you hope to evolve, to grow, to become more
intelligent, more beautiful. But will you? The *fact* is what you are,
and by comparing you are fragmenting the fact which is a waste of
energy. To see what you actually are without any comparison gives you
tremendous energy to look. When you can look at yourself without
comparison you are beyond comparison, which does not mean that the mind
is stagnant with contentment. So we see in essence how the mind wastes
energy which is so necessary to understand the totality of life.]{.s1}

 

[I don't want to know with whom I am in conflict; I don't want to know
the peripheral conflicts of my being. What I want to know is why
conflict should exist at all. When I put that question to myself I see a
fundamental issue which has nothing to do with peripheral conflicts and
their solutions. I am concerned with the central issue and I
see---perhaps you see also?---that the very nature of desire, if not
properly understood, must inevitably lead to conflict.]{.s1}

[Desire is always in contradiction. I desire contradictory
things---which doesn't mean that I must destroy desire, suppress,
control or sublimate it---I simply see that desire itself is
contradictory. It is not the objects of desire but the very nature of
desire which is contradictory. And I have to understand the nature of
desire before I can understand conflict. In ourselves we are in a state
of contradiction, and that state of contradiction is brought about by
desire---desire being the pursuit of pleasure and the avoidance of pain,
which we have already been into.]{.s1}

 

[So we see desire as the root of all contradiction---wanting something
and not wanting it---a dual activity. When we do something pleasurable
there is no effort involved at all, is there? But pleasure brings pain
and then there is a struggle to avoid the pain, and that again is a
dissipation of energy. Why do we have duality at all? There is, of
course, duality in nature---man and woman, light and shade, night and
day---but inwardly, psychologically, why do we have duality? Please
think this out with me, don't wait for me to tell you. You have to
exercise your own mind to find out. My words are merely a mirror in
which to observe yourself. Why do we have this psychological duality? Is
it that we have been brought up always to compare 'what is' with 'what
should be'? We have been conditioned in what is right and what is wrong,
what is good and what is bad, what is moral and what is immoral. Has
this duality come into being because we believe that thinking about the
opposite of violence, the opposite of envy, of jealousy, of meanness,
will help us to get rid of those things? Do we use the opposite as a
lever to get rid of what is? Or is it an escape from the actual?]{.s1}

[Do you use the opposite as a means of avoiding the actual which you
don't know how to deal with? Or is it because you have been told by
thousands of years of propaganda that you must have an ideal---the
opposite of 'what is'---in order to cope with the present? When you have
an ideal you think it helps you to get rid of 'what is', but it never
does. You may preach non-violence for the rest of your life and all the
time be sowing the seeds of violence.]{.s1}

[You have a concept of what you should be and how you should act, and
all the time you are in fact acting quite differently; so you see that
principles, beliefs and ideals must inevitably lead to hypocrisy and a
dishonest life. It is the ideal that creates the opposite to what is, so
if you know how to be with 'what is', then the opposite is not
necessary.]{.s1}

[Trying to become like somebody else, or like your ideal, is one of the
main causes of contradiction, confusion and conflict. A mind that is
confused, whatever it does, at any level, will remain confused; any
action born of confusion leads to further confusion. I see this very
clearly; I see it as clearly as I see an immediate physical danger. So
what happens? I cease to act in terms of confusion any more. Therefore
inaction is complete action.]{.s1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-11 .calibre}
::: section
[VIII]{.s1}

 

*[Freedom---Revolt---Solitude---Innocence---Living with Ourselves as We
Are]{.s1}*

 

[None of the agonies of suppression, nor the brutal discipline of
conforming to a pattern has led to truth. To come upon truth the mind
must be completely free, without a spot of distortion.]{.s1}

[But first let us ask ourselves if we really want to be free? When we
talk of freedom are we talking of complete freedom or of freedom from
some inconvenient or unpleasant or undesirable thing? We would like to
be free from painful and ugly memories and unhappy experiences but keep
our pleasurable, satisfying ideologies, formulas and relationships. But
to keep the one without the other is impossible, for, as we have seen,
pleasure is inseparable from pain.]{.s1}

[So it is for each one of us to decide whether or not we want to be
completely free. If we say we do, then we must understand the nature and
structure of freedom.]{.s1}

[Is it freedom when you are free *from* something---free from pain, free
from some kind of anxiety? Or is freedom itself something entirely
different? You can be free from jealousy, say, but isn't that freedom a
reaction and therefore not freedom at all? You can be free from dogma
very easily, by analysing it, by kicking it out, but the motive for that
freedom from dogma has its own reaction because the desire to be free
from a dogma may be that it is no longer fashionable or convenient. Or
you can be free from nationalism because you believe in internationalism
or because you feel it is no longer economically necessary to cling to
this silly nationalistic dogma with its flag and all that rubbish. You
can easily put that away. Or you may react against some spiritual or
political leader who has promised you freedom as a result of discipline
or revolt. But has such rationalism, such logical conclusion, anything
to do with freedom?]{.s1}

[If you say you are free *from* something, it is a reaction which will
then become another reaction which will bring about another conformity,
another form of domination. In this way you can have a chain of
reactions and accept each reaction as freedom. But it is not freedom; it
is merely a continuity of a modified past which the mind clings
to.]{.s1}

 

[The youth of today, like all youth, are in revolt against society, and
that is a good thing in itself, but revolt is not freedom because when
you revolt it is a reaction and that reaction sets up its own pattern
and you get caught in that pattern. You think it is something new. It is
not; it is the old in a different mould. Any social or political revolt
will inevitably revert to the good old bourgeois mentality.]{.s1}

[Freedom comes only when you see and act, never through revolt. The
seeing is the acting and such action is as instantaneous as when you see
danger. Then there is no cerebration, no discussion or hesitation; the
danger itself compels the act, and therefore to see is to act and to be
free.]{.s1}

 

[Freedom is a state of mind---not freedom *from* something but a sense
of freedom, a freedom to doubt and question everything and therefore so
intense, active and vigorous that it throws away every form of
dependence, slavery, conformity and acceptance. Such freedom implies
being completely alone. But can the mind brought up in a culture so
dependent on environment and its own tendencies ever find that freedom
which is complete solitude and in which there is no leadership, no
tradition and no authority?]{.s1}

[This solitude is an inward state of mind which is not dependent on any
stimulus or any knowledge and is not the result of any experience or
conclusion. Most of us, inwardly, are never alone. There is a difference
between isolation, cutting oneself off, and aloneness, solitude. We all
know what it is to be isolated---building a wall around oneself in order
never to be hurt, never to be vulnerable, or cultivating detachment
which is another form of agony, or living in some dreamy ivory tower of
ideology. Aloneness is something quite different.]{.s1}

[You are never alone because you are full of all the memories, all the
conditioning, all the mutterings of yesterday; your mind is never clear
of all the rubbish it has accumulated. To be alone you must die to the
past. When you are alone, totally alone, not belonging to any family,
any nation, any culture, any particular continent, there is that sense
of being an outsider. The man who is completely alone in this way is
innocent and it is this innocency that frees the mind from sorrow.]{.s1}

[We carry about with us the burden of what thousands of people have said
and the memories of all our misfortunes. To abandon all that totally is
to be alone, and the mind that is alone is not only innocent but
young---not in time or age, but young, innocent, alive at whatever
age---and only such a mind can see that which is truth and that which is
not measurable by words.]{.s1}

[In this solitude you will begin to understand the necessity of living
with yourself as you are, not as you think you should be or as you have
been. See if you can look at yourself without any tremor, any false
modesty, any fear, any justification or condemnation---just live with
yourself as you actually are.]{.s1}

[It is only when you live with something intimately that you begin to
understand it. But the moment you get used to it---get used to your own
anxiety or envy or whatever it is---you are no longer living with it. If
you live by a river, after a few days you do not hear the sound of the
water any more, or if you have a picture in the room which you see every
day you lose it after a week. It is the same with the mountains, the
valleys, the trees---the same with your family, your husband, your wife.
But to live with something like jealousy, envy or anxiety you must never
get used to it, never accept it. You must care for it as you would care
for a newly planted tree, protect it against the sun, against the storm.
You must care for it, not condemn it or justify it. Therefore you begin
to love it. When you care for it, you are beginning to love it. It is
not that you love being envious or anxious, as so many people do, but
rather that you care for watching.]{.s1}

[So can you---can you and I---live with what we actually are, knowing
ourselves to be dull, envious, fearful, believing we have tremendous
affection when we have not, getting easily hurt, easily flattered and
bored---can we live with all that, neither accepting it nor denying it,
but just observing it without becoming morbid, depressed or
elated?]{.s1}

[Now let us ask ourselves a further question. Is this freedom, this
solitude, this coming into contact with the whole structure of what we
are in ourselves---is it to be come upon through time? That is, is
freedom to be achieved through a gradual process? Obviously not, because
as soon as you introduce time you are enslaving yourself more and more.
You cannot become free gradually. It is not a matter of time.]{.s1}

[The next question is, can you become conscious of that freedom? If you
say, 'I am free', then you are not free. It is like a man saying, 'I am
happy'. The moment he says, 'I am happy' he is living in a memory of
something that has gone. Freedom can only come about naturally, not
through wishing, wanting, longing. Nor will you find it by creating an
image of what you think it is. To come upon it the mind has to learn to
look at life, which is a vast movement, without the bondage of time, for
freedom lies beyond the field of consciousness.]{.s1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-12 .calibre}
::: section
[IX]{.s1}

 

*[Time---Sorrow---Death]{.s1}*

 

[I am tempted to repeat a story about a great disciple going to God and
demanding to be taught truth. This poor God says, 'My friend, it is such
a hot day, please get me a glass of water.' So the disciple goes out and
knocks on the door of the first house he comes to and a beautiful young
lady opens the door. The disciple falls in love with her and they marry
and have several children. Then one day it begins to rain, and keeps on
raining, raining, raining---the torrents are swollen, the streets are
full, the houses are being washed away. The disciple holds on to his
wife and carries his children on his shoulders and as he is being swept
away he calls out, 'Lord, please save me', and the Lord says, 'Where is
that glass of water I asked for?']{.s1}

[It is rather a good story because most of us think in terms of time.
Man lives by time. Inventing the future has been his favourite game of
escape.]{.s1}

[We think that changes in ourselves can come about in time, that order
in ourselves can be built up little by little, added to day by day. But
time doesn't bring order or peace, so we must stop thinking in terms of
gradualness. This means that there is no tomorrow for us to be peaceful
in. We have to be orderly on the instant.]{.s1}

[When there is real danger time disappears, doesn't it? There is
immediate action. But we do not see the danger of many of our problems
and therefore we invent time as a means of overcoming them. Time is a
deceiver as it doesn't do a thing to help us bring about a change in
ourselves. Time is a movement which man has divided into past, present
and future, and as long as he divides it he will always be in
conflict.]{.s1}

 

[Is learning a matter of time? We have not learnt after all these
thousands of years that there is a better way to live than by hating and
killing each other. The problem of time is a very important one to
understand if we are to resolve this life which we have helped to make
as monstrous and meaningless as it is.]{.s1}

[The first thing to understand is that we can look at time only with
that freshness and innocency of mind which we have already been into. We
are confused about our many problems and lost in that confusion. Now if
one is lost in a wood, what is the first thing one does? One stops,
doesn't one? One stops and looks round. But the more we are confused and
lost in life the more we chase around, searching, asking, demanding,
begging. So the first thing, if I may suggest it, is that you completely
stop inwardly. And when you do stop inwardly, psychologically, your mind
becomes very peaceful, very clear. Then you can really look at this
question of time.]{.s1}

[Problems exist only in time, that is when we meet an issue
incompletely. This incomplete coming together with the issue creates the
problem. When we meet a challenge partially, fragmentarily, or try to
escape from it---that is, when we meet it without complete
attention---we bring about a problem. And the problem continues so long
as we continue to give it incomplete attention, so long as we hope to
solve it *one of these days*.]{.s1}

[Do you know what time is? Not by the watch, not chronological time, but
psychological time? It is the interval between idea and action. An idea
is for self-protection obviously; it is the idea of being secure. Action
is always immediate; it is not of the past or of the future; to act must
always be in the present, but action is so dangerous, so uncertain, that
we conform to an idea which we hope will give us a certain safety.]{.s1}

[Do look at this in yourself. You have an idea of what is right or
wrong, or an ideological concept about yourself and society, and
according to that idea you are going to act. Therefore the action is in
conformity with that idea, approximating to the idea, and hence there is
always conflict. There is the idea, the interval and action. And in that
interval is the whole field of time. That interval is essentially
thought. When you think you will be happy tomorrow, then you have an
image of yourself achieving a certain result in time. Thought, through
observation, through desire, and the continuity of that desire sustained
by further thought, says, 'Tomorrow I shall be happy. Tomorrow I shall
have success. Tomorrow the world will be a beautiful place.' So thought
creates that interval which is time.]{.s1}

[Now we are asking, can we put a stop to time? Can we live so completely
that there is no tomorrow for thought to think about? Because time is
sorrow. That is, yesterday or a thousand yesterdays ago, you loved, or
you had a companion who has gone, and that memory remains and you are
thinking about that pleasure and that pain---you are looking back,
wishing, hoping, regretting, so thought, going over it again and again,
breeds this thing we call sorrow and gives continuity to time.]{.s1}

[So long as there is this interval of time which has been bred by
thought, there must be sorrow, there must be continuity of fear. So one
asks oneself can this interval come to an end? If you say, 'Will it ever
end?', then it is already an idea, something you want to achieve, and
therefore you have an interval and you are caught again.]{.s1}

 

[Now take the question of death which is an immense problem to most
people. You know death, there it is walking every day by your side. Is
it possible to meet it so completely that you do not make a problem of
it at all? In order to meet it in such a way all belief, all hope, all
fear about it must come to an end, otherwise you are meeting this
extraordinary thing with a conclusion, an image, with a premeditated
anxiety, and therefore you are meeting it with time.]{.s1}

[Time is the interval between the observer and the observed. That is,
the observer, you, is afraid to meet this thing called death. You don't
know what it means; you have all kinds of hopes and theories about it;
you believe in reincarnation or resurrection, or in something called the
soul, the atman, a spiritual entity which is timeless and which you call
by different names. Now have you found out for yourself whether there is
a soul? Or is it an idea that has been handed down to you? *Is* there
something permanent, continuous, which is beyond thought? If thought can
think about it, it is within the field of thought and therefore it
cannot be permanent because there is nothing permanent within the field
of thought. To discover that nothing is permanent is of tremendous
importance for only then is the mind free, then you can look, and in
that there is great joy.]{.s1}

[You cannot be frightened of the unknown because you do not know what
the unknown is and so there is nothing to be frightened of. Death is a
word, and it is the word, the image, that creates fear. So can you look
at death without the image of death? As long as the image exists from
which springs thought, thought must always create fear. Then you either
rationalize your fear of death and build a resistance against the
inevitable or you invent innumerable beliefs to protect you from the
fear of death. Hence there is a gap between you and the thing of which
you are afraid. In this time-space interval there must be conflict which
is fear, anxiety and self-pity. Thought, which breeds the fear of death,
says, 'Let's postpone it, let's avoid it, keep it as far away as
possible, let's not think about it'---but you *are* thinking about it.
When you say, 'I won't think about it', you have already thought out how
to avoid it. You are frightened of death because you have postponed
it.]{.s1}

 

[We have separated living from dying, and the interval between the
living and the dying is fear. That interval, that time, is created by
fear. Living is our daily torture, daily insult, sorrow and confusion,
with occasional opening of a window over enchanted seas. That is what we
call living, and we are afraid to die, which is to end this misery. We
would rather cling to the known than face the unknown---the known being
our house, our furniture, our family, our character, our work, our
knowledge, our fame, our loneliness, our gods---that little thing that
moves around incessantly within itself with its own limited pattern of
embittered existence.]{.s1}

[We think that living is always in the present and that dying is
something that awaits us at a distant time. But we have never questioned
whether this battle of everyday life is living at all. We want to know
the truth about reincarnation, we want proof of the survival of the
soul, we listen to the assertion of clairvoyants and to the conclusions
of psychical research, but we never ask, *never*, how to live---to live
with delight, with enchantment, with beauty every day. We have accepted
life as it is with all its agony and despair and have got used to it,
and think of death as something to be carefully avoided. But death is
extraordinarily like life when we know how to live. You cannot live
without dying. You cannot live if you do not die psychologically every
minute. This is not an intellectual paradox. To live completely, wholly,
every day as if it were a new loveliness, there must be dying to
everything of yesterday, otherwise you live mechanically, and a
mechanical mind can never know what love is or what freedom is.]{.s1}

 

[Most of us are frightened of dying because we don't know what it means
to live. We don't know how to live, therefore we don't know how to die.
As long as we are frightened of life we shall be frightened of death.
The man who is not frightened of life is not frightened of being
completely insecure for he understands that inwardly, psychologically,
there is no security. When there is no security there is an endless
movement and then life and death are the same. The man who lives without
conflict, who lives with beauty and love, is not frightened of death
because to love is to die.]{.s1}

[If you die to everything you know, including your family, your memory,
everything you have felt, then death is a purification, a rejuvenating
process; then death brings innocence and it is only the innocent who are
passionate, not the people who believe or who want to find out what
happens after death.]{.s1}

[To find out actually what takes place when you die you must die. This
isn't a joke. You must die---not physically but psychologically,
inwardly, die to the things you have cherished and to the things you are
bitter about. If you have died to one of your pleasures, the smallest or
the greatest, naturally, without any enforcement or argument, then you
will know what it means to die. To die is to have a mind that is
completely empty of itself, empty of its daily longings, pleasures and
agonies. Death is a renewal, a mutation, in which thought does not
function at all because thought is old. When there is death there is
something totally new. Freedom from the known is death, and then you are
living.]{.s1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-13 .calibre}
::: section
[X]{.s1}

 

*[Love]{.s1}*

 

[The demand to be safe in relationship inevitably breeds sorrow and
fear. This seeking for security is inviting insecurity. Have you ever
found security in any of your relationships? Have you? Most of us want
the security of loving and being loved, but is there love when each one
of us is seeking his own security, his own particular path? We are not
loved because we don't know how to love.]{.s1}

[What is love? The word is so loaded and corrupted that I hardly like to
use it. Everybody talks of love---every magazine and newspaper and every
missionary talks everlastingly of love. I love my country, I love my
king, I love some book, I love that mountain, I love pleasure, I love my
wife, I love God. Is love an idea? If it is, it can be cultivated,
nourished, cherished, pushed around, twisted in any way you like. When
you say you love God what does it mean? It means that you love a
projection of your own imagination, a projection of yourself clothed in
certain forms of respectability according to what you think is noble and
holy; so to say, 'I love God', is absolute nonsense. When you worship
God you are worshipping yourself---and that is not love.]{.s1}

 

[Because we cannot solve this human thing called love we run away into
abstractions. Love may be the ultimate solution to all man's
difficulties, problems and travails, so how are we going to find out
what love is? By merely defining it? The church has defined it one way,
society another, and there are all sorts of deviations and perversions.
Adoring someone, sleeping with someone, the emotional exchange, the
companionship---is that what we mean by love? That has been the norm,
the pattern, and it has become so tremendously personal, sensuous, and
limited that religions have declared that love is something much more
than this. In what they call human love they see there is pleasure,
competition, jealousy, the desire to possess, to hold, to control and to
interfere with another's thinking, and knowing the complexity of all
this they say there must be another kind of love, divine, beautiful,
untouched, uncorrupted.]{.s1}

[Throughout the world, so-called holy men have maintained that to look
at a woman is something totally wrong: they say you cannot come near to
God if you indulge in sex, therefore they push it aside although they
are eaten up with it. But by denying sexuality they put out their eyes
and cut out their tongues for they deny the whole beauty of the earth.
They have starved their hearts and minds; they are dehydrated human
beings; they have banished beauty because beauty is associated with
woman.]{.s1}

[Can love be divided into the sacred and the profane, the human and the
divine, or is there only love? Is love of the one and not of the many?
If I say, 'I love you', does that exclude the love of the other? Is love
personal or impersonal? Moral or immoral? Family or non-family? If you
love mankind can you love the particular? Is love sentiment? Is love
emotion? Is love pleasure and desire? All these questions indicate,
don't they, that we have ideas about love, ideas about what it should or
should not be, a pattern or a code developed by the culture in which we
live.]{.s1}

[So to go into the question of what love is we must first free it from
the encrustation of centuries, put away all ideals and ideologies of
what it should or should not be. To divide anything into what should be
and what is, is the most deceptive way of dealing with life.]{.s1}

 

[Now how am I going to find out what this flame is which we call
love---not how to express it to another but what it means in itself? I
will first reject what the church, what society, what my parents and
friends, what every person and every book has said about it because I
want to find out for myself what it is. Here is an enormous problem that
involves the whole of mankind, there have been a thousand ways of
defining it and I myself am caught in some pattern or other according to
what I like or enjoy at the moment---so shouldn't I, in order to
understand it, first free myself from my own inclinations and
prejudices? I am confused, torn by my own desires, so I say to myself,
'First clear up your own confusion. Perhaps you may be able to discover
what love is through what it is not.']{.s1}

[The government says, 'Go and kill for the love of your country'. Is
that love? Religion says, 'Give up sex for the love of God'. Is that
love? Is love desire? Don't say no. For most of us it is---desire with
pleasure, the pleasure that is derived through the senses, through
sexual attachment and fulfilment. I am not against sex, but see what is
involved in it. What sex gives you momentarily is the total abandonment
of yourself, then you are back again with your turmoil, so you want a
repetition over and over again of that state in which there is no worry,
no problem, no self. You say you love your wife. In that love is
involved sexual pleasure, the pleasure of having someone in the house to
look after your children, to cook. You depend on her; she has given you
her body, her emotions, her encouragement, a certain feeling of security
and well-being. Then she turns away from you; she gets bored or goes off
with someone else, and your whole emotional balance is destroyed, and
this disturbance, which you don't like, is called jealousy. There is
pain in it, anxiety, hate and violence. So what you are really saying
is, 'As long as you belong to me I love you but the moment you don't I
begin to hate you. As long as I can rely on you to satisfy my demands,
sexual and otherwise, I love you, but the moment you cease to supply
what I want I don't like you.' So there is antagonism between you, there
is separation, and when you feel separate from another there is no love.
But if you can live with your wife without thought creating all these
contradictory states, these endless quarrels in yourself, then
perhaps---*perhaps*---you will know what love is. Then you are
completely free and so is she, whereas if you depend on her for all your
pleasure you are a slave to her. So when one loves there must be
freedom, not only from the other person but from oneself.]{.s1}

[This belonging to another, being psychologically nourished by another,
depending on another---in all this there must always be anxiety, fear,
jealousy, guilt, and so long as there is fear there is no love; a mind
ridden with sorrow will never know what love is; sentimentality and
emotionalism have nothing whatsoever to do with love. And so love is not
to do with pleasure and desire.]{.s1}

[Love is not the product of thought which is the past. Thought cannot
possibly cultivate love. Love is not hedged about and caught in
jealousy, for jealousy is of the past. Love is always active present. It
is not 'I will love' or 'I have loved'. If you know love you will not
follow anybody. Love does not obey. When you love there is neither
respect nor disrespect.]{.s1}

[Don't you know what it means really to love somebody---to love without
hate, without jealousy, without anger, without wanting to interfere with
what he is doing or thinking, without condemning, without
comparing---don't you know what it means? Where there is love is there
comparison? When you love someone with all your heart, with all your
mind, with all your body, with your entire being, is there comparison?
When you totally abandon yourself to that love there is not the
other.]{.s1}

[Does love have responsibility and duty, and will it use those words?
When you do something out of duty is there any love in it? In duty there
is no love. The structure of duty in which the human being is caught is
destroying him. So long as you are compelled to do something because it
is your duty you don't love what you are doing. When there is love there
is no duty and no responsibility.]{.s1}

[Most parents unfortunately think they are responsible for their
children and their sense of responsibility takes the form of telling
them what they should do and what they should not do, what they should
become and what they should not become. The parents want their children
to have a secure position in society. What they call responsibility is
part of that respectability they worship; and it seems to me that where
there is respectability there is no order; they are concerned only with
becoming a perfect bourgeois. When they prepare their children to fit
into society they are perpetuating war, conflict and brutality. Do you
call that care and love?]{.s1}

[Really to care is to care as you would for a tree or a plant, watering
it, studying its needs, the best soil for it, looking after it with
gentleness and tenderness---but when you prepare your children to fit
into society you are preparing them to be killed. If you loved your
children you would have no war.]{.s1}

[When you lose someone you love you shed tears---are your tears for
yourself or for the one who is dead? Are you crying for yourself or for
another? Have you ever cried for another? Have you ever cried for your
son who was killed on the battlefield? You have cried, but do those
tears come out of self-pity or have you cried because a human being has
been killed? If you cry out of self-pity your tears have no meaning
because you are concerned about yourself. If you are crying because you
are bereft of one in whom you have invested a great deal of affection,
it was not really affection. When you cry for your brother who dies cry
for *him*. It is very easy to cry for yourself because he is gone.
Apparently you are crying because your heart is touched, but it is not
touched for him, it is only touched by self-pity and self-pity makes you
hard, encloses you, makes you dull and stupid.]{.s1}

[When you cry for yourself, is it love---crying because you are lonely,
because you have been left, because you are no longer
powerful---complaining of your lot, your environment---always *you* in
tears? If you understand this, which means to come in contact with it as
directly as you would touch a tree or a pillar or a hand, then you will
see that sorrow is self-created, sorrow is created by thought, sorrow is
the outcome of time. I had my brother three years ago, now he is dead,
now I am lonely, aching, there is no one to whom I can look for comfort
or companionship, and it brings tears to my eyes.]{.s1}

[You can see all this happening inside yourself if you watch it. You can
see it fully, completely, in one glance, not take analytical time over
it. You can see in a moment the whole structure and nature of this
shoddy little thing called 'me', my tears, my family, my nation, my
belief, my religion---all that ugliness, it is all inside you. When you
see it with your heart, not with your mind, when you see it from the
very bottom of your heart, then you have the key that will end
sorrow.]{.s1}

[Sorrow and love cannot go together, but in the Christian world they
have idealized suffering, put it on a cross and worshipped it, implying
that you can never escape from suffering except through that one
particular door, and this is the whole structure of an exploiting
religious society.]{.s1}

 

[So when you ask what love is, you may be too frightened to see the
answer. It may mean complete upheaval; it may break up the family; you
may discover that you do not love your wife or husband or children---do
you?---you may have to shatter the house you have built, you may never
go back to the temple.]{.s1}

[But if you still want to find out, you will see that fear is not love,
dependence is not love, jealousy is not love, possessiveness and
domination are not love, responsibility and duty are not love, self-pity
is not love, the agony of not being loved is not love, love is not the
opposite of hate any more than humility is the opposite of vanity. So if
you can eliminate all these, not by forcing them but by washing them
away as the rain washes the dust of many days from a leaf, then perhaps
you will come upon this strange flower which man always hungers
after.]{.s1}

[If you have not got love---not just in little drops but in
abundance---if you are not filled with it---the world will go to
disaster. You know intellectually that the unity of mankind is essential
and that love is the only way, but who is going to teach you how to
love? Will any authority, any method, any system, tell you how to love?
If anyone tells you, it is not love. Can you say, 'I will practise love.
I will sit down day after day and think about it. I will practise being
kind and gentle and force myself to pay attention to others'? Do you
mean to say that you can discipline yourself to love, exercise the will
to love? When you exercise discipline and will to love, love goes out of
the window. By practising some method or system of loving you may become
extraordinarily clever or more kindly or get into a state of
non-violence, but that has nothing whatsoever to do with love.]{.s1}

 

[In this torn desert world there is no love because pleasure and desire
play the greatest roles, yet without love your daily life has no
meaning. And you cannot have love if there is no beauty. Beauty is not
something you see---not a beautiful tree, a beautiful picture, a
beautiful building or a beautiful woman. There is beauty only when your
heart and mind know what love is. Without love and that sense of beauty
there is no virtue, and you know very well that, do what you will,
improve society, feed the poor, you will only be creating more mischief,
for without love there is only ugliness and poverty in your own heart
and mind. But when there is love and beauty, whatever you do is right,
whatever you do is in order. If you know how to love, then you can do
what you like because it will solve all other problems.]{.s1}

[So we reach the point: can the mind come upon love without discipline,
without thought, without enforcement, without any book, any teacher or
leader---come upon it as one comes upon a lovely sunset?]{.s1}

[It seems to me that one thing is absolutely necessary and that is
passion without motive---passion that is not the result of some
commitment or attachment, passion that is not lust. A man who does not
know what passion is will never know love because love can come into
being only when there is total self-abandonment.]{.s1}

[A mind that is seeking is not a passionate mind and to come upon love
without seeking it is the only way to find it---to come upon it
unknowingly and not as the result of any effort or experience. Such a
love, you will find, is not of time; such a love is both personal and
impersonal, is both the one and the many. Like a flower that has perfume
you can smell it or pass it by. That flower is for everybody *and* for
the one who takes trouble to breathe it deeply and look at it with
delight. Whether one is very near in the garden, or very far away, it is
the same to the flower because it is full of that perfume and therefore
it is sharing with everybody.]{.s1}

[Love is something that is new, fresh, alive. It has no yesterday and no
tomorrow. It is beyond the turmoil of thought. It is only the innocent
mind which knows what love is, and the innocent mind can live in the
world which is not innocent. To find this extraordinary thing which man
has sought endlessly through sacrifice, through worship, through
relationship, through sex, through every form of pleasure and pain, is
only possible when thought comes to understand itself and comes
naturally to an end. Then love has no opposite, then love has no
conflict.]{.s1}

[You may ask, 'If I find such a love, what happens to my wife, my
children, my family? They must have security.' When you put such a
question you have never been outside the field of thought, the field of
consciousness. When once you have been outside that field you will never
ask such a question because then you will know what love is in which
there is no thought and therefore no time. You may read this mesmerized
and enchanted, but actually to go beyond thought and time---which means
going beyond sorrow---is to be aware that there is a different dimension
called love.]{.s1}

[But you don't know how to come to this extraordinary fount---so what do
you do? If you don't know what to do, you do nothing, don't you?
Absolutely nothing. Then inwardly you are completely silent. Do you
understand what that means? It means that you are not seeking, not
wanting, not pursuing; there is no centre at all. Then there is
love.]{.s1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-14 .calibre}
::: section
[XI]{.s1}

 

*[To Look and to Listen---Art---Beauty---Austerity---Images---Problems
---Space]{.s1}*

 

[We have been enquiring into the nature of love and have come to a
point, I think, which needs much greater penetration, a much greater
awareness of the issue. We have discovered that for most people love
means comfort, security, a guarantee for the rest of their lives of
continuous emotional satisfaction. Then someone like me comes along and
says, 'Is that really love?' and questions you and asks you to look
inside yourself. And you try not to look because it is very
disturbing---you would rather discuss the soul or the political or
economic situation---but when you are driven into a corner to look, you
realize that what you have always thought of as love is not love at all;
it is a mutual gratification, a mutual exploitation.]{.s1}

[When I say, 'Love has no tomorrow and no yesterday', or, 'When there is
no centre then there is love', it has reality for me but not for you.
You may quote it and make it into a formula but that has no validity.
You have to see it for yourself, but to do so there must be freedom to
look, freedom from all condemnation, all judgement, all agreeing or
disagreeing.]{.s1}

 

[Now, to look is one of the most difficult things in life---or to
listen---to look and listen are the same. If your eyes are blinded with
your worries, you cannot see the beauty of the sunset. Most of us have
lost touch with nature. Civilization is tending more and more towards
large cities; we are becoming more and more an urban people, living in
crowded apartments and having very little space even to look at the sky
of an evening and morning, and therefore we are losing touch with a
great deal of beauty. I don't know if you have noticed how few of us
look at a sunrise or a sunset or the moonlight or the reflection of
light on water.]{.s1}

[Having lost touch with nature we naturally tend to develop intellectual
capacities. We read a great many books, go to a great many museums and
concerts, watch television and have many other entertainments. We quote
endlessly from other people's ideas and think and talk a great deal
about art. Why is it that we depend so much upon art? Is it a form of
escape, of stimulation? If you are directly in contact with nature; if
you watch the movement of a bird on the wing, see the beauty of every
movement of the sky, watch the shadows on the hills or the beauty on the
face of another, do you think you will want to go to any museum to look
at any picture? Perhaps it is because you do not know how to look at all
the things about you that you resort to some form of drug to stimulate
you to see better.]{.s1}

[There is a story of a religious teacher who used to talk every morning
to his disciples. One morning he got on to the platform and was just
about to begin when a little bird came and sat on the window sill and
began to sing, and sang away with full heart. Then it stopped and flew
away and the teacher said, 'The sermon for this morning is over'.]{.s1}

 

[It seems to me that one of our greatest difficulties is to see for
ourselves really clearly, not only outward things but inward life. When
we say we see a tree or a flower or a person, do we actually see them?
Or do we merely see the image that the word has created? That is, when
you look at a tree or at a cloud of an evening full of light and
delight, do you actually see it, not only with your eyes and
intellectually, but totally, completely?]{.s1}

[Have you ever experimented with looking at an objective thing like a
tree without any of the associations, any of the knowledge you have
acquired about it, without any prejudice, any judgement, any words
forming a screen between you and the tree and preventing you from seeing
it as it actually is? Try it and see what actually takes place when you
observe the tree with all your being, with the totality of your energy.
In that intensity you will find that there is no observer at all; there
is only attention. It is when there is inattention that there is the
observer and the observed. When you are looking at something with
complete attention there is no space for a conception, a formula or a
memory. This is important to understand because we are going into
something which requires very careful investigation.]{.s1}

[It is only a mind that looks at a tree or the stars or the sparkling
waters of a river with complete self-abandonment that knows what beauty
is, and when we are actually *seeing* we are in a state of love. We
generally know beauty through comparison or through what man has put
together, which means that we attribute beauty to some object. I see
what I consider to be a beautiful building and that beauty I appreciate
because of my knowledge of architecture and by comparing it with other
buildings I have seen. But now I am asking myself, 'Is there a beauty
without object?' When there is an observer who is the censor, the
experiencer, the thinker, there is no beauty because beauty is something
external, something the observer looks at and judges, but when there is
no observer---and this demands a great deal of meditation, of
enquiry---then there is beauty without the object.]{.s1}

[Beauty lies in the total abandonment of the observer and the observed
and there can be self-abandonment only when there is total
austerity---not the austerity of the priest with its harshness, its
sanctions, rules and obedience---not austerity in clothes, ideas, food
and behaviour---but the austerity of being totally simple which is
complete humility. Then there is no achieving, no ladder to climb; there
is only the first step and the first step is the everlasting step.]{.s1}

[Say you are walking by yourself or with somebody and you have stopped
talking. You are surrounded by nature and there is no dog barking, no
noise of a car passing or even the flutter of a bird. You are completely
silent and nature around you is also wholly silent. In that state of
silence both in the observer and the observed---when the observer is not
translating what he observes into thought---in that silence there is a
different quality of beauty. There is neither nature nor the observer.
There is a state of mind wholly, completely, alone; it is alone---not in
isolation---alone in stillness and that stillness is beauty. When you
love, is there an observer? There is an observer only when love is
desire and pleasure. When desire and pleasure are not associated with
love, then love is intense. It is, like beauty, something totally new
every day. As I have said, it has no yesterday and no tomorrow.]{.s1}

 

[It is only when we see without any preconception, any image, that we
are able to be in direct contact with anything in life. All our
relationships are really imaginary---that is, based on an image formed
by thought. If I have an image about you and you have an image about me,
naturally we don't see each other at all as we actually are. What we see
is the images we have formed about each other which prevent us from
being in contact, and that is why our relationships go wrong.]{.s1}

[When I say I know you, I mean I knew you yesterday. I do not know you
actually *now*. All I know is my image of you. That image is put
together by what you have said in praise of me or to insult me, what you
have done to me---it is put together by all the memories I have of
you---and your image of me is put together in the same way, and it is
those images which have relationship and which prevent us from really
communing with each other.]{.s1}

[Two people who have lived together for a long time have an image of
each other which prevents them from really being in relationship. If we
understand relationship we can cooperate but cooperation cannot possibly
exist through images, through symbols, through ideological conceptions.
Only when we understand the true relationship between each other is
there a possibility of love, and love is denied when we have images.
Therefore it is important to understand, not intellectually but
*actually* in your daily life, how you have built images about your
wife, your husband, your neighbour, your child, your country, your
leaders, your politicians, your gods---you have nothing but
images.]{.s1}

[These images create the space between you and what you observe and in
that space there is conflict, so what we are going to find out now
together is whether it is possible to be free of the space we create,
not only outside ourselves but in ourselves, the space which divides
people in all their relationships.]{.s1}

[Now the very attention you give to a problem is the energy that solves
that problem. When you give your complete attention---I mean with
everything in you---there is no observer at all. There is only the state
of attention which is total energy, and that total energy is the highest
form of intelligence. Naturally that state of mind must be completely
silent and that silence, that stillness, comes when there is total
attention, not disciplined stillness. That total silence in which there
is neither the observer nor the thing observed is the highest form of a
religious mind. But what takes place in that state cannot be put into
words because what is said in words is not the fact. To find out for
yourself you have to go through it.]{.s1}

[Every problem is related to every other problem so that if you can
solve one problem completely---it does not matter what it is---you will
see that you are able to meet all other problems easily and resolve
them. We are talking, of course, of psychological problems. We have
already seen that a problem exists only in time, that is when we meet
the issue incompletely. So not only must we be aware of the nature and
structure of the problem and see it completely, but meet it as it arises
and resolve it immediately so that it does not take root in the mind. If
one allows a problem to endure for a month or a day, or even for a few
minutes, it distorts the mind. So is it possible to meet a problem
immediately without any distortion and be immediately, completely, free
of it and not allow a memory, a scratch on the mind, to remain? These
memories are the images we carry about with us and it is these images
which meet this extraordinary thing called life and therefore there is a
contradiction and hence conflict. Life is very real---life is not an
abstraction---and when you meet it with images there are problems.]{.s1}

 

[Is it possible to meet every issue without this space-time interval,
without the gap between oneself and the thing of which one is afraid? It
is possible only when the observer has no continuity, the observer who
is the builder of the image, the observer who is a collection of
memories and ideas, who is a bundle of abstractions.]{.s1}

[When you look at the stars there is you who are looking at the stars in
the sky; the sky is flooded with brilliant stars, there is cool air, and
there is you, the observer, the experiencer, the thinker, you with your
aching heart, you, the centre, creating space. You will never understand
about the space between yourself and the stars, yourself and your wife
or husband, or friend, because you have never looked without the image,
and that is why you do not know what beauty is or what love is. You talk
about it, you write about it, but you have never known it except perhaps
at rare intervals of total self-abandonment. So long as there is a
centre creating space around itself there is neither love nor beauty.
When there is no centre and no circumference then there is love. And
when you love you *are* beauty.]{.s1}

[When you look at a face opposite, you are looking from a centre and the
centre creates the space between person and person, and that is why our
lives are so empty and callous. You cannot cultivate love or beauty, nor
can you invent truth, but if you are all the time aware of what you are
doing, you can cultivate awareness and out of that awareness you will
begin to see the nature of pleasure, desire and sorrow and the utter
loneliness and boredom of man, and then you will begin to come upon that
thing called 'the space'.]{.s1}

[When there is space between you and the object you are observing you
will know there is no love, and without love, however hard you try to
reform the world or bring about a new social order or however much you
talk about improvements, you will only create agony. So it is up to you.
There is no leader, there is no teacher, there is nobody to tell you
what to do. You are alone in this mad brutal world.]{.s1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-15 .calibre}
::: section
[XII]{.s1}

 

*[The Observer and the Observed]{.s1}*

 

[Please go on with me a little further. It may be rather complex, rather
subtle, but please go on with it.]{.s1}

[Now, when I build an image about you or about anything, I am able to
watch that image, so there is the image and the observer of the image. I
see someone, say, with a red shirt on and my immediate reaction is that
I like it or that I don't like it. The like or dislike is the result of
my culture, my training, my associations, my inclinations, my acquired
and inherited characteristics. It is from that centre that I observe and
make my judgement, and thus the observer is separate from the thing he
observes.]{.s1}

[But the observer is aware of more than one image; he creates thousands
of images. But is the observer different from these images? Isn't he
just another image? He is always adding to and subtracting from what he
is; he is a living thing all the time weighing, comparing, judging,
modifying and changing as a result of pressures from outside and
within---living in the field of consciousness which is his own
knowledge, influence and innumerable calculations. At the same time when
you look at the observer, who is yourself, you see that he is made up of
memories, experiences, accidents, influences, traditions and infinite
varieties of suffering, all of which are the past. So the observer is
both the past and the present, and tomorrow is waiting and that is also
a part of him. He is half alive and half dead and with this death and
life he is looking, with the dead and living leaf. And in that state of
mind, which is within the field of time, you (the observer) look at
fear, at jealousy, at war, at the family (that ugly enclosed entity
called the family) and try to solve the problem of the thing observed
which is the challenge, the new; you are always translating the new in
terms of the old and therefore you are everlastingly in conflict.]{.s1}

 

[One image, as the observer, observes dozens of other images around
himself and inside himself, and he says, 'I like this image, I'm going
to keep it' or 'I don't like that image so I'll get rid of it', but the
observer himself has been put together by the various images which have
come into being through reaction to various other images. So we come to
a point where we can say, 'The observer is also the image, only he has
separated himself and observes. This observer who has come into being
through various other images thinks himself permanent and between
himself and the images he has created there is a division, a time
interval. This creates conflict between himself and the images he
believes to be the cause of his troubles. So then he says, "I must get
rid of this conflict", but the very desire to get rid of the conflict
creates another image.']{.s1}

[Awareness of all this, which is real meditation, has revealed that
there is a central image put together by all the other images, and this
central image, the observer, is the censor, the experiencer, the
evaluator, the judge who wants to conquer or subjugate the other images
or destroy them altogether. The other images are the result of
judgements, opinions and conclusions by the observer, and the observer
is the result of all the other images---therefore the observer *is* the
observed.]{.s1}

[So awareness has revealed the different states of one's mind, has
revealed the various images and the contradiction between the images,
has revealed the resulting conflict and the despair at not being able to
do anything about it and the various attempts to escape from it. All
this has been revealed through cautious hesitant awareness, and then
comes the awareness that the observer *is* the observed. It is not a
superior entity who becomes aware of this, it is not a higher self (the
superior entity, the higher self, are merely inventions, further
images); it is the awareness itself which has revealed that the observer
is the observed.]{.s1}

 

[If you ask yourself a question, who is the entity who is going to
receive the answer? And who is the entity who is going to enquire? If
the entity is part of consciousness, part of thought, then it is
incapable of finding out. What it can find out is only a state of
awareness. But if in that state of awareness there is still an entity
who says, 'I must be aware, I must practise awareness', that again is
another image.]{.s1}

[This awareness that the observer is the observed is not a process of
identification with the observed. To identify ourselves with something
is fairly easy. Most of us identify ourselves with something---with our
family, our husband or wife, our nation---and that leads to great misery
and great wars. We are considering something entirely different and we
must understand it not verbally but in our core, right at the root of
our being. In ancient China before an artist began to paint anything---a
tree, for instance---he would sit down in front of it for days, months,
years, it didn't matter how long, until he *was* the tree. He did not
identify himself with the tree but he was the tree. This means that
there was no space between him and the tree, no space between the
observer and the observed, no experiencer experiencing the beauty, the
movement, the shadow, the depth of a leaf, the quality of colour. He was
totally the tree, and in that state only could he paint.]{.s1}

 

[Any movement on the part of the observer, if he has not realized that
the observer is the observed, creates only another series of images and
again he is caught in them. But what takes place when the observer is
aware that the observer is the observed? Go slowly, go very slowly,
because it is a very complex thing we are going into now. What takes
place? The observer does not act at all. The observer has always said,
'I must do something about these images, I must suppress them or give
them a different shape'; he is always active in regard to the observed,
acting and reacting passionately or casually, and this action of like
and dislike on the part of the observer is called positive action---'I
like, therefore I must hold. I dislike therefore I must get rid of.' But
when the observer realizes that the thing about which he is acting is
*himself*, then there is no conflict between himself and the image. He
*is that*. He is not separate from that. When he was separate, he did,
or tried to do, something about it, but when the observer realizes that
he *is* that, then there is no like or dislike and conflict
ceases.]{.s1}

[For what is he to do? If something *is* you, what can you do? You
cannot rebel against it or run away from it or even accept it. It *is
there*. So all action that is the outcome of reaction to like and
dislike has come to an end.]{.s1}

[Then you will find that there is an awareness that has become
tremendously alive. It is not bound to any central issue or to any
image---and from that intensity of awareness there is a different
quality of attention and therefore the mind---because the mind is this
awareness---has become extraordinarily sensitive and highly
intelligent.]{.s1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-16 .calibre}
::: section
[XIII]{.s1}

 

*[What is Thinking?---Ideas and Action---Challenge---Matter---The
Beginning of Thought]{.s1}*

 

[Let us now go into the question of what is thinking, the significance
of that thought which must be exercised with care, logic and sanity (for
our daily work) and that which has no significance at all. Unless we
know the two kinds, we cannot possibly understand something much deeper
which thought cannot touch. So let us try to understand this whole
complex structure of what is thinking, what is memory, how thought
originates, how thought conditions all our actions; and in understanding
all this we shall perhaps come across something which thought has never
discovered, which thought cannot open the door to.]{.s1}

[Why has thought become so important in all our lives---thought being
ideas, being the response to the accumulated memories in the brain
cells? Perhaps many of you have not even asked such a question before,
or if you have you may have said, 'It's of very little importance---what
is important is emotion.' But I don't see how you can separate the two.
If thought doesn't give continuity to feeling, feeling dies very
quickly. So why in our daily lives, in our grinding, boring, frightened
lives, has thought taken on such inordinate importance? Ask yourself as
I am asking myself---why is one a slave to thought---cunning, clever,
thought which can organize, which can start things, which has invented
so much, bred so many wars, created so much fear, so much anxiety, which
is forever making images and chasing its own tail---thought which has
enjoyed the pleasure of yesterday and given that pleasure continuity in
the present and also in the future---thought which is always active,
chattering, moving, constructing, taking away, adding, supposing?]{.s1}

[Ideas have become far more important to us than action---ideas so
cleverly expressed in books by the intellectuals in every field. The
more cunning, the more subtle, those ideas are the more we worship them
and the books that contain them. We *are* those books, we *are* those
ideas, so heavily conditioned are we by them. We are forever discussing
ideas and ideals and dialectically offering opinions. Every religion has
its dogma, its formula, its own scaffold to reach the gods, and when
enquiring into the beginning of thought we are questioning the
importance of this whole edifice of ideas. We have separated ideas from
action because ideas are always of the past and action is always the
present---that is, living is always the present. We are afraid of living
and therefore the past, as ideas, has become so important to us.]{.s1}

 

[It is really extraordinarily interesting to watch the operation of
one's own thinking, just to observe how one thinks, where that reaction
we call thinking, springs from. Obviously from memory. Is there a
beginning to thought at all? If there is, can we find out its
beginning---that is, the beginning of memory, because if we had no
memory we would have no thought?]{.s1}

[We have seen how thought sustains and gives continuity to a pleasure
that we had yesterday and how thought also sustains the reverse of
pleasure which is fear and pain, so the experiencer, who is the thinker,
*is* the pleasure and the pain and also the entity who gives nourishment
to the pleasure and pain. The thinker separates pleasure from pain. He
doesn't see that in the very demand for pleasure he is inviting pain and
fear. Thought in human relationships is always demanding pleasure which
it covers by different words like loyalty, helping, giving, sustaining,
serving. I wonder why we want to serve? The petrol station offers good
service. What do those words mean, to help, to give, to serve? What is
it all about? Does a flower full of beauty, light and loveliness say, 'I
am giving, helping, serving'? It *is*! And because it is not trying to
do anything it covers the earth.]{.s1}

[Thought is so cunning, so clever, that it distorts everything for its
own convenience. Thought in its demand for pleasure brings its own
bondage. Thought is the breeder of duality in all our relationships:
there is violence in us which gives us pleasure but there is also the
desire for peace, the desire to be kind and gentle. This is what is
going on all the time in all our lives. Thought not only breeds this
duality in us, this contradiction, but it also accumulates the
innumerable memories we have had of pleasure and pain, and from these
memories it is reborn. So thought is the past, thought is always old, as
I have already said.]{.s1}

[As every challenge is met in terms of the past---a challenge being
always new---our meeting of the challenge will always be totally
inadequate, hence contradiction, conflict and all the misery and sorrow
we are heir to. Our little brain is in conflict *whatever* it does.
Whether it aspires, imitates, conforms, suppresses, sublimates, takes
drugs to expand itself---*whatever* it does---it is in a state of
conflict and will produce conflict.]{.s1}

 

[Those who think a great deal are very materialistic because thought is
matter. Thought is matter as much as the floor, the wall, the telephone,
are matter. Energy functioning in a pattern becomes matter. There is
energy and there is matter. That is all life is. We may think thought is
not matter but it is. Thought is matter as an ideology. Where there is
energy it becomes matter. Matter and energy are interrelated. The one
cannot exist without the other, and the more harmony there is between
the two, the more balance, the more active the brain cells are. Thought
has set up this pattern of pleasure, pain, fear, and has been
functioning inside it for thousands of years and cannot break the
pattern because it has created it.]{.s1}

[A new fact cannot be seen by thought. It can be understood later by
thought, verbally, but the understanding of a new fact is not reality to
thought. Thought can never solve any psychological problem. However
clever, however cunning, however erudite, whatever the structure thought
creates through science, through an electronic brain, through compulsion
or necessity, thought is never new and therefore it can never answer any
tremendous question. The old brain cannot solve the enormous problem of
living.]{.s1}

[Thought is crooked because it can invent anything and see things that
are not there. It can perform the most extraordinary tricks, and
therefore it cannot be depended upon. But if you understand the whole
structure of how you think, why you think, the words you use, the way
you behave in your daily life, the way you talk to people, the way you
treat people, the way you walk, the way you eat---if you are aware of
all these things then your mind will not deceive you, then there is
nothing to be deceived. The mind then is not something that demands,
that subjugates; it becomes extraordinarily quiet, pliable, sensitive,
alone, and in that state there is no deception whatsoever.]{.s1}

[Have you ever noticed that when you are in a state of complete
attention the observer, the thinker, the centre, the 'me', comes to an
end? In that state of attention thought begins to wither away.]{.s1}

[If one wants to see a thing very clearly, one's mind must be very
quiet, without all the prejudices, the chattering, the dialogue, the
images, the pictures---all that must be put aside to look. And it is
only in silence that you can observe the beginning of thought---not when
you are searching, asking questions, waiting for a reply. So it is only
when you are completely quiet, right through your being, having put that
question, 'What is the beginning of thought?', that you will begin to
see, out of that silence, how thought takes shape.]{.s1}

[If there is an awareness of how thought begins then there is no need to
control thought. We spend a great deal of time and waste a great deal of
energy all through our lives, not only at school, trying to control our
thoughts---'This is a good thought, I must think about it a lot. This is
an ugly thought, I must suppress it.' There is a battle going on all the
time between one thought and another, one desire and another, one
pleasure dominating all other pleasures. But if there is an awareness of
the beginning of thought, then there is no contradiction in
thought.]{.s1}

 

[Now when you hear a statement like 'Thought is always old' or 'Time is
sorrow', thought begins to translate it and interpret it. But the
translation and interpretation are based on yesterday's knowledge and
experience, so you will invariably translate according to your
conditioning. But if you look at those statements and do not interpret
them all but just give them your complete attention (not concentration)
you will find there is neither the observer nor the observed, neither
the thinker nor the thought. Don't say, 'Which began first?' That is a
clever argument which leads nowhere. You can observe in yourself that as
long as there is no thought---which doesn't mean a state of amnesia, of
blankness---as long as there is no thought derived from memory,
experience or knowledge, which are all of the past, there is no thinker
at all. This is not a philosophical or mystical affair. We are dealing
with actual facts, and you will see, if you have gone this far in the
journey, that you will respond to a challenge, not with the old brain,
but totally anew.]{.s1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-17 .calibre}
::: section
[XIV]{.s1}

 

*[The Burdens of Yesterday---The Quiet
Mind---Communication---Achievement---Discipline---Silence---Truth and
Reality]{.s1}*

 

[In the life we generally lead there is very little solitude. Even when
we are alone our lives are crowded by so many influences, so much
knowledge, so many memories of so many experiences, so much anxiety,
misery and conflict that our minds become duller and duller, more and
more insensitive, functioning in a monotonous routine. Are we ever
alone? Or are we carrying with us all the burdens of yesterday?]{.s1}

[There is a rather nice story of two monks walking from one village to
another and they come upon a young girl sitting on the bank of a river,
crying. And one of the monks goes up to her and says, 'Sister, what are
you crying about?' She says, 'You see that house over there across the
river? I came over this morning early and had no trouble wading across
but now the river has swollen and I can't get back. There is no boat.'
'Oh,' says the monk, 'that is no problem at all', and he picks her up
and carries her across the river and leaves her on the other side. And
the two monks go on together. After a couple of hours, the other monk
says, 'Brother, we have taken a vow never to touch a woman. What you
have done is a terrible sin. Didn't you have pleasure, a great
sensation, in touching a woman?' and the other monk replies, 'I left her
behind two hours ago. You are still carrying her, aren't you?']{.s1}

[That is what we do. We carry our burdens all the time; we never die to
them, we never leave them behind. It is only when we give complete
attention to a problem and solve it *immediately*---never carrying it
over to the next day, the next minute---that there is solitude. Then,
even, if we live in a crowded house or are in a bus, we have solitude.
And that solitude indicates a fresh mind, an innocent mind.]{.s1}

 

[To have inward solitude and space is very important because it implies
freedom to be, to go, to function, to fly. After all, goodness can only
flower in space just as virtue can flower only when there is freedom. We
may have political freedom but inwardly we are not free and therefore
there is no space. No virtue, no quality that is worthwhile, can
function or grow without this vast space within oneself. And space and
silence are necessary because it is only when the mind is alone,
uninfluenced, untrained, not held by infinite varieties of experience,
that it can come upon something totally new.]{.s1}

[One can see directly that it is only when the mind is silent that there
is a possibility of clarity. The whole purpose of meditation in the East
is to bring about such a state of mind---that is, to control thought,
which is the same as constantly repeating a prayer to quieten the mind
and in that state hoping to understand one's problems. But unless one
lays the foundation, which is to be free from fear, free from sorrow,
anxiety and all the traps one lays for oneself, I do not see how it is
possible for a mind to be actually quiet. This is one of the most
difficult things to communicate. Communication between us implies,
doesn't it, that not only must you understand the words I am using but
that we must both, you and I, be intense at the same time, not a moment
later or a moment sooner and capable of meeting each other on the same
level? And such communication is not possible when you are interpreting
what you are reading according to your own knowledge, pleasure or
opinions, or when you are making a tremendous effort to
comprehend.]{.s1}

 

[It seems to me that one of the greatest stumbling blocks in life is
this constant struggle to reach, to achieve, to acquire. We are trained
from childhood to acquire and to achieve---the very brain cells
themselves create and demand this pattern of achievement in order to
have physical security, but psychological security is not within the
field of achievement. We demand security in all our relationships,
attitudes and activities but, as we have seen, there is actually no such
thing as security. To find out for yourself that there is no form of
security in any relationship---to realize that psychologically there is
nothing permanent---gives a totally different approach to life. It is
essential, of course, to have outward security---shelter, clothing,
food---but that outward security is destroyed by the demand for
psychological security.]{.s1}

[Space and silence are necessary to go beyond the limitations of
consciousness, but how can a mind which is so endlessly active in its
self-interest be quiet? One can discipline it, control it, shape it, but
such torture does not make the mind quiet; it merely makes it dull.
Obviously the mere pursuit of the ideal of having a quiet mind is
valueless because the more you force it the more narrow and stagnant it
becomes. Control in any form, like suppression, produces only conflict.
So control and outward discipline are not the way, nor has an
*un*disciplined life any value.]{.s1}

[Most of our lives are outwardly disciplined by the demands of society,
by the family, by our own suffering, by our own experience, by
conforming to certain ideological or factual patterns---and that form of
discipline is the most deadening thing. Discipline must be without
control, without suppression, without any form of fear. How is this
discipline to come about? It is not discipline first and then freedom;
freedom is at the very beginning, not at the end. To understand this
freedom, which is the freedom from the conformity of discipline, is
discipline itself. The very act of learning is discipline (after all the
root meaning of the word discipline is to learn), the very act of
learning becomes clarity. To understand the whole nature and structure
of control, suppression and indulgence demands attention. You don't have
to impose discipline in order to study it, but the very act of studying
brings about its own discipline in which there is no suppression.]{.s1}

 

[In order to deny authority (we are talking of psychological authority,
not the law)---to deny the authority of all religious organizations,
traditions and experience, one has to see why one normally
obeys---actually study it. And to study it there must be freedom from
condemnation, justification, opinion or acceptance. Now we cannot accept
authority and yet study it---that is impossible. To study the whole
psychological structure of authority within ourselves there must be
freedom. And when we are studying we are denying the whole structure,
and when we do deny, that very denial is the light of the mind that is
free from authority. Negation of everything that has been considered
worthwhile, such as outward discipline, leadership, idealism, is to
study it; then that very act of studying is not only discipline but the
negative of it, and the very denial is a positive act. So we are
negating all those things that are considered important to bring about
the quietness of the mind.]{.s1}

[Thus we see it is not control that leads to quietness. Nor is the mind
quiet when it has an object which is so absorbing that it gets lost in
that object. This is like giving a child an interesting toy; he becomes
very quiet, but remove the toy and he returns to his mischief-making. We
all have our toys which absorb us and we think we are very quiet but if
a man is dedicated to a certain form of activity, scientific, literary
or whatever it is, the toy merely absorbs him and he is not really quiet
at all.]{.s1}

 

[The only silence we know is the silence when noise stops, the silence
when thought stops---but that is not silence. Silence is something
entirely different, like beauty, like love. And this silence is not the
product of a quiet mind, it is not the product of the brain cells which
have understood the whole structure and say, 'For God's sake be quiet';
then the brain cells themselves produce the silence and that is not
silence. Nor is silence the outcome of attention in which the observer
is the observed; then there is no friction, but that is not
silence.]{.s1}

[You are waiting for me to describe what this silence is so that you can
compare it, interpret it, carry it away and bury it. It cannot be
described. What can be described is the known, and the freedom from the
known can come into being only when there is a dying every day to the
known, to the hurts, the flatteries, to all the images you have made, to
all your experiences---dying every day so that the brain cells
themselves become fresh, young, innocent. But that innocency, that
freshness, that quality of tenderness and gentleness, does not produce
love; it is not the quality of beauty or silence.]{.s1}

[That silence which is not the silence of the ending of noise is only a
small beginning. It is like going through a small hole to an enormous,
wide, expansive ocean, to an immeasurable, timeless state. But this you
cannot understand verbally unless you have understood the whole
structure of consciousness and the meaning of pleasure, sorrow and
despair, and the brain cells themselves have become quiet. Then perhaps
you may come upon that mystery which nobody can reveal to you and
nothing can destroy. A living mind is a still mind, a living mind is a
mind that has no centre and therefore no space and time. Such a mind is
limitless and that is the only truth, that is the only reality.]{.s1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-18 .calibre}
::: section
[XV]{.s1}

 

*[Experience---Satisfaction---Duality---Meditation]{.s1}*

 

[We all want experiences of some kind---the mystical experience, the
religious experience, the sexual experience, the experience of having a
great deal of money, power, position, domination. As we grow older we
may have finished with the demands of our physical appetites but then we
demand wider, deeper and more significant experiences, and we try
various means to obtain them---expanding our consciousness, for
instance, which is quite an art, or taking various kinds of drugs. This
is an old trick which has existed from time immemorial---chewing a piece
of leaf or experimenting with the latest chemical to bring about a
temporary alteration in the structure of the brain cells, a greater
sensitivity and heightened perception which give a semblance of reality.
This demand for more and more experiences shows the inward poverty of
man. We think that through experiences we can escape from ourselves but
these experiences are conditioned by what we are. If the mind is petty,
jealous, anxious, it may take the very latest form of drug but it will
still see only its own little creation, its own little projections from
its own conditioned background.]{.s1}

[Most of us demand completely satisfying, lasting experiences which
cannot be destroyed by thought. So behind this demand for experience is
the desire for satisfaction, and the demand for satisfaction dictates
the experience, and therefore we have not only to understand this whole
business of satisfaction but also the thing that is experienced. To have
some great satisfaction is a great pleasure; the more lasting, deep and
wide the experience the more pleasurable it is, so pleasure dictates the
form of experience we demand, and pleasure is the measure by which we
measure the experience. Anything measurable is within the limits of
thought and is apt to create illusion. You can have marvellous
experiences and yet be completely deluded. You will inevitably see
visions according to your conditioning; you will see Christ or Buddha or
whoever you happen to believe in, and the greater a believer you are the
stronger will be your visions, the projections of your own demands and
urges.]{.s1}

[So if in seeking something fundamental, such as what is truth, pleasure
is the measure, you have already projected what that experience will be
and therefore it is no longer valid.]{.s1}

 

[What do we mean by experience? Is there anything new or original in
experience? Experience is a bundle of memories responding to a challenge
and it can respond only according to its background, and the cleverer
you are at interpreting the experience the more it responds. So you have
to question not only the experience of another but your own experience.
If you don't recognize an experience it isn't an experience at all.
Every experience has already been experienced or you wouldn't recognize
it. You recognize an experience as being good, bad, beautiful, holy and
so on according to your conditioning, and therefore the recognition of
an experience must inevitably be old.]{.s1}

 

[When we demand an experience of reality---as we all do, don't we?---to
experience it we must know it and the moment we recognize it we have
already projected it and therefore it is not real because it is still
within the field of thought and time. If thought can think about reality
it cannot be reality. We cannot recognize a *new* experience. It is
impossible. We recognize only something we have already known and
therefore when we say we have had a new experience it is not new at all.
To seek further experience through expansion of consciousness, as is
being done through various psychedelic drugs, is still within the field
of consciousness and therefore very limited.]{.s1}

[So we have discovered a fundamental truth, which is that a mind that is
seeking, craving, for wider and deeper experience is a very shallow and
dull mind because it lives always with its memories.]{.s1}

[Now if we didn't have any experience at all, what would happen to us?
We depend on experiences, on challenges, to keep us awake. If there were
no conflicts within ourselves, no changes, no disturbances, we would all
be fast asleep. So challenges are necessary for most of us; we think
that without them our minds will become stupid and heavy, and therefore
we depend on a challenge, an experience, to give us more excitement,
more intensity, to make our minds sharper. But in fact this dependence
on challenges and experiences to keep us awake, only makes our minds
duller---it doesn't really keep us awake at all. So I ask myself, is it
possible to keep awake totally, not peripherally at a few points of my
being, but totally awake without any challenge or any experience? This
implies a great sensitivity, both physical and psychological; it means I
have to be free of all demands, for the moment I demand I will
experience. And to be free of demand and satisfaction necessitates
investigation into myself and an understanding of the whole nature of
demand.]{.s1}

[Demand is born out of duality: 'I am unhappy and I must be happy'. In
that very demand that I must be happy is unhappiness. When one makes an
effort to be good, in that very goodness is its opposite, evil.
Everything affirmed contains its own opposite, and effort to overcome
strengthens that against which it strives. When you demand an experience
of truth or reality, that very demand is born out of your discontent
with what is, and therefore the demand creates the opposite. And in the
opposite there is what *has been*. So one must be free of this incessant
demand, otherwise there will be no end to the corridor of duality. This
means knowing yourself so completely that the mind is no longer
seeking.]{.s1}

[Such a mind does not demand experience; it cannot ask for a challenge
or know a challenge; it does not say, 'I am asleep' or 'I am awake'. It
is completely what it is. Only the frustrated, narrow, shallow mind, the
conditioned mind, is always seeking the more. Is it possible then to
live in this world without the more---without this everlasting
comparison? Surely it is? But one has to find out for oneself.]{.s1}

 

[Investigation into this whole question is meditation. That word has
been used both in the East and the West in a most unfortunate way. There
are different schools of meditation, different methods and systems.
There are systems which say, 'Watch the movement of your big toe, watch
it, watch it, watch it'; there are other systems which advocate sitting
in a certain posture, breathing regularly or practising awareness. All
this is utterly mechanical. Another method gives you a certain word and
tells you that if you go on repeating it you will have some
extraordinary transcendental experience. This is sheer nonsense. It is a
form of self-hypnosis. By repeating Amen or Om or Coca-Cola indefinitely
you will obviously have a certain experience because by repetition the
mind becomes quiet. It is a well known phenomenon which has been
practised for thousands of years in India---Mantra Yoga it is called. By
repetition you can induce the mind to be gentle and soft but it is still
a petty, shoddy, little mind. You might as well put a piece of stick you
have picked up in the garden on the mantelpiece and give it a flower
every day. In a month you will be worshipping it and not to put a flower
in front of it will become a sin.]{.s1}

[Meditation is not following any system; it is not constant repetition
and imitation. Meditation is not concentration. It is one of the
favourite gambits of some teachers of meditation to insist on their
pupils learning concentration---that is, fixing the mind on one thought
and driving out all other thoughts. This is a most stupid, ugly thing,
which any schoolboy can do because he is forced to. It means that all
the time you are having a battle between the insistence that you must
concentrate on the one hand and your mind on the other which wanders
away to all sorts of other things, whereas you should be attentive to
every movement of the mind wherever it wanders. When your mind wanders
off it means you are interested in something else.]{.s1}

 

[Meditation demands an astonishingly alert mind; meditation is the
understanding of the totality of life in which every form of
fragmentation has ceased. Meditation is not control of thought, for when
thought is controlled it breeds conflict in the mind, but when you
understand the structure and origin of thought, which we have already
been into, then thought will not interfere. That very understanding of
the structure of thinking is its own discipline which is
meditation.]{.s1}

[Meditation is to be aware of every thought and of every feeling, never
to say it is right or wrong but just to watch it and move with it. In
that watching you begin to understand the whole movement of thought and
feeling. And out of this awareness comes silence. Silence put together
by thought is stagnation, is dead, but the silence that comes when
thought has understood its own beginning, the nature of itself,
understood how all thought is never free but always old---this silence
is meditation in which the meditator is entirely absent, for the mind
has emptied itself of the past.]{.s1}

[If you have read this book for a whole hour attentively, that is
meditation. If you have merely taken away a few words and gathered a few
ideas to think about later, then it is no longer meditation. Meditation
is a state of mind which looks at everything with complete attention,
totally, not just parts of it. And no one can teach you how to be
attentive. If any system teaches you how to be attentive, then you are
attentive to the system and that is not attention. Meditation is one of
the greatest arts in life---perhaps *the* greatest, and one cannot
possibly learn it from anybody, that is the beauty of it. It has no
technique and therefore no authority. When you learn about yourself,
watch yourself, watch the way you walk, how you eat, what you say, the
gossip, the hate, the jealousy---if you are aware of all that in
yourself, without any choice, that is part of meditation.]{.s1}

[So meditation can take place when you are sitting in a bus or walking
in the woods full of light and shadows, or listening to the singing of
birds or looking at the face of your wife or child.]{.s1}

[In the understanding of meditation there is love, and love is not the
product of systems, of habits, of following a method. Love cannot be
cultivated by thought. Love can perhaps come into being when there is
complete silence, a silence in which the meditator is entirely absent;
and the mind can be silent only when it understands its own movement as
thought and feeling. To understand this movement of thought and feeling
there can be no condemnation in observing it. To observe in such a way
is the discipline, and that kind of discipline is fluid, free, not the
discipline of conformity.]{.s1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-19 .calibre}
::: section
[XVI]{.s1}

 

*[Total Revolution---The Religious Mind---Energy---Passion]{.s1}*

 

[What we have been concerned with all through this book is the bringing
about in ourselves, and therefore in our lives, of a total revolution
that has nothing whatsoever to do with the structure of society as it
is. Society as it is, is a horrifying thing with its endless wars of
aggression, whether that aggression be defensive or offensive. What we
need is something totally new---a revolution, a mutation, in the psyche
itself. The old brain cannot possibly solve the human problem of
relationship. The old brain is Asiatic, European, American or African,
so what we are asking ourselves is whether it is possible to bring about
a mutation in the brain cells themselves?]{.s1}

[Let us ask ourselves again, now that we have come to understand
ourselves better, is it possible for a human being living an ordinary
everyday life in this brutal, violent, ruthless world---a world which is
becoming more and more efficient and therefore more and more
ruthless---is it possible for him to bring about a revolution not only
in his outward relationships but in the whole field of his thinking,
feeling, acting and reacting?]{.s1}

[Every day we see or read of appalling things happening in the world as
the result of violence in man. You may say, 'I can't do anything about
it', or, 'How can I influence the world?' I think you can tremendously
influence the world if in yourself you are not violent, if you lead
actually every day a peaceful life---a life which is not competitive,
ambitious, envious---a life which does not create enmity. Small fires
can become a blaze. We have reduced the world to its present state of
chaos by our self-centred activity, by our prejudices, our hatreds, our
nationalism, and when we say we cannot do anything about it, we are
accepting disorder in ourselves as inevitable. We have splintered the
world into fragments and if we ourselves are broken, fragmented, our
relationship with the world will also be broken. But if, when we act, we
act totally, then our relationship with the world undergoes a tremendous
revolution.]{.s1}

[After all, any movement which is worthwhile, any action which has any
deep significance, must begin with each one of us. I must change first;
I must see what is the nature and structure of my relationship with the
world---and in the very *seeing* is the doing; therefore I, as a human
being living in the world, bring about a different quality, and that
quality, it seems to me, is the quality of the religious mind.]{.s1}

 

[The religious mind is something entirely different from the mind that
believes in religion. You cannot be religious and yet be a Hindu, a
Muslim, a Christian, a Buddhist. A religious mind does not seek at all,
it cannot experiment with truth. Truth is not something dictated by your
pleasure or pain, or by your conditioning as a Hindu or whatever
religion you belong to. The religious mind is a state of mind in which
there is no fear and therefore no belief whatsoever but only *what
is---what actually is*.]{.s1}

[In the religious mind there is that state of silence we have already
examined which is not produced by thought but is the outcome of
awareness, which is meditation when the meditator is entirely absent. In
that silence there is a state of energy in which there is no conflict.
Energy is action and movement. All action is movement and all action is
energy. All desire is energy. All feeling is energy. All thought is
energy. All living is energy. All life is energy. If that energy is
allowed to flow without any contradiction, without any friction, without
any conflict, then that energy is boundless, endless. When there is no
friction there are no frontiers to energy. It is friction which gives
energy limitations. So, having once seen this, why is it that the human
being always brings friction into energy? Why does he create friction in
this movement which we call life? Is pure energy, energy without
limitation, just an idea to him? Does it have no reality?]{.s1}

 

[We need energy not only to bring about a total revolution in ourselves
but also in order to investigate, to look, to act. And as long as there
is friction of any kind in any of our relationships, whether between
husband and wife, between man and man, between one community and another
or one country and another or one ideology and another---if there is any
inward friction or any outward conflict in any form, however subtle it
may be---there is a waste of energy.]{.s1}

[As long as there is a time interval between the observer and the
observed it creates friction and therefore there is a waste of energy.
That energy is gathered to its highest point when the observer is the
observed, in which there is no time interval at all. Then there will be
energy without motive and it will find its own channel of action because
then the 'I' does not exist.]{.s1}

[We need a tremendous amount of energy to understand the confusion in
which we live, and the feeling, 'I must understand', brings about the
vitality to find out. But finding out, searching, implies time, and, as
we have seen, gradually to uncondition the mind is not the way. Time is
not the way. Whether we are old or young it is *now* that the whole
process of life can be brought into a different dimension. Seeking the
opposite of what we are is not the way either, nor is the artificial
discipline imposed by a system, a teacher, a philosopher or priest---all
that is so very childish. When we realize this, we ask ourselves is it
possible to break through this heavy conditioning of centuries
immediately and not enter into another conditioning---to be free, so
that the mind can be altogether new, sensitive, alive, aware, intense,
capable? That is our problem. There is no other problem because when the
mind is made new it can tackle any problem. That is the only question we
have to ask ourselves.]{.s1}

[But we do not ask. We want to be told. One of the most curious things
in the structure of our psyche is that we all want to be told because we
are the result of the propaganda of ten thousand years. We want to have
our thinking confirmed and corroborated by another, whereas to ask a
question is to ask it of yourself. What I say has very little value. You
will forget it the moment you shut this book, or you will remember and
repeat certain phrases, or you will compare what you have read here with
some other book---but you will not face your own life. And that is all
that matters---your life, yourself, your pettiness, your shallowness,
your brutality, your violence, your greed, your ambition, your daily
agony and endless sorrow---that is what you have to understand and
nobody on earth or in heaven is going to save you from it but
yourself.]{.s1}

 

[Seeing everything that goes on in your daily life, your daily
activities---when you pick up a pen, when you talk, when you go out for
a drive or when you are walking alone in the woods---can you with one
breath, with one look, know yourself very simply as you are? When you
know yourself as you are, then you understand the whole structure of
man's endeavour, his deceptions, his hypocrisies, his search. To do this
you must be tremendously honest with yourself throughout your being.
When you act according to your principles you are being dishonest
because when you act according to what you think you ought to be you are
not what you are. It is a brutal thing to have ideals. If you have any
ideals, beliefs or principles you cannot possibly look at yourself
directly. So can you be completely negative, completely quiet, neither
thinking nor afraid, and yet be extraordinarily, passionately
alive?]{.s1}

[That state of mind which is no longer capable of striving is the true
religious mind, and in that state of mind you may come upon this thing
called truth or reality or bliss or God or beauty or love. This thing
cannot be invited. Please understand that very simple fact. It cannot be
invited, it cannot be sought after, because the mind is too silly, too
small, your emotions are too shoddy, your way of life too confused for
that enormity, that immense something, to be invited into your little
house, your little corner of living which has been trampled and spat
upon. You cannot invite it. To invite it you must know it and you cannot
know it. It doesn't matter who says it, the moment he says, 'I know', he
does not know. The moment you say you have found it you have not found
it. If you say you have experienced it, you have never experienced it.
Those are all ways of exploiting another man---your friend or your
enemy.]{.s1}

[One asks oneself then whether it is possible to come upon this thing
without inviting, without waiting, without seeking or exploring---just
for it to happen like a cool breeze that comes in when you leave the
window open? You cannot invite the wind but you must leave the window
open, which doesn't mean that you are in a state of waiting; that is
another form of deception. It doesn't mean you must open yourself to
receive; that is another kind of thought.]{.s1}

 

[Haven't you ever asked yourself why it is that human beings lack this
thing? They beget children, they have sex, tenderness, a quality of
sharing something together in companionship, in friendship, in
fellowship, but this thing---why is it they haven't got it? Haven't you
ever wondered lazily on occasion when you are walking by yourself in a
filthy street or sitting in a bus or are on holiday by the seaside or
walking in a wood with a lot of birds, trees, streams and wild
animals---hasn't it ever come upon you to ask why it is that man, who
has lived for millions and millions of years, has not got this thing,
this extraordinary unfading flower? Why is it that you, as a human
being, who are so capable, so clever, so cunning, so competitive, who
have such marvellous technology, who go to the skies and under the earth
and beneath the sea, and invent extraordinary electronic brains---why is
it that you haven't got this one thing which matters? I don't know
whether you have ever seriously faced this issue of why your heart is
empty.]{.s1}

[What would your answer be if you put the question to yourself---your
direct answer without any equivocation or cunningness? Your answer would
be in accordance with your intensity in asking the question and the
urgency of it. But you are neither intense nor urgent, and that is
because you haven't got energy, energy being passion---and you cannot
find any truth without passion---passion with a fury behind it, passion
in which there is no hidden want. Passion is a rather frightening thing
because if you have passion you don't know where it will take you.]{.s1}

[So is fear perhaps the reason why you have not got the energy of that
passion to find out for yourself why this quality of love is missing in
you, why there is not this flame in your heart? If you have examined
your own mind and heart very closely, you will know why you haven't got
it. If you are passionate in your discovery to find why you haven't got
it, you will know it is there. Through complete negation alone, which is
the highest form of passion, that thing which is love, comes into being.
Like humility you cannot cultivate love. Humility comes into being when
there is a total ending of conceit---then you will never know what it is
to be humble. A man who knows what it is to have humility is a vain man.
In the same way when you give your mind and your heart, your nerves,
your eyes, your whole being to find out the way of life, to see what
actually is and go beyond it, and deny completely, totally, the life you
live now---in that very denial of the ugly, the brutal, the other comes
into being. And you will never know it either. A man who knows that he
is silent, who knows that he loves, does not know what love is or what
silence is.]{.s1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-20 .calibre6}
::: calibre7
![Cover Image](images/000000.jpg){.calibre8}
:::
::::
