---
title: "The Lays of Beleriand"
author: "J.R.R. Tolkien"
editor: "Christopher Tolkien"
voice: "J.R.R. Tolkien"
voice_role: "Mythmaker & Philologist - Sub-creation as Art"
tradition: "English Literature/Mythology"
period: "20th Century"
region: "England"
genre: "Epic Poetry"
form: "Verse Epic"
mode: "Mythological Poetry"
work_type: "Primary Source"
source_type: "Complete Work"
source_quality: "Posthumous Edition"
chamber_integration: "June 2025"
significance: "Tolkien's great verse epics of Middle-earth, showing his philological craft in poetic form"
tags:
  - mythology
  - epic-poetry
  - middle-earth
  - philology
  - sub-creation
  - verse-narrative
  - tolkien
  - beleriand
related_voices:
  - Beowulf Poet
  - William Morris
  - Lord Dunsany
  - C.S. Lewis
chamber_position: "First Ring - The Makers / Fourth Ring - Mythological Presences"
amphitheatre_status: "Essential personal voice - longest companion"
personal_significance: "Accompanied David longest of all Chamber voices"
status: "source-aware"
---

# The Lays of Beleriand

*J.R.R. Tolkien*  
*Edited by Christopher Tolkien*

---

*Chamber Note: Tolkien enters the Chamber as essential personal voice - the longest companion. These verse epics show his fusion of philological scholarship with mythmaking, creating languages and worlds as unified art. The Lays demonstrate sub-creation at its most ambitious - entire mythologies born from linguistic music.*one of the most difficult of forms 'if one wishes to avoid monotony and
sing-song in a very long poem. I am often astonished by your success,
but it is by no means consistently maintained.' His strictures on the
diction of the Lay **2 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

included archaisms so archaic that they needed annotation, distorted
order, use of emphatic *doth* or *did* where there is no emphasis, and
language sometimes flat and conventional (in contrast to passages of
'gorgeous description'). There is no record of what my father thought of
this criticism (written when *The* *Lord of the Rings* was already
completed), but it must be associated in some way with the fact that in
1949 or 1950 he returned to the *Lay of Leithian* and began a revision
that soon became virtually a new poem; and relatively little though he
wrote of it, its advance on the old version in all those respects in
which that had been censured is so great as to give it a sad prominence
in the long list of his works that might have been. The new Lay is
included in this book, and a page from a fine manuscript of it is
reproduced as frontispiece.

The sections of both poems are interleaved with commentaries which are
primarily concerned to trace the evolution of the legends and the lands
they are set in.

The two pages reproduced from the *Lay of the Children of* *Húrin* (p.
15) are from the original manuscript of the first version, lines
297---317 and 318---33. For differences between the readings of the
manuscript and those of the printed text see pp. 4---5. The page from
*the Lay of Leithian* in Elvish script (p. 299) comes from the

\'A\' version of the original Lay (see pp. 150-1), and there are certain
differences in the text from the \'B\' version which is that printed.
These pages from the original manuscripts are reproduced with the
permission of the Bodleian Library, Oxford, and I thank the staff of the
Department of Western Manuscripts at the Bodleian for their assistance.

The two earlier volumes in this series (the first and second parts of
*The Book of Lost Tales)* are referred to as 'I' and 'II'. The fourth
volume will contain the 'Sketch of the Mythology' (1926), from which the
*Silmarillion* 'tradition' derived; the *Quenta Noldorinwa* or History
of the Noldoli (1930); the first map of the North-west of Middle-earth;
the *Ambarkanta* ('Shape of the World') by Rúmil, together with the only
existing maps of the entire World; the earliest *Annals of Valinor* and
*Annals of Beleriand,* by Pengolod the Wise of Gondolin; and the
fragments of translations of the *Quenta* and *Annals* from Elvish into
Anglo-Saxon by Ǽlfwine of England.

I

THE LAY OF THE

CHILDREN OF HÚRIN

There exists a substantial manuscript (28 pages long) entitled 'Sketch
of the Mythology with especial reference to "The Children of Húrin'";
and this 'Sketch' is the next complete narrative, in the *prose*
tradition, after the *Lost Tales* (though a few fragmentary writings are
extant from the intervening time). On the envelope containing this
manuscript my father wrote at some later time:

Original 'Silmarillion'. Form orig\[inally\] composed c. 1926-30 for R.
W. Reynolds to explain background of 'alliterative version' of Turin

& the Dragon: then in progress (unfinished) (begun c. 1918).

He seems to have written first '1921' before correcting this to '1918'.

R. W. Reynolds taught my father at King Edward\'s School, Birming-ham
(see Humphrey Carpenter, *Biography,* p. 47). In a passage of his diary
written in August 1926 he wrote that 'at the end of last year' he had
heard again from R. W. Reynolds, that they had corresponded
subsequently, and that he had sent Reynolds many of his poems, including
*Tinúviel* and *Turin ('Tinúviel* meets with qualified approval, it is
too prolix, but how could I ever cut it down, and the specimen I sent of
*Turin* with little or none'). This would date the 'Sketch' as
originally written (it was subsequently heavily revised) definitely in
1926, probably fairly early in the year. It must have accompanied the
specimen of *Turin* (the alliterative poem), the background of which it
was written to explain, to Anacapri, where Reynolds was then living in
retirement.

My father took up his appointment to the Professorship of Anglo-Saxon at
Oxford in the winter term (October-December) of 1925, though for that
term he had to continue to teach at Leeds also, since the appointments
overlapped. There can be no doubt that at any rate the great bulk of the
alliterative *Children of Húrin* (or *Turin)* was completed at Leeds,
and I think it virtually certain that he had ceased to work on it before
he moved south: in fact there seems nothing to oppose to the natural
assumption that he left 'Turin' for 'Tinúviel' (the *Lay of*
*Leithian),* which he began according to his diary in the summer of 1925

(see p. 159 and footnote).

For the date of its commencement we have only my father\'s later (and
perhaps hesitant) statement that it was 'begun c. 1918'. A *terminus a*
*quo* is provided by a page of the earliest manuscript of the poem,
which is **4 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

written on a slip from the Oxford English Dictionary bearing the
printer\'s stamp *May 1918.* On the other hand the *name Melian* which
occurs near the beginning of the earliest manuscript shows it to be
later than the typescript version of the *Tale of Tinúviel,* where the
Queen\'s name was *Gwenethlin* and only became *Melian* in the course of
its composition (II. 51); and the manuscript version of that Tale which
underlies the typescript seems itself to have been one of the last
completed elements in the *Lost Tales* (see I. 204).

*The Children of Húrin* exists in two versions, which I shall refer to
as I and II, both of them found in manuscript and later typescript (IA,
IB; IIA, IIB). I do not think that the second is significantly later
than the first; it is indeed possible, and would not be in any way
uncharacteristic, that my father began work on II while he was still
composing at a later point in 1. II is essentially an expansion of I,
with many lines, and blocks of lines, left virtually unchanged. Until
the second version is reached it will be sufficient to refer simply to
\'A\' and \'B\', the manuscript and typescript of the first version.

The manuscript A consists of two parts: first (a) a bundle of small
slips, numbered 1-32. The poem is here in a very rough state with many
alternative readings, and in places at least may represent the actual
beginnings, the first words written down. This is followed by (b) a set
of large sheets of examination paper from the University of Leeds,
numbered 33 ff., where the poem is for the most part written out in a
more finished form - the second stage of composition; but my father
wrote in line-numbers continuously through (a) and (b) - lines 1-528 in
(a), lines 528 ff. in (b). We have thus one sole text, not two, without
any overlap; and if (a), the slips, ever existed in the form of (b), the
examination sheets, that part has disappeared. In part (b) there are
many later emendations in pencil.

Based on this manuscript is the typescript B. This introduces changes
not found in A or its emendations; and it was itself emended both in ink
and pencil, doubtless involving several movements of revision. To take a
single line as exemplification: line 8 was written first in A: Lo!
Thalion in the throng of thickest battle

The line was emended, in two stages, to

Lo! Thalion Húrin in the throng of battle

and this was the form in B as typed; but B was emended, in two stages,
to Lo! Húrin Thalion in the hosts of war

It is obvious that to set this and a great many other similar cases out
in a textual apparatus would be a huge task and the result impossibly
complicated. The text that follows is therefore, so far as purely
metrical-stylistic **THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 5**

changes are concerned, that of B as *emended,* and apart from a few
special cases there is no mention in the notes of earlier readings.

In the matter of names, however, the poem presents great difficulty; for
changes were made at quite different times and were not introduced
consistently throughout. If the latest form in any particular passage is
made the principle of choice, irrespective of any other consideration,
then the text will have *Morwin* at lines 105, 129, *Mavwin* 137 etc.,
*Mortven* 438, 472; *Ulmo* 1469, *but Ylmir* 1529 and subsequently;
*Nirnaith Ornoth* 1448, but *Nirnaith Únoth* 1543. If the later
*Nirnaith* *Ornoth* is adopted at 1543, it seems scarcely justifiable to
intrude it at lines 13 and 218 (where the final form is *Ninin
Unothradin).* I have decided finally to abandon overall consistency, and
to treat individual names as seems best in the circumstances; for
example, I give *Ylmir* rather than *Ulmo* at line 1469, for consistency
with all the other occurrences, and while changing *Únoth* to *Ornoth*
at line 1543 I retain *Ornoth* rather than the much later *Arnediad* at
line 26 of the second version - similarly I prefer the earlier *Finweg*
to *Fingon* (1975, second version 19, 520) and *Bansil, Glingol* to
*Belthil, Glingal* (2027-8). All such points are documented in the
notes.

A has no title. In B as typed the title was *The Golden Dragon,* but
this was emended to *Turin Son of Húrin & Glórund the Dragon.* The
second version of the poem was first titled *Turin,* but this was
changed to *The Children of Húrin,* and I adopt this, the title by which
my father referred to the poem in the 1926 'Sketch', as the general
title of the work.

The poem in the first version is divided into a short prologue (Húrin
and Morgoth) without sub-title and three long sections, of which the
first two ('Turin\'s Fostering' and 'Beleg') were only introduced later
into the typescript; the third ('Failivrin') is marked both in A and in
B as typed.

The detail of the typescript is largely preserved in the present text,
but I have made the capitalisation rather more consistent, added in
occasional accents, and increased the number of breaks in the text. The
space between the half-lines is marked in the second part of the A-text
and begins at line 543 in B.

I have avoided the use of numbered notes to the text, and all annotation
is related to the line-numbers of the poem. This annotation (very
largely concerned with variations of names, and comparisons with names
in the *Lost Tales)* is.found at the end of each of the three major
parts, followed by a commentary on the matter of that part.

Throughout, the *Tale* refers to the *Tale of Turambar and the Foalókë*
(II. 69ff.); *Narn* refers to the *Narn i Hîn Húrin,* in *Unfinished
Tales* pp. 57 ff.

**6 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

TURIN SON OF HÚRIN

&

GLÓRUND THE DRAGON

Lo! the golden dragon of the God of Hell,

the gloom of the woods of the world now gone,

the woes of Men, and weeping of Elves

fading faintly down forest pathways,

is now to tell, and the name most tearful 5

of Niniel the sorrowful, and the name most sad

of Thalion\'s son Turin o\'erthrown by fate.

Lo! Húrin Thalion in the hosts of war

was whelmed, what time the white-clad armies

of Elfinesse were all to ruin 10

by the dread hate driven of Delu-Morgoth.

That field is yet by the folk named

Ninin Unothradin, Unnumbered Tears.

There the children of Men, chieftain and warrior,

fled and fought not, but the folk of the Elves 15

they betrayed with treason, save that true man only,

Thalion Erithámrod and his thanes like gods.

There in host on host the hill-fiend Ores

overbore him at last in that battle terrible,

by the bidding of Bauglir bound him living, 20

and pulled down the proudest of the princes of Men.

To Bauglir\'s halls in the hills builded,

to the Hells of Iron and the hidden caverns

they haled the hero of Hithlum\'s land,

Thalion Erithámrod, to their throned lord, 25

whose breast was burnt with a bitter hatred,

and wroth he was that the wrack of war

had not taken Turgon ten times a king,

even Finweg\'s heir; nor Fëanor\'s children,

makers of the magic and immortal gems. 30

For Turgon towering in terrible anger

a pathway clove him with his pale sword-blade

out of that slaughter --- yea, his swath was plain

through the hosts of Hell like hay that lieth

all low on the lea where the long scythe goes. 35

A countless company that king did lead

through the darkened dales and drear mountains

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 7**

out of ken of his foes, and he comes not more

in the tale; but the triumph he turned to doubt

of Morgoth the evil, whom mad wrath took. 40

Nor spies sped him, nor spirits of evil,

nor his wealth of wisdom to win him tidings,

whither the nation of the Gnomes was gone.

Now a thought of malice, when Thalion stood,

bound, unbending, in his black dungeon, 45

then moved in his mind that remembered well

how Men were accounted all mightless and frail

by the Elves and their kindred; how only treason

could master the magic whose mazes wrapped

the children of Corthûn, and cheated his purpose. 50

'Is it dauntless Húrin,' quoth Delu-Morgoth,

'stout steel-handed, who stands before me,

a captive living as a coward might be?

Knowest thou my name, or need\'st be told

what hope he has who is haled to Angband --- 55

the bale most bitter, the Balrogs' torment?'

'I know and I hate. For that knowledge I fought thee

by fear unfettered, nor fear I now,'

said Thalion there, and a thane of Morgoth

on the mouth smote him; but Morgoth smiled: 60

'Fear when thou feelest, and the flames lick thee,

and the whips of the Balrogs thy white flesh brand.

Yet a way canst win, an thou wishest, still

to lessen thy lot of lingering woe.

Go question the captives of the accursed people 65

I have taken, and tell me where Turgon is hid;

how with fire and death I may find him soon,

where he lurketh lost in lands forgot.

Thou must feign thee a friend faithful in anguish,

and their inmost hearts thus open and search. 70

Then, if truth thou tellest, thy triple bonds

I will bid men unbind, that abroad thou fare

in my service to search the secret places

following the footsteps of these foes of the Gods.'

'Build not thy hopes so high, O Bauglir --- 75

I am no tool for thy evil treasons;

torment were sweeter than a traitor\'s stain.'

**8 THE LAVS OF BELERIAND**

'If torment be sweet, treasure is liever.

The hoards of a hundred hundred ages,

the gems and jewels of the jealous Gods, 80

are mine, and a meed shall I mete thee thence,

yea, wealth to glut the Worm of Greed.'

'Canst not learn of thy lore when thou look\'st on a foe, O Bauglir
unblest? Bray no longer

of the things thou hast thieved from the Three Kindreds. 85

In hate I hold thee, and thy hests in scorn.'

'Boldly thou bravest me. Be thy boast rewarded/

in mirth quod Morgoth, 'to me now the deeds,

and thy aid I ask not; but anger thee nought

if little they like thee. Yea, look thereon 90

helpless to hinder, or thy hand to raise.'

Then Thalion was thrust to Thangorodrim,

that mountain that meets the misty skies

on high o\'er the hills that Hithlum sees

blackly brooding on the borders of the north. 95

To a stool of stone on its steepest peak

they bound him in bonds, an unbreakable chain,

and the Lord of Woe there laughing stood,

then cursed him for ever and his kin and seed

with a doom of dread, of death and horror. 1oo

There the mighty man unmoved sat;

but unveiled was his vision, that he viewed afar

all earthly things with eyes enchanted

that fell on his folk - a fiend\'s torment.

I

TURIN\'S FOSTERING

Lo! the lady Morwin in the Land of Shadows 105

waited in the woodland for her well-beloved;

but he came never from the combat home.

No tidings told her whether taken or dead,

or lost in flight he lingered yet.

Laid waste his lands, and his lieges slain, no

and men unmindful of his mighty lordship

dwelt in Dorlómin and dealt unkindly

**8 THE LAVS OF BELERIAND**

'If torment be sweet, treasure is liever.

The hoards of a hundred hundred ages,

the gems and jewels of the jealous Gods, 80

are mine, and a meed shall I mete thee thence,

yea, wealth to glut the Worm of Greed.'

'Canst not learn of thy lore when thou look\'st on a foe, O Bauglir
unblest? Bray no longer

of the things thou hast thieved from the Three Kindreds. 85

In hate I hold thee, and thy hests in scorn.'

'Boldly thou bravest me. Be thy boast rewarded/

in mirth quod Morgoth, 'to me now the deeds,

and thy aid I ask not; but anger thee nought

if little they like thee. Yea, look thereon 90

helpless to hinder, or thy hand to raise.'

Then Thalion was thrust to Thangorodrim,

that mountain that meets the misty skies

on high o\'er the hills that Hithlum sees

blackly brooding on the borders of the north. 95

To a stool of stone on its steepest peak

they bound him in bonds, an unbreakable chain,

and the Lord of Woe there laughing stood,

then cursed him for ever and his kin and seed

with a doom of dread, of death and horror. 1oo

There the mighty man unmoved sat;

but unveiled was his vision, that he viewed afar

all earthly things with eyes enchanted

that fell on his folk - a fiend\'s torment.

I

TURIN\'S FOSTERING

Lo! the lady Morwin in the Land of Shadows 105

waited in the woodland for her well-beloved;

but he came never from the combat home.

No tidings told her whether taken or dead,

or lost in flight he lingered yet.

Laid waste his lands, and his lieges slain, no

and men unmindful of his mighty lordship

dwelt in Dorlómin and dealt unkindly

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 9**

with his widowed wife; and she went with child,

who a son must succour now sadly orphaned,

Turin Thaliodrin of tender years. 115

Then in days of blackness was her daughter born,

and was named Nienor, a name of tears

that in language of eld is Lamentation.

Then her thoughts turned to Thingol the Elf-king,

and the dancer of Doriath, his daughter Tinúviel, 120

whom the boldest of the brave, Beren Ermabwed,

had won to wife. He once had known

firmest friendship to his fellow in arms,

Thalion Erithámrod --- so thought she now,

and said to her son, 'My sweetest child, 125

our friends are few, and thy father comes not.

Thou must fare afar to the folk of the wood,

where Thingol is throned in the Thousand Caves.

If he remember Morwin and thy mighty sire

he will fain foster thee, and feats of arms 130

he will teach thee, the trade of targe and sword,

and Thalion\'s son no thrall shall be ---

but remember thy mother when thy manhood nears. '

Heavy boded the heart of Hurin\'s son,

yet he weened her words were wild with grief, 135

and he denied her not, for no need him seemed.

Lo! henchmen had Morwin, Halog and Gumlin,

who were young of yore ere the youth of Thalion,

who alone of the lieges of that lord of Men

steadfast in service staid beside her: 140

now she bade them brave the black mountains,

and the woods whose ways wander to evil;

though Turin be tender and to travail unused,

they must gird them and go; but glad they were not,

and Morwin mourned when men saw not. 145

Came a summer day when sun filtered

warm through the woodland\'s waving branches.

Then Morwin stood her mourning hiding

by the gate of her garth in a glade of the woods.

At the breast she mothered her babe unweaned, 150

and the doorpost held lest she droop for anguish.

There Gumlin guided her gallant boy,

and a heavy burden was borne by Halog;

**10 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

but the heart of Turin was heavy as stone

uncomprehending its coming anguish. 155

He sought for comfort, with courage saying:

'Quickly will I come from the courts of Thingol;

long ere manhood I will lead to Morwin

great tale of treasure, and true comrades\' ---

for he wist not the weird woven by Bauglir, 160

nor the sundering sorrow that swept between.

The farewells are taken: their footsteps are turned

to the dark forest: the dwelling fadeth

in the tangled trees. Then in Turin leapt

his awakened heart, and he wept blindly, 165

calling 'I cannot, I cannot leave thee.

O Morwin, my mother, why makest me go?

Hateful are the hills where hope is lost.

O Morwin, my mother, I am meshed in tears.

Grim are the hills, and my home is gone.' 170

And there came his cries calling faintly

down the dark alleys of the dreary trees,

and one who wept weary on the threshold

heard how the hills said 'my home is gone.'

The ways were weary and woven with deceit 175

o\'er the hills of Hithlum to the hidden kingdom

deep in the darkness of Doriath\'s forest;

and never ere now for need or wonder

had children of Men chosen that pathway,

and few of the folk have followed it since. 180

There Turin and the twain knew torment of thirst,

and hunger and fear and hideous nights,

for wolfriders and wandering Ores

and the Things of Morgoth thronged the woodland.

Magics were about them, that they missed their ways 185

and strayed steerless, and the stars were hid.

Thus they passed the mountains, but the mazes of Doriath wildered and
wayworn in wanhope bound them.

They had nor bread nor water, and bled of strength

their death they deemed it to die forewandered, 190

when they heard a horn that hooted afar,

and baying dogs. It was Beleg the hunter,

who farthest fared of his folk abroad

ahunting by hill and hollow valley,

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN II**

who cared not for concoufse and commerce of men. 195

He was great of growth and goodly-limbed,

but lithe of girth, and lightly on the ground

his footsteps fell as he fared towards them,

all garbed in grey and green and brown ---

a son of the wilderness who wist no sire. 200

'Who are ye?' he asked. 'Outlaws, or maybe

hard hunted men whom hate pursueth?'

'Nay, for famine and thirst we faint,' saith Halog,

'wayworn and wildered, and wot not the road.

Or hast not heard of the hills of slain, 205

or the tear-drenched field where the terror and fire

of Morgoth devoured both Men and Elves?

There Thalion Erithámrod and his thanes like gods

vanished from the earth, and his valiant lady

weeps yet widowed as she waits in Hithlum. 210

Thou lookest on the last of the lieges of Morwin

and Thalion\'s son Turin, who to Thingol\'s court

are wending by the word of the wife of Húrin.'

Then Beleg bade them be blithe, and said:

'The Gods have guided you to good keeping. 215

I have heard of the house of Húrin the Steadfast -

and who hath not heard of the hills of slain,

of Ninin Unothradin, the Unnumbered Tears?

To that war I went not, but wage a feud

with the Orcs unending, whom mine arrows bitter 220

oft stab unseen and strike to death.

I am the huntsman Beleg of the Hidden People.'

Then he bade them drink, and drew from his belt

a flask of leather full filled with wine

that is bruised from the berries of the burning South --- 225

and the Gnome-folk know it, and the nation of the Elves, and by long
ways lead it to the lands of the North.

There baked flesh and bread from his wallet

they had to their hearts\' joy; but their heads were mazed by the wine
of Dor-Winion that went in their veins, 230

and they soundly slept on the soft needles

of the tall pine-trees that towered above.

Later they wakened and were led by ways

devious winding through the dark wood-realm

**12 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

by slade and slope and swampy thicket 235

through lonely days and long night-times,

and but for Beleg had been baffled utterly

by the magic mazes of Melian the Queen.

To the shadowy shores he showed the way

where stilly that stream strikes 'fore the gates 240

of the cavernous court of the King of Doriath.

O\'er the guarded bridge he gained a passage,

and thrice they thanked him, and thought in their hearts

'the Gods are good' - had they guessed maybe

what the future enfolded they had feared to live. 245

To the throne of Thingol the three were come,

and their speech sped them; for he spake them fair,

and held in honour Húrin the steadfast,

Beren Ermabwed\'s brother-in-arms.

Remembering Morwin, of mortals fairest, 250

he turned not Turin in contempt away;

said: \'O son of Húrin, here shalt sojourn

in my cavernous court for thy kindred\'s sake.

Nor as slave or servant, but a second king\'s son

thou shalt dwell in dear love, till thou deem\'st it time 255

to remember thy mother Morwin\'s loneliness.

Thou wisdom shalt win unwist of Men

and weapons shalt wield as the warrior Elves,

and Thalion\'s son no thrall shall be.'

There tarried the twain that had tended the child, 260

till their limbs were lightened and they longed to fare through dread
and danger to their dear lady.

But Gumlin was gone in greater years

than Halog, and hoped not to home again.

Then sickness took him, and he stayed by Túrin, 265

while Halog hardened his heart to go.

An Elfin escort to his aid was given

and magics of Melian, and a meed of gold.

In his mouth a message to Morwin was set,

words of the king\'s will, how her wish was granted; 270

how Thingol called her to the Thousand Caves

to fare unfearing with his folk again,

there to sojourn in solace, till her son be grown;

for Húrin the hero was held in mind,

and no might had Morgoth where Melian dwelt. 275

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 13**

Of the errand of the Elves and that other Halog

the tale tells not, save in time they came

to the threshold of Morwin, and Thingol\'s message

was said where she sate in her solitary hall.

But she dared not do as was dearly bidden, 280

for Nienor her nestling was not yet weaned.

More, the pride of her people, princes of Men,

had suffered her send her son to Thingol

when despair sped her, but to spend her days

as alms-guest of others, even Elfin kings, 285

it liked her little; and there lived e\'en now

a hope in her heart that Húrin would come,

and the dwelling was dear where he dwelt of old.

At night she would listen for a knock at the doors,

or a footstep falling that she fondly knew; 290

so she fared not forth, and her fate was woven.

Yet the thanes of Thingol she thanked nobly,

and her shame she showed not, how shorn of glory

to reward their wending she had wealth too scant;

but gave them in gift her golden things 295

that last lingered, and they led away

a helm of Húrin that was hewn in war

when he battled with Beren his brother-in-arms

against ogres and Orcs and evil foemen;

\'twas o\'erwritten with runes by wrights of old. 300

She bade Thingol receive it and think of her.

Thus Halog her henchman came home, but the Elves,

the thanes of Thingol, thrust through the woods,

and the message of Morwin in a month\'s journey,

so quick their coming, to the king was said. 305

Then was Melian moved to ruth,

and courteously received the king her gift,

who deeply, delved had dungeons filled

with Elfin armouries of ancient gear,

but he handled the helm as his hoard were scant; 310

said: 'High were the head that upheld this thing

with that token crowned of the towering dragon

that Thalion Erithámrod thrice-renowned

oft bore into battle with baleful foes.'

Then a thought was thrust into Thingol\'s heart, 315

and Turin he called and told when come

**14 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

that Morwin his mother a mighty thing

had sent to her son, his sire\'s heirloom,

a helm that hammers had hardened of old,

whose makers had mingled a magic therein 320

that its worth was a wonder and its wearer safe,

guarded from glaive or gleaming axe ---

'Lo! Hurin\'s helm hoard thou till manhood

bids thee battle; then bravely don it';

and Turin touched it, but took it not, 325

too weak to wield that weight as yet,

and his mind mourned for Morwin\'s answer,

and the first of his sorrows o\'erfilled his soul.

Thus came it to pass in the court of Thingol

that Turin tarried for twelve long years 330

with Gumlin his guardian, who guided him thither

when but seven summers their sorrows had laid

on the son of Thalion. For the seven first

his lot was lightened, since he learnt at whiles

from faring folk what befell in Hithlum, 335

and tidings were told by trusty Elves,

how Morwin his mother was more at ease;

![](images/000091.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000092.png){.calibre1}

and they named Nienor that now was growing

to the sweet beauty of a slender maiden.

Thus his heart knew hope, and his hap was fairer. 340

There he waxed wonderly and won him praise

in all lands where Thingol as lord was held

for the strength of his body and stoutness of heart.

Much lore he learned, and loved wisdom,

but fortune followed him in few desires; 345

oft wrong and awry what he wrought turnéd;

what he loved he lost, what he longed for he won not; and full
friendship he found not easily,

nor was lightly loved for his looks were sad.

He was gloomy-hearted, and glad seldom, 350

for the sundering sorrow that seared his youth.

On manhood\'s threshold he was mighty holden

in the wielding of weapons; and in weaving song

he had a minstrel\'s mastery, but mirth was not in it, for he mourned
the misery of the Men of Hithlum. 355

Yet greater his grief grew thereafter,

when from Hithlum\'s hills he heard no more,

v3 - 0015-2.jpg

Two pages from the original manuscript of *The Lay of the Children of
Húrin* 16 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

and no traveller told him tidings of Morwin.

For those days were drawing to the Doom of the Gnomes, and the power of
the Prince of the People of Hell, 360

of the grim Glamhoth, was grown apace,

till the lands of the North were loud with their noise, and they fell on
the folk with flame and ruin

who bent not to Bauglir, or the borders passed

of dark Dorlómin with its dreary pines 365

that Hithlum unhappy is hight by Men.

There Morgoth shut them, and the Shadowy Mountains

fenced them from Faerie and the folk of the wood.

Even Beleg fared not so far abroad

as once was his wont, and the woods were filled 370

with the armies of Angband and evil deeds,

while murder walked on the marches of Doriath;

only mighty magic of Melian the Queen

yet held their havoc from the Hidden People.

To assuage his sorrow and to sate the rage 375

and hate of his heart for the hurts of his folk

then Húrin\'s son took the helm of his sire

and weapons weighty for the wielding of men,

and went to the woods with warlike Elves;

and far in the fight his feet led him, 380

into black battle yet a boy in years.

Ere manhood\'s measure he met and slew

the Orcs of Angband and evil things

that roamed and ravened on the realm\'s borders.

There hard his life, and hurts he got him, 385

the wounds of shaft and warfain sword,

and his prowess was proven and his praise renowned,

and beyond his years he was yielded honour;

for by him was holden the hand of ruin

from Thingol\'s folk, and Thû feared him - 390

Thû who was throned as thane most mighty

neath Morgoth Bauglir; whom that mighty one bade

'Go ravage the realm of the robber Thingol,

and mar the magic of Melian the Queen.'

Only one was there in war greater, 395

higher in honour in the hearts of the Elves,

than Turin son of Húrin untamed in war ---

even the huntsman Beleg of the Hidden People,

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 17**

the son of the wilderness who wist no sire

(to bend whose bow of the black yew-tree 400

had none the might), unmatched in knowledge

of the wood\'s secrets and the weary hills.

He was leader beloved of the light-armed bands,

the scouts that scoured, scorning danger,

afar o\'er the fells their foemen\'s lairs; 405

and tales and tidings timely won them

of camps and councils, of comings and goings -

all the movements of the might of Morgoth the Terrible.

Thus Turin, who trusted to targe and sword,

who was fain of fighting with foes well seen, 410

and the banded troops of his brave comrades

were snared seldom and smote unlooked-for.

Then the fame of the fights on the far marches

were carried to the court of the King of Doriath,

and tales of Turin were told in his halls, 415

and how Beleg the ageless was brother-in-arms

to the black-haired boy from the beaten people.

Then the king called them to come before him

ever and anon when the Ore-raids waned;

to rest them and revel, and to raise awhile 420

the secret songs of the sons of Ing.

On a time was Turin at the table of Thingol -

there was laughter long and the loud clamour

of a countless company that quaffed the mead,

amid the wine of Dor-Winion that went ungrudged 425

in their golden goblets; and goodly meats

there burdened the boards, neath the blazing torches

set high in those halls that were hewn of stone.

There mirth fell on many; there minstrels clear

did sing to them songs of the city of Tun 430

neath Tain-Gwethil, towering mountain,

where the great gods sit and gaze on the world

from the guarded shores of the gulf of Faerie.

Then one sang of the slaying at the Swanships' Haven

and the curse that had come on the kindreds since: 435

all silent sat and soundless harkened,

and waited the words save one alone ---

the Man among Elves that Morwin bore.

Unheeding he heard or high feasting

**18 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

or lay or laughter, and looked, it seemed, 440

to a deep distance in the dark without,

and strained for sounds in the still spaces,

for voices that vanished in the veils of night.

He was lithe and lean, and his locks were wild,

and woodland weeds he wore of brown 445

and grey and green, and gay jewel

or golden trinket his garb knew not.

An Elf there was - Orgof - of the ancient race

that was lost in the lands where the long marches

from the quiet waters of Cuiviénen 450

were made in the mirk of the midworld\'s gloom,

ere light was lifted aloft o\'er earth;

but blood of the Gnomes was blent in his veins.

He was close akin to the King of Doriath ---

a hardy hunter and his heart was brave, 45 5

but loose his laughter and light his tongue,

and his pride outran his prowess in arms.

He was fain before all of fine raiment

and of gems and jewels, and jealous of such

as found favour before himself. 460

Now costly clad in colours gleaming

he sat on a seat that was set on high

near the king and queen and close to Turin.

When those twain were at table he had taunted him oft, lightly with
laughter, for his loveless ways, 465

his haggard raiment and hair unshorn;

but Turin untroubled neither turned his head

nor wasted words on the wit of Orgof.

But this day of the feast more deep his gloom

than of wont, and his words men won harder; 470

for of twelve long years the tale was full

since on Morwin his mother through a maze of tears

he looked the last, and the long shadows

of the forest had fallen on his fading home;

and he answered few, and Orgof nought. 475

Then the fool\'s mirth was filled the more,

to a keener edge was his carping whetted

at the clothes uncouth and the uncombed hair

of Turin newcome from the tangled forest.

He drew forth daintily a dear treasure, 480

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 19**

a comb of gold that he kept about him,

and tendered it to Turin; but he turned not his eyes, nor deigned to
heed or harken to Orgof,

who too deep drunken that disdain should quell him:

'Nay, an thou knowest not thy need of comb, 485

nor its use,' quoth he, 'too young thou leftest

thy mother\'s ministry, and \'twere meet to go

that she teach thee tame thy tangled locks -

if the women of Hithlum be not wild and loveless,

uncouth and unkempt as their cast-off sons. ' 490

Then a fierce fury, like a fire blazing,

was born of bitterness in his bruised heart;

his white wrath woke at the words of scorn

for the women of Hithlum washed in tears;

and a heavy horn to his hand lying, 495

with gold adorned for good drinking,

of his might unmindful thus moved in ire

he seized and, swinging, swiftly flung it

in the face of Orgof. 'Thou fool', he said,

'fill thy mouth therewith, and to me no further 500

thus witless prate by wine bemused' ---

but his face was broken, and he fell backward,

and heavy his head there hit upon the stone

of the floor rock-paved mid flagons and vessels

of the o\'erturned table that tumbled on him 505

as clutching he fell; and carped no more,

in death silent. There dumb were all

at bench and board; in blank amaze

they rose around him, as with ruth of heart

he gazed aghast on his grievous deed, 510

on his wine-stained hand, with wondering eyes

half-comprehending. On his heel then he turned

into the night striding, and none stayed him;

but some their swords half slipped from sheaths

--- they were Orgof\'s kin --- yet for awe of Thingol 515

they dared not draw while the dazed king

stonefacéd stared on his stricken thane

and no sign showed them. But the slayer weary

his hands laved in the hidden stream

that strikes 'fore the gates, nor stayed his tears: 520

'Who has cast,' he cried, 'a curse upon me;

**2O THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

for all I do is ill, and an outlaw now,

in bitter banishment and blood-guilty,

of my fosterfather I must flee the halls,

nor look on the lady beloved again'--- 525

yea, his heart to Hithlum had hastened him now,

but that road he dared not, lest the wrath he draw

of the Elves after him, and their anger alight

should speed the spears in despite of Morgoth

o\'er the hills of Hithlum to hunt him down; 530

lest a doom more dire than they dreed of old

be meted his mother and the Maid of Tears.

In the furthest folds of the Forest of Doriath,

in the darkest dales on its drear borders,

in haste he hid him, lest the hunt take him; 535

and they found not his footsteps who fared after,

the thanes of Thingol; who thirty days

sought him sorrowing, and searched in vain

with no purpose of ill, but the pardon bearing

of Thingol throned in the Thousand Caves. 540

He in council constrained the kin of Orgof

to forget their grief and forgiveness show,

in that wilful bitterness had barbed the words

of Orgof the Elf; said 'his hour had come

that his soul should seek the sad pathway 545

to the deep valley of the Dead Awaiting,

there a thousand years thrice to ponder

in the gloom of Gurthrond his grim jesting,

ere he fare to Faerie to feast again.'

Yet of his own treasure he oped the gates, 550

and gifts ungrudging of gold and gems

to the sons he gave of the slain; and his folk

well deemed the deed. But that doom of the King

Turin knew not, and turned against him

the hands of the Elves he unhappy believed, 555

wandering the woodland woeful-hearted;

for his fate would not that the folk of the caves

should harbour longer Hurin\'s offspring.

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 21**

**NOTES**

(Throughout the Notes statements such as *'Delimorgoth* A, and B as
typed' (line II) imply that the reading in the printed text (in that
case *Delu-Morgoth)* is a later emendation made to B).

8 *Húrin* is *Úrin* in the *Lost Tales* (and still when this poem was
begun, see note to line 213), and his name *Thalion* 'Steadfast', found
in *The Silmarillion* and the *Narn,* does not occur in them (though he
is called 'the Steadfast').

11 *Delimorgoth* A, and B as typed. *Morgoth* occurs once only in the
*Lost Tales,* in the typescript version of the *Tale of* *Tinúviel*
(11.44); see note to line 20.

13 *Ninin Udathriol* A, and B as typed; this occurs in the *Tale*
(11.84; for explanation of the name see 11.346). When changing
*Udathriol* to *Unothradin* my father wrote in the margin of B: 'or
*Nirnaithos Unothradin'.*

17 Above *Erithámrod* is pencilled in A *Urinthalion.*

20 B as typed had *Belcha,* which was then changed through *Belegor,
Melegor,* to *Bauglir.* (A has a different reading here: as *a myriad
rats in measureless army I might pull* *down the proudest*\...) *Belcha*
occurs in the typescript version of the *Tale of Tinúviel* (11.44),
where *Belcha* *Morgoth* are said to be Melko\'s names among the Gnomes.

*Bauglir* is found as a name of Morgoth in *The Silmarillion* and the
*Narn.*

22 *Melko\'s* A; *Belcha\'s* B as typed, then the line changed to *To*
*the halls* of *Belegor* (\> *Melegor),* and finally to the reading
given. See note to line 20.

25 Above *Erithámrod* in A is written *UrinThalion* (see note to line
17); *Úrin \> Húrin,* and a direction to read *Thalion* *Húrin.*

29 *Fimweg\'s son* A, and B as typed; the emendation is a later one, and
at the same time my father wrote in the margin of B

'he was Fingolfin\'s son', clearly a comment on the change of *son* to
*heir. Finweg* is *Finwë Nólemë* Lord of the Noldoli, who in *the Lost
Tales* was Turgon\'s father (1.115), not as he afterwards became his
grandfather.

50 *Kor \> Cor A, Cor* B as typed. When emending *Cor* to *Corthûn* my
father wrote in the margin of B: *'Corthun* or *Tun'.*

51 *Thalion* A, and B as typed.

*Delimorgoth* A, and B as typed (as at line 11).

73 In B there is a mark of insertion between lines 72 and 73. This
probably refers to a line in A, not taken up into B: *bound by* *the (\>
my) spell of bottomless (\> unbroken) might.*

**22 THE** LAYS OF BELERIAND

75 *Belcha* A, and B as typed; the same chain of emendations in B as at
lines 20 and 22.

84 *Bauglir:* as at line 75.

105 *Mavwin* A, and B as typed; in B then emended to *Mailwin,* and back
to *Mavwin; Morwin* written later in the margin of B. Exactly the same
at 129, and at 137 though here without *Morwin* in the margin; at 145
*Mavwin* unemended, but *Morwin* in the margin. Thereafter *Mavwin*
stands unemended and without marginal note, as far as 438 (see note).

For consistency I read *Morwin* throughout the first version of the
poem. *-Mavwin* is the form in the *Tale*; *Mailwin* does not occur
elsewhere.

117 On the variation *Nienóri/Nienor* in the *Tale* see 11. 118---19.

120 *Tinúviel* A, *Tinwiel* B unemended but with *Tinūviel* in the
margin. *Tinwiel* does not occur elsewhere.

121 *Ermabwed* 'One-handed' is Beren\'s title or nickname in the *Last
Tales.*

137 *Gumlin* is named in the *Tale* (II. 74, etc.); the younger of the
two guardians of Turin on his journey to Doriath (here called *Halog)*
is not.

160 *Belcha* A, and B as typed, emended to *Bauglir.* Cf. notes to lines
20, 22, 75.

213 *Urin \> Húrin* A; but *Húrin* A in line 216.

218 *Ninin Udathriol* A, and B as typed; cf. line 13.

226 The distinction between 'Gnomes\' and 'Elves\' is still made; see
1.43-4.

230 *Dorwinian* A.

306 *For Mavwin was Melian moved to ruth* A, and B as typed, with *Then
was Melian moved* written in the margin.

The second half-line has only three syllables unless *moved* is read
*movéd,* which is not satisfactory. The second version of the poem has
here *For Morwen Melian was moved to*

*ruth.* Cf. lines 494, 519.

333 *Turin Thaliodrin* A (cf. line 115), emended to *the son of*
*Thalion.*

361 *Glamhoth* appears in *The Fall of Gondolin* (11. 160), with the
translation 'folk of dreadful hate'.

364 *Belcha* A, and B as typed; then \> *Melegor \> Bauglir* in B.

392 *Bauglir:* as at line 364.

408 *Morgoth Belcha* A, and B as typed.

430 *Kor \> Cor* A, *Cor* B as typed. Cf. line 50.

431 *Tengwethil* A, and B as typed. In the early Gnomish dictionary and
in the Name-list to *The Fall of Gondolin* the Gnomish name of
Taniquetil is *Danigwethil* (1.266, II-337).

438 *Mavwin A,* and B as typed, but *Mavwin \> Morwen* a later **THE LAV
OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 23**

emendation in B. I read *Morwin* throughout the first version of the
poem (see note to line 105).

450 *Cuinlimfin* A, and B as typed; *Cuiviénen* a later emendation in B.
The form in the *Lost Tales* is *Koiviё-Néni; Cuinlimfin* occurs nowhere
else.

461-3 These lines bracketed and marked with an X in B.

471 This line marked with an X in B.

472 *Mavwin \> Morwen* B; see line 438.

494 *all washed in tears* A, *washed in tears* B (half-line of three
syllables), with an X in the margin and an illegible word written in
pencil before *washed.* Cf. lines 306, 519. The second version of the
poem does not reach this point.

514---16 Against these lines my father wrote in the margin of B: 'Make
Orgof\'s kin set on him and T. fight his way out.'

517 *stonefacéd stared:* the accent on *stonefacéd* was put in later and
the line marked with an X. --- In his essay *On* *Translating Beowulf*
(1940; *The Monsters and the Critics* *and Other Essays* (1983) p. 67)
my father gave *stared* *stonyfaced* as an example of an Old English
metrical type.

519 *his hands laved:* the line is marked with an X in B. Cf. lines 306,
494.

528 With the half-line *and their anger alight* the second, more
finished, part of the manuscript A begins; see p. 4.

529 *Belcha* A, *Morgoth* B as typed.

548 *Guthrond* A, and B as typed.

Commentary on the *Prologue*

and *Part I 'Túrin\'s Fostering'*

The opening section or 'Prologue' of the poem derives from the opening
of the *Tale* (11. 70---1) and in strictly narrative terms there has
been little development. In lines 18-21 (and especially in the rejected
line in A, as *a* *myriad rats in measureless army/might pull down the
proudest)* is clearly foreshadowed the story in *The Silmarillion* (p.
195):

. . . they took him at last alive, by the command of Morgoth, for the
Orcs grappled him with their hands, which clung to him though he hewed
off their arms; and ever their numbers were renewed, until at last he
fell buried beneath them.

On the other hand the motive in the later story for capturing him alive
(Morgoth knew that Húrin had been to Gondolin) is necessarily not
present, since Gondolin in the older phases of the legends was not
discovered till Turgon retreated down Sirion after the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears (II. 120, 208). That he was taken alive by Morgoth\'s
**24 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

command is however already stated in the poem (line 20), though it is
not explained why. In the *Tale* Morgoth\'s interest in Húrin as a tool
for the discovery of Turgon arose from his knowledge that

the Elves of Kôr thought little of Men, holding them in scant fear or
suspicion for their blindness and lack of skill

\- an idea that is repeated in the poem (46---8); but this idea seems
only to have arisen in Morgoth\'s mind when he came to Húrin in his
dungeon (44ff.)

The place of Húrin\'s torment (in the *Tale* 'a lofty place of the
mountains\') is now defined as *a stool of stone* on the steepest peak
of Thangorodrim; and this is the first occurrence of that name.

In the change of *son* to *heir* in line 29 is seen the first hint of a
development in the kingly house of the Noldoli, with the appearance of a
second generation between Finwë (Finweg) and Turgon; but by the time
that my father pencilled this change on the text (and noted 'He was
Fingolfin\'s son') the later genealogical structure was already in
being, and this is as it were a casual indication of it.

In 'Túrin\'s Fostering' there is a close relationship between the *Tale*
and the poem, extending to many close similarities of wording-especially
abundant in the scene in Thingol\'s hall leading to the death of Orgof;
and some phrases had a long life, surviving from the *Tale,* through the
poem, and into the *Narn i Hîn Húrin,* as

rather would she dwell poor among Men than live sweetly as an almsguest
among the woodland Elves (11-73)

but to spend her days

as alms-guest of others, even Elfin kings, (284---6)

it liked her little

she would not yet humble her pride to be an alms-guest, not even of a
king *(Narn* p. 70)

\- though in the *Narn* the 'alms-guest' passage occurs at a different
point, before Turin left Hithlum (Morwen\'s hope that Húrin would come
back is in the *Narn* her reason\'for not journeying to Doriath with her
son, not for refusing the later invitation to her to go).

Of Morwen\'s situation in Dor-lómin after the Battle of Unnumbered Tears
there are a few things to say. In the poem (111-13) men unmindful of his
mighty lordship

dwelt in Dorlómin and dealt unkindly

with his widowed wife

\- echoing the *Tale:* 'the strange men who dwelt nigh knew not the
dignity of the Lady Mavwin', but there is still no indication of who
these men were or where they came from (see II. 126). As so often, the
narrative **THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 25**

situation was prepared but its explanation had not emerged. The
un-clarity of the *Tale* as to where Úrin dwelt before the great Battle
(see II. 120) is no longer present: *the dwelling was dear where he*
*dwelt of old* (288). Nienor was born before Turin left (on the
contradiction in the *Tale* on this point see II. 131); and the
chronology of Turin\'s childhood is still that of the *Tale* (see II.
142): seven years old when he left Hithlum (332), seven years in Doriath
while tidings still came from Morwen (333), twelve years since he came
to Doriath when he slew Orgof (471). In the later story the last figure
remained unchanged, which suggests that the X (mark of dissatisfaction)
placed against line 471 had some other reason.

There are several references in the poem to Húrin and Beren having been
friends and fellows-in-arms (122-4, 248---9, 298). In the *Tale* it was
said originally (when Beren was a Man) that Egnor Beren\'s father was
akin to Mavwin; this was replaced by a different passage (when Beren had
become a Gnome) according to which Egnor was a friend of **Ú**rin ('and
Beren Ermabwed son of Egnor he knew'); see II. 71-2, 139. In the later
version of the *Tale of Tinúviel* (II. 44) Urin is named as the 'brother
in arms\' of Egnor; this was emended to make Úrin\'s relationship with
Beren himself --- as in the poem. In *The Silmarillion* (p. 198) Morwen
thought to send Turin to Thingol 'for Beren son of Barahir was her
father\'s kinsman, and he had been moreover a friend of Húrin, ere evil
befell'. There is no mention of the fact in the *Narn* (p. 63): Morwen
merely says: 'Am I not now kin of the king \[Thingol\]? For Beren son of
Barahir was grandson of Bregor, as was my father also.'

That Beren was still an Elf, not a Man, (deducible on other grounds) is
apparent from lines 178---9:

and never ere now for need or wonder

had children of Men chosen that pathway

\- cf. the *Tale* (II. 72): 'and Turin son of Urin was the first of Men
to tread that way', changed from the earlier reading 'and Beren Ermabwed
was the first of Men . . .'

In the parting of Turin from his mother comparison with the *Tale* will
show some subtle differences which need not be spelled out here. The
younger of Turin\'s guardians is now named, Halog (and it is said that
Gumlin and Halog were the only 'henchmen' left to Morwen).

Some very curious things are said of Beleg in the poem. He is twice
(200, 399) called 'a (the) son of the wilderness who wist no sire', and
at line 416 he is 'Beleg the ageless'. There seems to be a mystery about
him, an otherness that sets him apart (as he set himself apart, 195)
from the Elves of Thingol\'s lordship (see further p. 127). It may be
that there is still a trace of this in the 1930 'Silmarillion', where it
is said that none went from Doriath to the Battle of Unnumbered Tears
save Mablung, **26 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

and Beleg 'who obeyed no man' (in the later text this becomes 'nor any
out of Doriath save Mablung and Beleg, who were unwilling to have no
part in these great deeds. To them Thingol gave leave to go . . .';
*The* *Silmarillion* p. 189). In the poem (219) Beleg says expressly
that he did not go to the great Battle. --- His great bow of black
yew-wood (so in *The* *Silmarillion,* p. 208, where it is named
*Belthronding)* now appears (400): in the *Tale* he is not particularly
marked out as a bowman (II. 123).

Beleg\'s *The gods have guided you* (215) and Turin\'s guardians\'

thought *the gods are good* (244) accord with references in the *Lost*
*Tales* to the influence of the Valar on Men and Elves in the Great
Lands: see II. 141.

The potent wine that Beleg carried and gave to the travellers from his
flask (223 ff.) is notable --- brought from *the burning South* and *by
long* *ways* carried *to the lands of the North ---* as is the name of
the land from which it came: *Dor-Winion* (230, 425). The only other
places in my father\'s writings where this name occurs (so far as I
know) are in *The* *Hobbit,* Chapter IX *Barrels out of Bond,* 'the
heady vintage of the great gardens of Dorwinion', and 'the wine of
Dorwinion brings deep and pleasant dreams\'.\* See further p. 127.

The curious element in Thingol\'s message to Morwen in the *Tale,*
explaining why he did not go with his people to the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears (11.73), has now been rejected; but with Morwen\'s response to the
messengers out of Doriath there enters the legend the Dragon-helm of
Dor-lómin (297 ff.). As yet little is told of it (though more is said in
the second version of the poem, see p. 126): Húrin often bore it in
battle (in the *Narn* it is denied that he used it, p. 76); it magically
protected its wearer (as still in the *Narn,* p. 75); and it was *with
that token crowned of the towering dragon,* and *o\'erwritten with runes
by wrights of old* (cf. the *Narn:* 'on it were graven runes of
victory'). But nothing is here said of how Húrin came by it, beyond the
fact that it was his *heirloom.* Very notable is the passage (307ff.) in
which is described Thingol\'s handling of the helm *as his* *hoard were
scant,* despite his possession of *dungeons filled / with* *Elfin
armouries of ancient gear.* I have commented previously (see II.
128---9, 245\~6) on the early emphasis on the poverty of Tinwelint
(Thingol): here we have the first appearance of the idea of his wealth
(present also at the beginning of *the Lay of Leithian).* Also notable
is the close echoing of the lines of the poem in the words of the
*Narn,* p. 76:

*\*Doruiinion* is marked on the decorated map by Pauline Bayncs, as a
region on the North-western shores of the Sea of Rhûn. It must be
presumed that this, like other names on that map, was communicated to
her by my father (see *Unfinished Tales* p. 261, footnote), but its
placing seems surprising.

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 27**

Yet Thingol handled the Helm of Hador as though his hoard were scanty,
and he spoke courteous words, saying: 'Proud were the head that bore
this helm, which the sires of Húrin bore.'

There is also a clear echo of lines 315---18

Then a thought was thrust into Thingol\'s heart,

and Turin he called and told when come

that Morwin his mother a mighty thing

had sent to her son, his sire\'s heirloom

in the prose of the *Narn:*

Then a thought came to him, and he summoned Turin, and told him that
Morwen had sent to her son a mighty thing, the heirloom of his fathers.

Compare also the passages that follow in both works, concerning Turin\'s
being too young to lift the Helm, and being in any case too unhappy to
heed it on account of his mother\'s refusal to leave Hithlum. This was
*the* *first of his sorrows* (328); in the *Narn* (p. 75) the second.

The account of Turin\'s character in boyhood (341 ff.) is very close to
that in the *Tale* (II. 74), which as I have noted before (II. 121)
survived into the *Narn* (p. 77): the latter account indeed echoes the
poem ('he learned much lore', 'neither did he win friendship easily').
In the poem it is now added that *in weaving song / he had a
minstrel\'s* *mastery, but mirth was not in it.*

An important new element in the narrative enters with the companion-ship
of Beleg and Turin (wearing the Dragon-helm, 377) in warfare on the
marches of Doriath:

how Beleg the ageless was brother-in-arms

to the black-haired boy from the beaten people. (416-17) Of this there
is no mention in the *Tale* at all (11.74). Cf. my Commentary, II. 122:

Turin\'s prowess against the Orcs during his sojourn in Artanor is given
a more central or indeed unique importance in the tale ('he held the
wrath of Melko from them for many years\'), especially as Beleg, his
companion-in-arms in the later versions, is not here mentioned.

In the poem the importance to Doriath of Turin\'s warfare is not
diminished, however:

for by him was holden the hand of ruin

from Thingol\'s folk, and Thû feared him (389-90)

We meet here for the first time Thû, *thane most mighty / neath* **28
THE** LAYS **OF BELERIAND**

*Morgoth Bauglir.* It is interesting to learn that Thû knew of Turin and
feared him, also that Morgoth ordered Thû to assault Doriath: this story
will reappear in the *Lay of Leithian.*

In the story of Turin and Orgof the verses are very clearly following
the prose of the *Tale,* and there are many close likenesses of wording,
as already noted. The relation of this scene to the later story has been
discussed previously (II. 121-2). Orgof still has Gnome-blood, which may
imply the continuance of the story that there were Gnomes among
Thingol\'s people (see 11.43). The occasion of Turin\'s return from the
forest to the Thousand Caves (a name that first occurs in the poem)
becomes, as it seems, a great feast, with songs of Valinor - quite
unlike the later story, where the occasion is in no way marked out and
Thingol and Melian were not in Menegroth *(Narn* p. 79); and Turin and
Orgof were *set on high / near the king and queen* (i.e. presumably on
the dais, at the 'high table'). Whether it was a rejection of this idea
that caused my father to bracket lines 461-3 and mark them with an X I
cannot say. *The secret songs of the sons of Ing* referred to in this
passage (421) are not indeed songs of the sons of Ing of the Ǽlfwine
history (II. 301 ff.); this Ing is the Gnomish form of Ingwë, Lord of
the First Kindred of the Elves (earlier Inwë Lord of the Teleri).\*

The lines concerning Orgof dead are noteworthy:

his hour had come

that his soul should seek the sad pathway

to the deep valley of the Dead Awaiting,

there a thousand years thrice to ponder

in the gloom of Gurthrond his grim jesting,

ere he fare to Faerie to feast again. (544---9)

With this compare the tale of *The Coming of the Valar and the*
*Building of Valinor* (1. 76):

There \[in the hall of Vê\] Mandos spake their doom, and there they
waited in the darkness, dreaming of their past deeds, until such time as
he appointed when they might again be born into their children, and go
forth to laugh and sing again.

The name *Gurthrond* (\< *Guthrond)* occurs nowhere else; the first
element is doubtless *gurth* 'death', as in the name of Turin\'s sword

\*That *Ing* is the Gnomish form of *Ingwë a* ppears from the 1926
'Sketch of the Mythology' and the 1930 'Silmarillion'. *Ing* was
replaced by *I mile* in *The Cottage of Last* *Play,* but there the
Gnomish name of Inwë is *Inwithiel,* changed from *(Jim Githil* (I. 16,
22)".

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 29**

There remain a few particular points concerning names. At line 366

*Hithlum* is explained as the name of Dorlómin among Men: of dark
Dorlómin with its dreary pines

that Hithlum unhappy is hight by Men.

This is curious. In the *Lost Tales* the name of the land among Men was
*Aryador;* so in the *Tale of Turambar* (II. 70): In those days my folk
dwelt in a vale of Hisilómë and that land did Men name Aryador in the
tongues they then used.

In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is specifically stated that *Hithlum* and
*Dorlómin* were Gnomish names for *Hisilómë,* and there seems every
reason to suppose that this was always the case. The answer to the
puzzle may however lie in the same passage of the *Tale of Turambar,*
where it is said that

often was the story of Turambar and the Foalókë in their \[i.e. Men\'s\]

mouths - but rather after the fashion of the Gnomes did they say
Turumart and the Fuithlug.

Perhaps then the meaning of line 366 is that Men called Hisilómë
*Hithlum* because they used the Gnomish name, not that it was the name
in their own tongue.

In the following lines (367---8)

the Shadowy Mountains

fenced them from Faerie and the folk of the wood.

This is the first occurrence of the name *Shadowy Mountains,* and it is
used as it was afterwards *(Ered Wethrin);* in the *Lost Tales* the
mountains forming the southern fence of Hithlum are called the Iron
Mountains or the Bitter Hills (see II. 61).

The name *Cuinlimfin* of the Waters of Awakening (note to line 450)
seems to have been a passing idea, soon abandoned.

Lastly, at line 50 occurs (by emendation in B from *C*ó *r)* the unique
compound name *Corthun,* while at 430 *the city of C*ó *r* was emended
to *the city of Tún;* see II. 292.

II

BELEG

Long time alone he lived in the hills

a hunter of beast and hater of Men, 560

or Ores, or Elves, till outcast folk

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 29**

There remain a few particular points concerning names. At line 366

*Hithlum* is explained as the name of Dorlómin among Men: of dark
Dorlómin with its dreary pines

that Hithlum unhappy is hight by Men.

This is curious. In the *Lost Tales* the name of the land among Men was
*Aryador;* so in the *Tale of Turambar* (II. 70): In those days my folk
dwelt in a vale of Hisilómë and that land did Men name Aryador in the
tongues they then used.

In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is specifically stated that *Hithlum* and
*Dorlómin* were Gnomish names for *Hisilómë,* and there seems every
reason to suppose that this was always the case. The answer to the
puzzle may however lie in the same passage of the *Tale of Turambar,*
where it is said that

often was the story of Turambar and the Foalókë in their \[i.e. Men\'s\]

mouths - but rather after the fashion of the Gnomes did they say
Turumart and the Fuithlug.

Perhaps then the meaning of line 366 is that Men called Hisilómë
*Hithlum* because they used the Gnomish name, not that it was the name
in their own tongue.

In the following lines (367---8)

the Shadowy Mountains

fenced them from Faerie and the folk of the wood.

This is the first occurrence of the name *Shadowy Mountains,* and it is
used as it was afterwards *(Ered Wethrin);* in the *Lost Tales* the
mountains forming the southern fence of Hithlum are called the Iron
Mountains or the Bitter Hills (see II. 61).

The name *Cuinlimfin* of the Waters of Awakening (note to line 450)
seems to have been a passing idea, soon abandoned.

Lastly, at line 50 occurs (by emendation in B from *C*ó *r)* the unique
compound name *Corthun,* while at 430 *the city of C*ó *r* was emended
to *the city of Tún;* see II. 292.

II

BELEG

Long time alone he lived in the hills

a hunter of beast and hater of Men, 560

or Ores, or Elves, till outcast folk

**3O THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

there one by one, wild and reckless

around him rallied; and roaming far

they were feared by both foe and friend of old.

For hot with hate was the heart of Turin, 565

nor a friend found him such folk of Thingol

as he wandering met in the wood\'s fastness.

There Beleg the brave on the borders of Doriath

they found and fought --- and few were with him ---

and o\'erborne by numbers they bound him at last, 570

till their captain came to their camp at eve.

Afar from that fight his fate that day

had taken Turin on the trail of the Ores,

as they hastened home to the Hills of Iron

with the loot laden of the lands of Men. 575

Then soon was him said that a servant of Thingol

they had tied to a tree --- and Turin coming

stared astonied on the stern visage

of Beleg the brave his brother in arms,

of whom he learned the lore of leaping blades, 580

and of bended bow and barbed shaft,

and the wild woodland\'s wisdom secret,

when they blent in battle the blood of their wounds.

Then Turin\'s heart was turned from hate,

and he bade unbind Beleg the huntsman. 585

'Now fare thou free! But, of friendship aught

if thy heart yet holds for Hurin\'s son,

never tell thou tale that Turin thou sawst

an outlaw unloved from Elves and Men,

whom Thingol\'s thanes yet thirst to slay. 590

Betray not my trust or thy troth of yore! '

Then Beleg of the bow embraced him there -

he had not fared to the feast or the fall of Orgof -

there kissed him kindly comfort speaking:

'Lo! nought know I of the news thou tellest; 595

but outlawed or honoured thou ever shalt be

the brother of Beleg, come bliss come woe!

Yet little me likes that thy leaping sword

the life should drink of the leaguered Elves.

Are the grim Glamhoth then grown so few, 600

or the foes of Faerie feeble-hearted,

that warlike Men have no work to do?

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 31**

Shall the foes of Faerie be friends of Men?

Betrayest thou thy troth whom we trusted of yore?'

'Nor of armed Orc, nor \[of\] Elf of the wood, 605

nor of any on earth have I honour or love,

O Beleg the bowman. This band alone

I count as comrades, my kindred in woe

and friendless fate - our foes the world.'

' Let the bow of Beleg to your band be joined; 61 o

and swearing death to the sons of darkness

let us suage our sorrow and the smart of fate!

Our valour is not vanquished, nor vain the glory

that once we did win in the woods of old.'

Thus hope in the heart of Hurin\'s offspring 615

awoke at those words; and them well liked

of that band the boldest, save Blodrin only ---

Blodrin Bor\'s son, who for blood and for gold

alone lusted, and little he recked

whom he robbed of riches or reft of life, 620

were it Elf or Orc; but he opened not

the thoughts of his heart. There throbbed the harp,

where the fires flickered, and the flaming brands

of pine were piled in the place of their camp;

where glad men gathered in good friendship 625

as dusk fell down on the drear woodland.

Then a song on a sudden soaring loudly ---

and the trees up-looming towering harkened -

was raised of the Wrack of the Realm of the Gods;

of the need of the Gnomes on the Narrow Crossing; 630

of the fight at Fangros, and Fëanor\'s sons\'

oath unbreakable. Then up sprang Beleg:

'That our vaunt and our vows be not vain for ever,

even such as they swore, those seven chieftains,

an oath let us swear that is unchanging 635

as Tain-Gwethil\'s towering mountain! '

Their blades were bared, as blood shining

in the flame of the fires while they flashed and touched.

As with one man\'s voice the words were spoken,

and the oath uttered that must unrecalled 640

abide for ever, a bond of truth

and friendship in arms, and faith in peril.

**32 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Thus war was waked in the woods once more

for the foes of Faerie, and its fame widely,

and the fear of that fellowship, now fared abroad; 645

when the horn was heard of the hunting Elves

that shook the shaws and the sheer valleys.

Blades were naked and bows twanging,

and shafts from the shadows shooting winged,

and the sons of darkness slain and conquered; 650

even in Angband the Orcs trembled.

Then the word wandered down the ways of the forest

that Turin Thalion was returned to war;

and Thingol heard it, and his thanes were sped

to lead the lost one in love to his halls --- 655

but his fate was fashioned that they found him not.

Little gold they got in that grim warfare,

but weary watches and wounds for guerdon;

nor on robber-raids now rode they ever,

who fended from Faërie the fiends of Hell. 660

But Blodrin Bor\'s son for booty lusted,

for the loud laughter of the lawless days,

and meats unmeasured, and mead-goblets

refilled and filled, and the flagons of wine

that went as water in their wild revels. 665

Now tales have told that trapped as a child

he was dragged by the Dwarves to their deep mansions, and in Nogrod
nurtured, and in nought was like,

spite blood and birth, to the blissful Elves.

His heart hated Hurin\'s offspring 670

and the bowman Beleg; so biding his while

he fled their fellowship and forest hidings

to the merciless Orcs, whose moon-pallid

cruel-curved blades to kill spare not;

than whose greed for gold none greater burns 675

save in hungry hearts of the hell-dragons.

He betrayed his troth; traitor made him

and the forest fastness of his fellows in arms

he opened to the Orcs, nor his oath heeded.

There they fought and fell by foes outnumbered, 680

by treachery trapped at a time of night

when their fires faded and few were waking ---

some wakened never, not for wild noises,

nor cries nor curses, nor clashing steel,

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN** 33

swept as they slumbered to the slades of death. 685

But Turin they took, though towering mighty

at the Huntsman\'s hand he hewed his foemen,

as a bear at bay mid bellowing hounds,

unheeding his hurts; at the hest of Morgoth

yet living they lapped him, his limbs entwining, 690

with hairy hands and hideous arms.

Then Beleg was buried in the bodies of the fallen,

as sorely wounded he swooned away;

and all was over, and the Orcs triumphed.

The dawn over Doriath dimly kindled 695

saw Blodrin Bor\'s son by a beech standing

with throat thirled by a thrusting arrow,

whose shaven shaft, shod with poison,

and feather-winged, was fast in the tree.

He bargained the blood of his brothers for gold: 700

thus his meed was meted - in the mirk at random

by an ore-arrow his oath came home.

From the magic mazes of Melian the Queen

they haled unhappy Húrin\'s offspring,

lest he flee his fate; but they fared slowly 705

and the leagues were long of their laboured way

over hill and hollow to the high places,

where the peaks and pinnacles of pitiless stone

looming up lofty are lapped in cloud,

and veiled in vapours vast and sable; 710

where Eiglir Engrin, the Iron Hills, lie

o\'er the hopeless halls of Hell upreared

wrought at the roots of the roaring cliffs

of Thangorodrim\'s thunderous mountain.

Thither led they laden with loot and evil; 715

but Beleg yet breathed in blood drenched

aswoon, till the sun to the South hastened,

and the eye of day was opened wide.

Then he woke and wondered, and weeping took him,

and to Turin Thalion his thoughts were turned, 720

that o\'erborne in battle and bound he had seen.

Then he crawled from the corpses that had covered him over, weary,
wounded, too weak to stand.

So Thingol\'s thanes athirst and bleeding

in the forest found him: his fate willed not 725

**34 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

that he should drink the draught of death from foes.

Thus they bore him back in bitter torment

his tidings to tell in the torchlit halls

of Thingol the king; in the Thousand Caves

to be healed whole by the hands enchanted 730

of Melian Mablui, the moonlit queen.

Ere a week was outworn his wounds were cured,

but his heart\'s heaviness those hands of snow

nor soothed nor softened, and sorrow-laden

he fared to the forest. No fellows sought he 735

in his hopeless hazard, but in haste alone

he followed the feet of the foes of Elf land,

the dread daring, and the dire anguish,

that held the hearts of Hithlum\'s men

and Doriath\'s doughtiest in a dream of fear. 740

Unmatched among Men, or magic-wielding

Elves, or hunters of the Ore-kindred,

or beasts of prey for blood pining,

was his craft and cunning, that cold and dead

an unseen slot could scent o\'er stone, 745

foot-prints could find on forest pathways

that lightly on the leaves were laid in moons

long waned, and washed by windy rains.

The grim Glamhoth\'s goblin armies

go cunning-footed, but his craft failed not 750

to tread their trail, till the lands were darkened,

and the light was lost in lands unknown.

Never-dawning night was netted clinging

in the black branches of the beetling trees;

oppressed by pungent pinewood\'s odours, 755

and drowsed with dreams as the darkness thickened,

he strayed steerless. The stars were hid,

and the moon mantled. There magic foundered

in the gathering glooms, there goblins even

(whose deep eyes drill the darkest shadows) 760

bewildered wandered, who the way forsook

to grope in the glades, there greyly loomed

of girth unguessed in growth of ages

the topless trunks of trees enchanted.

That fathomless fold by folk of Elf land 765

is Taur-na-Fuin, the Trackless Forest

of Deadly Nightshade, dreadly named.

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 35**

Abandoned, beaten, there Beleg lying

to the wind harkened winding, moaning

in bending boughs; to branches creaking 770

up high over head, where huge pinions

of the plumed pine-trees complained darkly

in black foreboding. There bowed hopeless,

in wit wildered, and wooing death,

he saw on a sudden a slender sheen 775

shine a-shimmering in the shades afar,

like a glow-worm\'s lamp a-gleaming dim.

He marvelled what it might be as he moved softly;

for he knew not the Gnomes of need delving

in the deep dungeons of dark Morgoth. 780

Unmatched their magic in metal-working,

who jewels and gems that rejoiced the Gods

aforetime fashioned, when they freedom held,

now swinking slaves of ceaseless labour

in Angband\'s smithies, nor ever were suffered 785

to wander away, warded always.

But little lanterns of lucent crystal

and silver cold with subtlest cunning

they strangely fashioned, and steadfast a flame

burnt unblinking there blue and pale, 790

unquenched for ever. The craft that lit them

was the jewel-makers\' most jealous secret.

Not Morgoth\'s might, nor meed nor torment

them vowed, availed to reveal that lore;

yet lights and lamps of living radiance, 795

many and magical, they made for him.

No dark could dim them the deeps wandering;

whose lode they lit was lost seldom

in groundless grot, or gulfs far under.

'Twas a Gnome he beheld on the heaped needles 800

of a pine-tree pillowed, when peering wary

he crept closer. The covering pelt

was loosed from the lamp of living radiance

by his side shining. Slumber-shrouded

his fear-worn face was fallen in shade. 805

Lest in webs woven of unwaking sleep,

spun round by spells in those spaces dark,

he lie forlorn and lost for ever,

the Hunter hailed him in the hushed forest ---

**36 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

to the drowsy deeps of his dream profound 81 o

fear ever-following came falling loud;

as the lancing lightning he leapt to his feet

full deeming that dread and death were upon him,

Funding go-Fuilin fleeing in anguish

from the mines of Morgoth. Marvelling he heard 815

the ancient tongue of the Elves of Tun;

and Beleg the Bowman embraced him there,

and learnt his lineage and luckless fate,

how thrust to thraldom in a throng of captives,

from the kindred carried and the cavernous halls 820

of the Gnomes renowned of Nargothrond,

long years he laboured under lashes and flails

of the baleful Balrogs, abiding his time.

A tale he unfolded of terrible flight

o\'er flaming fell and fuming hollow, 825

o\'er the parched dunes of the Plains of Drouth,

till his heart took hope and his heed was less.

'Then Taur-na-Fuin entangled my feet

in its mazes enmeshed; and madness took me

that I wandered witless, unwary stumbling 830

and beating the boles of the brooding pines

in idle anger --- and the Orcs heard me.

They were camped in a clearing, that close at hand

by mercy I missed. Their marching road

is beaten broad through the black shadows 835

by wizardry warded from wandering Elves;

but dread they know of the Deadly Nightshade,

and in haste only do they hie that way.

Now cruel cries and clamorous voices

awoke in the wood, and winged arrows 840

from horny bows hummed about me;

and following feet, fleet and stealthy,

were padding and pattering on the pine-needles;

and hairy hands and hungry fingers

in the glooms groping, as I grovelled fainting 845

till they cowering found me. Fast they clutched me

beaten and bleeding, and broken in spirit

they laughing led me, my lagging footsteps

with their spears speeding. Their spoils were piled,

and countless captives in that camp were chained, 850

and Elfin maids their anguish mourning.

THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 37

But one they watched, warded sleepless,

was stern-visaged, strong, and in stature tall

as are Hithlum\'s men of the misty hills.

Full length he lay and lashed to pickets 855

in baleful bonds, yet bold-hearted

his mouth no mercy of Morgoth sued,

but defied his foes. Foully they smote him.

Then he called, as clear as cry of hunter

that hails his hounds in hollow places, 860

on the name renowned of that noblest king -

but men unmindful remember him little ---

Húrin Thalion, who Erithámrod hight,

the Unbending, for Orc and Balrog

and Morgoth\'s might on the mountain yet 865

he defies fearless, on a fanged peak

of thunder-riven Thangorodrim.'

In eager anger then up sprang Beleg,

crying and calling, careless of Funding:

\'O Turin, Turin, my troth-brother, 870

to the brazen bonds shall I abandon thee,

and the darkling doors of the Deeps of Hell?'

'Thou wilt join his journey to the jaws of sorrow,

O bowman crazed, if thy bellowing cry

to the Orcs should come; their ears than cats\' 875

are keener whetted, and though the camp from here

be a day distant where those deeds I saw,

who knows if the Gnome they now pursue

that crept from their clutches, as a crawling worm

on belly cowering, whom they bleeding cast 880

in deathly swoon on the dung and slough

of their loathsome lair. O Light of Valinor!

and ye glorious Gods! How gleam their eyes,

and their tongues are red!' 'Yet I Turin will wrest

from their hungry hands, or to Hell be dragged, 885

or sleep with the slain in the slades of Death.

Thy lamp shall lead us, and my lore rekindle

and wise wood-craft!' \'O witless hunter,

thy words are wild --- wolves unsleeping

and wizardry ward their woeful captives; 890

unerring their arrows; the icy steel

of their curved blades cleaves unblunted

**38 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

the meshes of mail; the mirk to pierce

those eyes are able; their awful laughter

the flesh freezes! I fare not thither, 895

for fear fetters me in the Forest of Night:

better die in the dark dazed, forwandered,

than wilfully woo that woe and anguish!

I know not the way.' 'Are the knees then weak

of Flinding go-Fuilin? Shall free-born Gnome 900

thus show himself a shrinking slave,

who twice entrapped has twice escaped ?

Remember the might and the mirth of yore,

the renown of the Gnomes of Nargothrond! '

Thus Beleg the bowman quoth bold-hearted, 905

but Flinding fought the fear of his heart,

and loosed the light of his lamp of blue,

now brighter burning. In the black mazes

enwound they wandered, weary searching;

by the tall tree-boles towering silent 910

oft barred and baffled; blindly stumbling

over rock-fast roots writhing coiled;

and drowsed with dreams by the dark odours,

till hope was hidden. 'Hark thee, Flinding;

viewless voices vague and distant, 915

a muffled murmur of marching feet

that are shod with stealth shakes the stillness.'

'No noise I hear', the Gnome answered,

'thy hope cheats thee.' 'I hear the chains

clinking, creaking, the cords straining, 920

and wolves padding on worn pathways.

I smell the blood that is smeared on blades

that are cruel and crooked; the croaking laughter -

now, listen! louder and louder comes,'

the hunter said. 'I hear no sound', 925

quoth Flinding fearful. 'Then follow after! '

with bended bow then Beleg answered,

'my cunning rekindles, my craft needs not

thy lamp\'s leading.' Leaping swiftly

he shrank in the shadows; with shrouded lantern 930

Flinding followed him, and the forest-darkness

and drowsy dimness drifted slowly

unfolding from them in fleeing shadows,

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 39**

and its magic was minished, till they marvelling saw

they were brought to its borders. There black-gaping 935

an archway opened. By ancient trunks

it was framed darkly, that in far-off days

the lightning felled, now leaning gaunt

their lichen-leprous limbs uprooted.

There shadowy bats that shrilled thinly 940

flew in and flew out the air brushing

as they swerved soundless. A swooning light

faint filtered in, for facing North

they looked o\'er the leagues of the lands of mourning, o\'er the bleak
boulders, o\'er the blistered dunes 945

and dusty drouth of Dor-na-Fauglith;

o\'er that Thirsty Plain, to the threatening peaks,

now glimpsed grey through the grim archway,

of the marching might of the Mountains of Iron,

and faint and far in the flickering dusk 950

the thunderous towers of Thangorodrim.

But backward broad through the black shadows

from that darkling door dimly wandered

the ancient Ore-road; and even as they *gazed*

the silence suddenly with sounds of dread 955

was shaken behind them, and shivering echoes

from afar came fleeting. Feet were tramping;

trappings tinkling; and the troublous murmur

of viewless voices in the vaulted gloom

came near and nearer. 'Ah! now I hear', 960

said Flinding fearful; 'flee we swiftly

from hate and horror and hideous faces,

from fiery eyes and feet relentless!

Ah! woe that I wandered thus witless hither!'

Then beat in his breast, foreboding evil, 965

with dread unwonted the dauntless heart

of Beleg the brave. With blanched cheeks

in faded fern and the feathery leaves

of brown bracken they buried them deep,

where dank and dark a ditch was cloven 970

on the wood\'s borders by waters oozing,

dripping down to die in the drouth below.

Yet hardly were they hid when a host to view

round a dark turning in the dusky shadows

4O THE LAYS **OF BELERIAND**

came swinging sudden with a swift thudding 975

of feet after feet on fallen leaves.

In rank on rank of ruthless spears

that war-host went; weary stumbling

countless captives, cruelly laden

with bloodstained booty, in bonds of iron 980

they haled behind them, and held in ward

by the wolf-riders and the wolves of Hell.

Their road of ruin was a-reek with tears:

many a hall and homestead, many a hidden refuge

of Gnomish lords by night beleaguered 985

their o\'ermastering might of mirth bereft,

and fair things fouled, and fields curdled

with the bravest blood of the beaten people.

To an army of war was the Ore-band waxen

that Blodrin Bor\'s son to his bane guided 990

to the wood-marches, by the welded hosts

homeward hurrying to the halls of mourning

swiftly swollen to a sweeping plague.

Like a throbbing thunder in the threatening deeps

of cavernous clouds o\'ercast with gloom 995

now swelled on a sudden a song most dire,

and their hellward hymn their home greeted;

flung from the foremost of the fierce spearmen,

who viewed mid vapours vast and sable

the threefold peaks of Thangorodrim, 1ooo

it rolled rearward, rumbling darkly,

like drums in distant dungeons empty.

Then a werewolf howled; a word was shouted

like steel on stone; and stiffly raised

their spears and swords sprang up thickly 1005

as the wild wheatfields of the wargod\'s realm

with points that palely pricked the twilight.

As by wind wafted then waved they all,

and bowed, as the bands with beating measured

moved on mirthless from the mirky woods, 1o1o

from the topless trunks of Taur-na-Fuin,

neath the leprous limbs of the leaning gate.

Then Beleg the bowman in bracken cowering,

on the loathly legions through the leaves peering,

saw Turin the tall as he tottered forward 1015

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 41**

neath the whips of the Orcs as they whistled o\'er him; and rage arose
in his wrathful heart,

and piercing pity outpoured his tears.

The hymn was hushed; the host vanished

down the hellward slopes of the hill beyond; 1020

and silence sank slow and gloomy

round the trunks of the trees of Taur-na-Fuin,

and nethermost night drew near outside.

'Follow me, Flinding, from the forest cursed!

Let us haste to his help, to Hell if need be 1025

or to death by the darts of the dread Glamhoth!':

and Beleg bounded from the bracken madly,

like a deer driven by dogs baying

from his hiding in the hills and hollow places;

and Flinding followed fearful after him 1030

neath the yawning gate, through yew-thickets,

through bogs and bents and bushes shrunken,

till they reached the rocks and the riven moorlands

and friendless fells falling darkly

to the dusty dunes of Dor-na-Fauglith. 1035

In a cup outcarven on the cold hillside,

whose broken brink was bleakly fringed

with bended bushes bowed in anguish

from the North-wind\'s knife, beneath them far

the feasting camp of their foes was laid; 1040

the fiery flare of fuming torches,

and black bodies in the blaze they saw

crossing countlessly, and cries they heard

and the hollow howling of hungry wolves.

Then a moon mounted o\'er the mists riding, 1045

and the keen radiance of the cold moonshine

the shadows sharpened in the sheer hollows,

and slashed the slopes with slanting blackness;

in wreaths uprising the reek of fires

was touched to tremulous trails of silver. 1050

Then the fires faded, and their foemen slumbered

in a sleep of surfeit. No sentinel watched,

nor guards them girdled - what good were it

to watch wakeful in those withered regions

neath Eiglir Engrin, whence the eyes of Bauglir 1055

gazed unclosing from the gates of Hell?

**42 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Did not werewolves\' eyes unwinking gleam

in the wan moonlight --- the wolves that sleep not,

that sit in circles with slavering tongues

round camp or clearing of the cruel Glamhoth ? 1060

Then was Beleg a-shudder, and the unblinking eyes

nigh chilled his marrow and chained his flesh

in fear unfathomed, as flat to earth

by a boulder he lay. Lo! black cloud-drifts

surged up like smoke from the sable North, 1065

and the sheen was shrouded of the shivering moon;

the wind came wailing from the woeful mountains,

and the heath unhappy hissed and whispered;

and the moans came faint of men in torment

in the camp accursed. His quiver rattled 1070

as he found his feet and felt his bow,

hard horn-pointed, by hands of cunning

of black yew wrought; with bears\' sinews

it was stoutly strung; strength to bend it

had nor Man nor Elf save the magic helped him 1075

that Beleg the bowman now bore alone.

No arrows of the Orcs so unerring winged

as his shaven shafts that could shoot to a mark

that was seen but in glance ere gloom seized it.

Then Dailir he drew, his dart beloved; 1080

howso far fared it, or fell unnoted,

unsought he found it with sound feathers

and barbs unbroken (till it broke at last);

and fleet bade he fly that feather-pinioned

snaketonguéd shaft, as he snicked the string 1085

in the notch nimbly, and with naked arm

to his ear drew it. The air whistled,

and the tingling string twanged behind it,

soundless a sentinel sank before it ---

there was one of the wolves that awaked no more. 1090

Now arrows after he aimed swiftly

that missed not their mark and meted silent

death in the darkness dreadly stinging,

till three of the wolves with throats pierced,

and four had fallen with fleet-winged 1095

arrows a-quivering in their quenched eyes.

Then great was the gap in the guard opened,

and Beleg his bow unbent, and said:

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 43**

'Wilt come to the camp, comrade Flinding,

or await me watchful? If woe betide 11oo

thou might win with word through the woods homeward

to Thingol the king how throve my quest,

how Turin the tall was trapped by fate,

how Beleg the bowman to his bane hasted.'

Then Flinding fiercely, though fear shook him: 1105

'I have followed thee far, O forest-walker,

nor will leave thee now our league denying!'

Then both bow and sword Beleg left there

with his belt unbound in the bushes tangled

of a dark thicket in a dell nigh them, 111 o

and Flinding there laid his flickering lamp

and his nailed shoes, and his knife only

he kept, that uncumbered he might creep silent.

Thus those brave in dread down the bare hillside

towards the camp clambered creeping wary, 1115

and dared that deed in days long past

whose glory has gone through the gates of earth,

and songs have sung unceasing ringing

wherever the Elves in ancient places \\

had light or laughter in the later world. 1120

With breath bated on the brink of the dale

they stood and stared through stealthy shadows,

till they saw where the circle of sleepless eyes

was broken; with hearts beating dully

they passed the places where pierced and bleeding 1125

the wolves weltered by winged death

unseen smitten; as smoke noiseless

they slipped silent through the slumbering throngs

as shadowy wraiths shifting vaguely

from gloom to gloom, till the Gods brought them 1130

and the craft and cunning of the keen huntsman

to Turin the tall where he tumbled lay

with face downward in the filthy mire,

and his feet were fettered, and fast in bonds

anguish enchained his arms behind him. 1135

There he slept or swooned, as sunk in oblivion

by drugs of darkness deadly blended;

he heard not their whispers; no hope stirred him

nor the deep despair of his dreams fathomed;

44 **THE** LAYS OF **BELERIAND**

to awake his wit no words availed. 1140

No blade would bite on the bonds he wore,

though Funding felt for the forged knife

of dwarf en steel, his dagger prized,

that at waist he wore awake or sleeping,

whose edge would eat through iron noiseless 1145

as a clod of clay is cleft by the share.

It was wrought by wrights in the realms of the East,

in black Belegost, by the bearded Dwarves

of troth unmindful; it betrayed him now

from its sheath slipping as o\'er shaggy slades 1150

and roughhewn rocks their road they wended.

'We must bear him back as best we may,'

said Beleg, bending his broad shoulders.

Then the head he lifted of Húrin\'s offspring,

and Flinding go-Fuilin the feet clasped; 115 5

and doughty that deed, for in days long gone

though Men were of mould less mighty builded

ere the earth\'s goodness from the Elves they drew,

though the Elfin kindreds ere old was the sun

were of might unminished, nor the moon haunted 1160

faintly fading as formed of shadows

in places unpeopled, yet peers they were not

in bone and flesh and body\'s fashioning,

and Turin was tallest of the ten races

that in Hithlum\'s hills their homes builded. 1165

Like a log they lifted his limbs mighty,

and straining staggered with stealth and fear,

with bodies bending and bones aching,

from the cruel dreaming of the camp of dread,

where spearmen drowsed sprawling drunken 1170

by their moon-blades keen with murder whetted

mid their shaven shafts in sheaves piled.

Now Beleg the brave backward led them,

but his foot fumbled and he fell thudding

with Turin atop of him, and trembling stumbled 1175

Flinding forward; there frozen lying

long while they listened for alarm stirring,

for hue and cry, and their hearts cowered;

but unbroken the breathing of the bands sleeping,

as darkness deepened to dead midnight, 1180

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 45**

and the lifeless hour when the loosened soul

oft sheds the shackles of the shivering flesh.

Then dared their dread to draw its breath,

and they found their feet in the fouled earth,

and bent they both their backs once more 1185

to their task of toil, for Turin woke not.

There the huntsman\'s hand was hurt deeply,

as he groped on the ground, by a gleaming point ---

\'twas Dailir his dart dearly prized

he had found by his foot in fragments twain, 1190

and with barbs bended: it broke at last

neath his body falling. It boded ill.

As in dim dreaming, and dazed with horror,

they won their way with weary slowness,

foot by footstep, till fate them granted 1195

the leaguer at last of those lairs to pass,

and their burden laid they, breathless gasping,

on bare-bosméd earth, and abode a while,

ere by winding ways they won their path

up the slanting slopes with silent labour, 1200

with spended strength sprawling to cast them

in the darkling dell neath the deep thicket.

Then sought his sword, and songs of magic

o\'er its eager edge with Elfin voice

there Beleg murmured, while bluely glimmered 1205

the lamp of Flinding neath the laced thorns.

There wondrous wove he words of sharpness,

and the names of knives and Gnomish blades

he uttered o\'er it: even Ogbar\'s spear

and the glaive of Gaurin whose gleaming stroke 1210

did rive the rocks of Rodrim\'s hall;

the sword of Saithnar, and the silver blades

of the enchanted children of chains forged

in their deep dungeon; the dirk of Nargil,

the knife of the North in Nogrod smithied; 1215

the sweeping sickle of the slashing tempest,

the lambent lightning\'s leaping falchion

even Celeg Aithorn that shall cleave the world.

Then whistling whirled he the whetted sword-blade

and three times three it threshed the gloom, 1220

till flame was kindled flickering strangely

**46 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

like licking firelight in the lamp\'s glimmer

blue and baleful at the blade\'s edges.

Lo! a leering laugh lone and dreadful

by the wind wafted wavered nigh them; 1225

their limbs were loosened in listening horror;

they fancied the feet of foes approaching,

for the horns hearkening of the hunt afoot

in the rustling murmur of roving breezes.

Then quickly curtained with its covering pelt 1230

was the lantern\'s light, and leaping Beleg

with his sword severed the searing bonds

on wrist and arm like ropes of hemp

so strong that whetting; in stupor lying

entangled still lay Turin moveless. 1235

For the feet\'s fetters then feeling in the dark

Beleg blundering with his blade\'s keenness

unwary wounded the weary flesh

of wayworn foot, and welling blood

bedewed his hand - too dark his magic: 1240

that sleep profound was sudden fathomed;

in fear woke Turin, and a form he guessed

o\'er his body bending with blade naked.

His death or torment he deemed was come,

for oft had the Orcs for evil pastime 1245

him goaded gleeful and gashed with knives

that they cast with cunning, with cruel spears.

Lo! the bonds were burst that had bound his hands:

his cry of battle calling hoarsely

he flung him fiercely on the foe he dreamed, 1250

and Beleg falling breathless earthward

was crushed beneath him. Crazed with anguish

then seized that sword the son of Húrin,

to his hand lying by the help of doom;

at the throat he thrust; through he pierced it, 1255

that the blood was buried in the blood-wet mould;

ere Flinding knew what fared that night,

all was over. With oath and curse

he bade the goblins now guard them well,

or sup on his sword: ' Lo! the son of Húrin 1260

is freed from his fetters.' His fancy wandered

in the camps and clearings of the cruel Glamhoth.

Flight he sought not at Flinding leaping

THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 47

with his last laughter, his life to sell

amid foes imagined; but Fuilin\'s son 1265

there stricken with amaze, starting backward,

cried: 'Magic of Morgoth! A! madness damned!

with friends thou fightest! ' - then falling suddenly the lamp
o\'erturned in the leaves shrouded

that its light released illumined pale 1270

with its flickering flame the face of Beleg.

Then the boles of the trees more breathless rooted

stone-faced he stood staring frozen

on that dreadful death, and his deed knowing

wildeyed he gazed with waking horror, 1275

as in endless anguish an image carven.

So fearful his face that Flinding crouched

and watched him, wondering what webs of doom

dark, remorseless, dreadly meshed him

by the might of Morgoth; and he mourned for him, 1280

and for Beleg, who bow should bend no more,

his black yew-wood in battle twanging ---

his life had winged to its long waiting

in the halls of the Moon o\'er the hills of the sea.

Hark! he heard the horns hooting loudly, 1285

no ghostly laughter of grim phantom,

no wraithlike feet rustling dimly ---

the Orcs were up; their ears had hearkened

the cries of Turin; their camp was tumult,

their lust was alight ere the last shadows 1290

of night were lifted. Then numb with fear

in hoarse whisper to unhearing ears

he told his terror; for Turin now

with limbs loosened leaden-eyed was bent

crouching crumpled by the corse moveless; 1295

nor sight nor sound his senses knew,

and wavering words he witless murmured,

'A! Beleg,' he whispered, 'my brother-in-arms.'

Though Funding shook him, he felt it not:

had he comprehended he had cared little. 1300

Then winds were wakened in wild dungeons

where thrumming thunders throbbed and rumbled;

storm came striding with streaming banners

from the four corners of the fainting world;

**48 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

then the clouds were cloven with a crash of lightning, 1305

and slung like stones from slings uncounted

the hurtling hail came hissing earthward,

with a deluge dark of driving rain.

Now wafted high, now wavering far,

the cries of the Glamhoth called and hooted, 1310

and the howl of wolves in the heavens\' roaring

was mingled mournful: they missed their paths,

for swollen swept there swirling torrents

down the blackening slopes, and the slot was blind,

so that blundering back up the beaten road 1315

to the gates of gloom many goblins wildered

were drowned or drawn in Deadly Nightshade

to die in the dark; while dawn came not,

while the storm-riders strove and thundered

all the sunless day, and soaked and drenched 1320

Flinding go-Fuilin with fear speechless

there crouched aquake; cold and lifeless

lay Beleg the bowman; brooding dumbly

Turin Thalion neath the tangled thorns

sat unseeing without sound or movement. 1325

The dusty dunes of Dor-na-Fauglith

hissed and spouted. Huge rose the spires

of smoking vapour swathed and reeking,

thick-billowing clouds from thirst unquenched,

and dawn was kindled dimly lurid 1330

when a day and night had dragged away.

The Orcs had gone, their anger baffled,

o\'er the weltering ways weary faring

to their hopeless halls in Hell\'s kingdom;

no thrall took they Turin Thalion --- 1335

a burden bore he than their bonds heavier,

in despair fettered with spirit empty

in mourning hopeless he remained behind.

NOTES

617 *Blodrin: Bauglir* A, and B as typed. See line 618.

618 *Bauglir Ban\'s son* A, and B as typed *(Bauglir \> Blodrin* THE LAY
OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 49

carefully-made early change, *Ban \> Bor* hasty and later).

See lines 661, 696, 990.

631 *Fangair* A, *Fangros* B as typed.

636 *Tengwethiel \[sic\]* A, *Tain-Gwethil* B as typed. Cf. line 431.

653 *Turin Thaliodrin* A, and B as typed. Cf. lines 115, 333, 720.

661, 696 As at line6i8.

711 *Aiglir-angrin* A, *Aiglir Angrin* B as typed, emended roughly in
pencil to *Eiglir Engrin;* cf. line 1055. *In the Tale* *of Turambar*
occurs *Angorodin* (the Iron Mountains), II. 77.

711---14 These lines read in A (and as typed in B, with *of Hell is*
*reared* for *of the Hells of Iron):*

where Aiglir-angrin the Iron Hills lie

and Thangorodrim\'s thunderous mountain

o\'er the hopeless halls of the Hells of iron

wrought at the roots of the ruthless hills.

718 Cf. Bilbo\'s second riddle to Gollum.

720 As at line 653.

780 *Delimorgoth* A, *Delu-Morgoth* B as typed, *dark Morgoth* a late
pencilled emendation. At lines 11 and 51 *Delu-Morgoth* is an emendation
of *Delimorgoth* in B.

816 *Tun* also in A; see lines 50, 430.

818-20 Against these lines my father wrote in the margin of B:

'Captured in battle at gates of Angband.'

826 *o\'er the black boulders of the Blasted Plain* A (marked with
query).

834 *mercy: magic* A, and B as typed; *mercy* in pencil and not quite
certain.

946 *Daideloth* A emended at time of writing to *Dor-na-Maiglos,
Dor-na-Fauglith* B as typed. In margin of A is written: 'a plateau from
*Dai* "high", *Deloth* "plain'"; contrast II. 337, entry
*Dor-na-Dhaideloth.*

990 *Blodrin Ban\'s son* A, and B as typed; *Ban\'s* \> *Bor\'s* later
in B. At lines 617---18, 661, 696 A, and B as typed, had *Bauglir,*
changed *to Blodrin* in B.

1055 *Aiglir Angrin* A, and B as typed; see line 711.

*Bauglir* A and B.

1098 This line is emended in B, but the reading is uncertain: apparently
*Then his bow unbending Beleg asked hint:* 1137 In the margin of B is
written *r?,* i.e. *dreadly* for *deadly.*

1147 *East: South* A, and B as typed.

1198 *bosméd* (bosomed) written thus in both A and B.

1214 *Nargil: Loruin* A, with *Nargil* added as an alternative.

1324 *Turin Thaliodrin* A, and B as typed; see lines 653, 720.

1335 *Thalion-Túrin* A, and B as typed.

**5O THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Commentary on *Part II 'Beleg'*

In this part of the poem there are some narrative developments of much
interest. The poem follows the *Tale* (II. 76) in making Beleg become
one of Turin\'s band on the marches of Doriath not long after Turin\'s
departure from the Thousand Caves, and with no intervening event --- in
*The* *Silmarillion* (p. 200) Beleg came to Menegroth, and after
speaking to Thingol set out to seek Turin, while in the *Narn* (pp.
82-5) there is the

'trial of Turin', and the intervention of Beleg bringing Nellas as
witness, before he set out on Turin\'s trail. In the poem it is explicit
that Beleg was not searching for him, and indeed knew nothing whatever
of what had passed in the Thousand Caves (595). But Turin\'s band are no
longer the

'wild spirits\' of the *Tale;* they are hostile to all comers, whether
Orcs or Men or Elves, including the Elves of Doriath (560-1, 566), as in
*The* *Silmarillion,* and in far greater detail in the *Narn,* where the
band is called *Gaunuaith,* the Wolf-men, 'to be feared as wolves\'.

The element of Beleg\'s capture and maltreatment by the band now
appears, and also that of Turin\'s absence from the camp at the time.

Several features of the story in the *Narn* are indeed already present
in the poem, though absent from the more condensed account in *The
Silmarillion :* as Beleg\'s being tied to a tree by the outlaws (577,
*Narn* pp. 92-3), and the occasion of Turin\'s absence --- he was

on the trail of the Orcs,

as they hastened home to the Hills of Iron

with the loot laden of the lands of Men

just as in the *Narn* (pp. 91-2), where however the story is part of a
complex set of movements among the Woodmen of Brethil, Beleg, the
Gaurwaith, and the Orcs.

Whereas in the *Tale* it was only now that Beleg and Turin became
companions-in-arms, we have already seen that the poem has the later
story whereby they had fought together on the marches of Doriath before
Turin\'s flight from the Thousand Caves (p. 27); and we now have also
the development that Turin\'s altered mood at the sight of Beleg tied to
the tree *(Then Turin\'s heart was turned from hate,* 584), and Beleg\'s
own reproaches *(Shall the foes of Faerie be friends of Men?* 603), led
to the band\'s turning their arms henceforth only against *the foes of*
*Faerie* (644). Of the great oath sworn by the members of the band,
explicitly echoing that of the Sons of Fëanor (634) - and showing
incidentally that in that oath the holy mountain of Taniquetil
(Tain-Gwethil) was taken in witness (636), there is no trace in *The
Silmarillion* or the *Narn:* in the latter, indeed, the outlaws are not
conceived in such a way as to make such an oath-taking at all probable.

Lines 643 ff., describing the prowess of the fellowship in the forest,
are the ultimate origin of the never finally achieved story of the Land
of Dor-Cuarthol *(The Silmarillion* p. 205, *Narn* pp. 152-4); lines
651-4

THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 51

even in Angband the Orсs trembled.

Then the word wandered down the ways of the forest

that Turin Thalion was returned to war;

and Thingol heard it\...

lead in the end to

In Menegroth, and in the deep halls of Nargothrond, and even in the
hidden realm of Gondolin, the fame of the deeds of the Two Captains was
heard; and in Angband also they were known.

But in the later story Turin was hidden under the name Gorthol, the
Dread Helm, and it was his wearing of the Dragon-helm that revealed him
to Morgoth. There is no suggestion of this in the earlier phase of the
legend; the Dragon-helm makes no further appearance here in the poem.

A table may serve to clarify the development:

*Tale*

*Lay*

*Silmarillion* and *Narn*

Turin\'s prowess on the

Turin and Beleg

marches of Doriath

companions-in-arms on

(Beleg not mentioned).

the marches of Doriath;

Turin wears the

Dragon-helm.

As in the poem.

Death of Orgof.

Turin leaves Doriath;

a band of outlaws forms

round him which attacks

Death of Orgof.

all comers.

Death of Saeros.

Turin leaves Doriath;

The band captures Beleg

Turin leaves Doriath

a band forms round him

(who knows nothing of

and joins a band of

which includes Beleg.

Turin\'s leaving Doriath)

desperate outlaws.

and ties him to a tree.

Turin has him set free;

suffers a change of heart;

Beleg joins the band; all

swear an oath.

The band captures Beleg

(who is searching for

Turin bearing Thingol\'s

pardon) (and ties him to a

tree, *N* arn).

Turin has him set free;

suffers a change of heart;

but Beleg will not join the

band and departs. (No

mention of oath.)

(Later Beleg returns and

joins the band:)

Land of Dor-Cúarthol.

Great prowess of the

Great prowess of the band

band.

against the Orcs.

Before leaving this part of the story, it may be suggested that lines
605 ff., in which Turin declares to Beleg that *This band alone / I
count* **52 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

*as comrades,* contain the germ of Turin\'s words to him in the *Narn,*
p. 94:

The grace of Thingol will not stretch to receive these companions of my
fall, I think; but I will not part with them now, if they do not wish to
part with me, &c.

The traitor, who betrayed the band to the Orcs, now first appears. At
first he is called *Bauglir* both in A and in B as originally typed; and
it might be thought that the name had much too obviously an evil
signific-

ance. The explanation is quite clearly, however, that *Bauglir* became
*Blodrin* at the same time as *Bauglir* replaced *Belcha* as a name of
Morgoth. (By the time my father reached line 990 *Blodrin* is the name
as first written in both A and B; while similarly at line 1055 *Bauglir*
is Morgoth\'s name, not *Belcha,* both in A and B as first written.) The
change of *Ban* (father of Blodrin) to *Bor* was passing; he is *Ban* in
the 1926 'Sketch of the Mythology', and so remained until, much later,
he disappeared.

Blodrin\'s origin is interesting:

trapped as a child

he was dragged by the Dwarves to their deep mansions, and in Nogrod
nurtured, and in nought was like,

spite blood and birth, to the blissful Elves. (666-9) Thus Blodrin\'s
evil nature is explicitly ascribed to the influence of *the* *bearded
Dwarves/of troth unmindful* (1148-9); and Blodrin follows Ufedhin of the
*Tale of the Nauglafring* as an example of the sinister effect of Elvish
association with Dwarves - not altogether absent in the tale of Eöl and
Maeglin as it appears in *The Silmarillion.* Though the nature - and
name --- of the traitor in Turin\'s band went through Protean mutations
afterwards, it is not inconceivable that recollection of the Dwarvish
element in Blodrin\'s history played some part in the emergence of Mîm
in this role. On the early hostile view of the Dwarves see II. 247.

The words of the poem just cited arise from the 'betrayal' of Flinding
by his dwarvish knife, which slipped from its sheath; so later, in the
*Lay of* *Leithian,* when Beren attempted to cut a second Silmaril from
the Iron Crown (lines 4160-2)

The dwarvish steel of cunning blade

by treacherous smiths of Nogrod made

snapped . . .

The idea expressed in the *Tale* (II. 76) that Turin was taken alive by
Morgoth\'s command 'lest he cheat the doom that was devised for him'

reappears in the poem: *lest he flee his fate* (705).

The rest of the story as told in the poem differs only in detail from
that THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 53

in the *Tale.* The survival of Beleg in the attack by Orcs and his swift
recovery from his grievous wounds (II. 77), present in much changed
circumstances in *The Silmarillion* (p. 206), is here made perhaps more
comprehensible, in that Elves from Doriath, who were searching for Turin
(654-5), found Beleg and took him back to be healed by Melian in the
Thousand Caves (727-31). In the account of Beleg\'s meeting with
Flinding in Taur-na-Fuin, led to him by his blue lamp, the poem is
following the *Tale* very closely.\* My father\'s painting of the scene
*(Pictures by J. R. R. Tolkien* no. 37) was almost certainly made a few
years later, when the Elf lying under the tree was still called Flinding
son of Fuilin (in the *Tale bo-Dhuilin,* earlier *go-Dhuilin,* son of
Duilin; the patronymic prefix has in the poem (814, 900) reverted to the
earlier form *go-,* see II. 119).

In the *Tale* it is only said (II. 81) that Flinding was of the people
of the Rodothlim 'before the Orcs captured him'; from the poem (819-21)
it seems that he was carried off, with many others, from Nargothrond,
but this can scarcely be the meaning, since *nought yet knew they* \[the
Orcs\] *of Nargothrond* (1578). The marginal note in B against these
lines 'Captured in battle at gates of Angband' refers to the later
story, first appearing in the 1930 'Silmarillion'.

The poem follows the *Tale* in the detail of Flinding\'s story to Beleg,
except that in the poem he was recaptured by the Orcs in Taur-na-Fuin
(846 ff.) and escaped again *(crept from their clutches as a crawling*
*worm,* 879), whereas in the *Tale* he was not recaptured but 'fled
heedlessly' (11. 79). The notable point in the *Tale* that Flinding 'was
overjoyed to have speech with a free Noldo' reappears in the poem:
*Marvelling he* *heard I the ancient tongue of the Elves of Tun.* The
detail of their encountering of the Ore-host is slightly different: in
the *Tale* the Orcs had changed their path, in the poem it seems that
Beleg and Flinding merely came more quickly than did the Orcs to the
point where the Ore-road emerged from the edge of the forest. In the
*Tale* it seems indeed that the Ores had not left the forest when they
encamped for the night: the eyes of the wolves 'shone like points of red
light among the trees\', and Beleg and Flinding laid Turin down after
his rescue 'in the woods at no great distance from the camp'. The *cup
outcarven on the cold hillside* of the poem (1036), where the Orcs made
their bivouac, is the 'bare dell' of *The Silmarillion.*

In contrast to the *Tale* (see p. 26) Beleg is now frequently called
*Beleg the bowman,* his great bow (not yet named) is fully described,
and his unmatched skill as an archer (1071 ff.). There is also in the
poem the feature of the arrow Dailir, unfailingly found and always
unharmed (1o8off.), until it broke when Beleg fell upon it while
carrying Turin (1189-92): of this there is never a mention later. The
element of Beleg\'s

•The element of the blue lamp is lacking from the account in *The
Silmarillion;* see *Unfinished Tales* p. 51 note 2.

**54 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

archery either arose from, or itself caused, the change in the story of
the entry of Beleg and Flinding into the Ore-camp that now appears: in
the *Tale* they merely 'crept between the wolves at a point where there
was a great gap between them', whereas in the poem Beleg performed the
feat of shooting seven wolves in the darkness, and only so was 'a great
gap opened' (1097). But the words of the *Tale,* 'as the luck of the
Valar had it Turin was lying nigh', are echoed in

till the Gods brought them

and the craft and cunning of the keen huntsman

to Turin the tall where he tumbled lay (1130---2)

The lifting and carrying of Turin by the two Elves, referred to in the
*Tale* as 'a great feat', 'seeing that he was a Man and of greater
stature than they' (II. 80), is expanded in the poem (1156 ff.) into a
comment on the stature of Men and Elves in the ancient time, which
agrees with earlier statements on this topic (see I. 235, II. 142, 220).
The notable lines though Men were of mould less mighty builded

ere the earth\'s goodness from the Elves they drew (1157-8) are to be
related to the statements cited in II. 326: 'As Men\'s stature grows
\[the Elves\'\] diminishes', and 'ever as Men wax more powerful and
numerous so the fairies fade and grow small and tenuous, filmy and
transparent, but Men larger and more dense and gross'. The mention here
(1164) of *the ten races* of Hithlum occurs nowhere else, and it is not
clear whether it refers to all the peoples of Men and Elves who in one
place or another in the *Lost Tales* are set in Hithlum, which as I have
remarked 'seems to have been in danger of having too many inhabitants\'

(see II. 249, 251).

The *Tale* has it that it was Beleg\'s knife that had slipped from him
as he crept into the camp; in the poem it is Flinding\'s (1142 ff.). In
the *Tale* Beleg returned to fetch his sword from the place where he had
left it, since they could carry Turin no further; in the poem they
carried Turin all the way up to the *dark thicket in a dell* whence they
had set out (1110, 1202). The 'whetting spell' of Beleg over his (still
unnamed) sword is an entirely new element (and without trace later); it
arises in association with line 1141, *No blade would bite on the bonds
he* *wore.* In style it is reminiscent of Lúthien\'s 'lengthening spell'
in Canto V of the *Lay of Leithian;* but of the names in the spell, of
*Ogbar,* *Gaurin, Rodrim, Saithnar, Nargil, Celeg Aithorn,* there seems
to be now no other trace.

There now occurs in the poem the mysterious *leering laugh* (1224), to
which it seems that the *ghostly laughter of grim phantom* in line 1286
refers, and which is mentioned again in the next part of the poem
(1488-90). The narrative purpose of this is evidently to cause the
covering of the lamp and to cause Beleg to work too quickly in the
darkness at the cutting of the bonds. It may be also that the wounding
of **THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF** HÚRIN 55

Beleg\'s hand when he put it on the point of Dailir his arrow (1187)
accounts for his clumsiness; for every aspect of this powerful scene had
been pondered and refined.

In the poem the great storm is introduced: first presaged in lines 1064
ff., when Beleg and Funding were at the edge of the dell (as it is in
*The Silmarillion):*

Lo! black cloud-drifts

surged up like smoke from the sable North,

and the sheen was shrouded of the shivering moon;

the wind came wailing from the woeful mountains,

and the heath unhappy hissed and whispered

and bursting at last after Beleg\'s death (1301 ff.), to last all
through the following day, during which Turin and Funding crouched on
the hillside (1320, 1330-1). On account of the storm the Orcs were
unable to find Turin, and departed, as in *The Silmarillion;* in the
*Tale* Flinding roused Turin to flee as soon as the shouts of discovery
were heard from the Ore-camp, and nothing more is said of the matter.
But in the poem it is still, as in the *Tale,* the sudden uncovering of
Flinding\'s lamp as he fell back from Turin\'s assault that illumined
Beleg\'s face; in the last account that my father wrote of this episode
he was undecided whether it was the cover falling off the lamp or a
great flash of lightning that gave the light, and in the published work
I chose the latter.

There remain a few isolated points, mostly concerning names. In this
part of the poem we meet for the first time:

*Nargothrond* 821,904;

*Taur-na-Fuin* (for *Taur Fuin* of the *Lost Tales)* 766, 828; called
also *Deadly Nightshade* 767, 837, 1317, and *Forest of Night* 896;
*Dor-na-Fauglith* 946, 1035, 1326, called also *the Plains of Drouth*
826, *the Thirsty Plain* 947 (and in A, note to 826, *the Blasted
Plain).*

The name *Dor-na-Fauglith* arose during the composition of the poem (see
note to 946). By this time the story of the blasting of the great
northern plain, so that it became a dusty desert, in the battle that
ended the Siege of Angband, must have been conceived, though it does not
appear in writing for several years.

Here also is the first reference to the triple peaks of Thangorodrim
(1000), called *the thunderous towers* (951), though in the 'Prologue'

to the poem it is said that Húrin was set *on its steepest peak* (96);
and from lines 713-14 (as rewritten in the B-text) we learn that Angband
was *wrought at the roots* of the great mountain.

The name *Fangros* (631; *Fangair* A) occurs once elsewhere, in a very
obscure note, where it is apparently connected with the burning of the
ships of the Noldoli.

Melian\'s name *Mablui - by the hands enchanted of Melian* **56 THE LAYS
OF BELERIAND**

*Mablui,* 731 - clearly contains *mab* 'hand', as in *Mablung, Ermabwed*
(see II. 339).

That the Dwarves were said in A and originally in B to dwell in the
South (1147, emended in B to *East)* is perhaps to be related to the
statement in the *Tale of the Nauglafring* that Nogrod lay *'a very
long* *journey southward* beyond the wide forest on the borders of those
great heaths nigh Umboth-muilin the Pools of Twilight' (II. 225).

I cannot explain the reference in line 1006 to *the wild wheatfields of*
*the wargod\'s realm;* nor that in the lines concerning Beleg\'s fate
after death to the long waiting of the dead *in the halls of the Moon*
(1284).

![](images/000116.png){.calibre1}

**III**

FAILIVRIN

Flinding go-Fuilin faithful-hearted

the brand of Beleg with blood stained 1340

lifted with loathing from the leafy mould,

and hid it in the hollow of a huge thorn-tree;

then he turned to Turin yet tranced brooding,

and softly said he: \'O son of Húrin,

unhappy-hearted, what helpeth it 1345

to sit thus in sorrow\'s silent torment

without hope or counsel?' But Húrin\'s son,

by those words wakened, wildly answered:

'I abide by Beleg; nor bid me leave him,

thou voice unfaithful. Vain are all things. 1 *350*

O Death dark-handed, draw thou near me;

if remorse may move thee, from mourning loosed

crush me conquered to his cold bosom! '

Flinding answered, and fear left him

for wrath and pity: 'Arouse thy pride! 1355

Not thus unthinking on Thangorodrim\'s

heights enchained did Húrin speak.'

'Curse thy comfort! Less cold were steel.

If Death comes not to the death-craving,

I will seek him by the sword. The sword-where lies it? 1360

O cold and cruel, where cowerest now,

murderer of thy master? Amends shalt work,

and slay me swift, O sleep-giver.'

'Look not, luckless, thy life to steal,

**56 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

*Mablui,* 731 - clearly contains *mab* 'hand', as in *Mablung, Ermabwed*
(see II. 339).

That the Dwarves were said in A and originally in B to dwell in the
South (1147, emended in B to *East)* is perhaps to be related to the
statement in the *Tale of the Nauglafring* that Nogrod lay *'a very
long* *journey southward* beyond the wide forest on the borders of those
great heaths nigh Umboth-muilin the Pools of Twilight' (II. 225).

I cannot explain the reference in line 1006 to *the wild wheatfields of*
*the wargod\'s realm;* nor that in the lines concerning Beleg\'s fate
after death to the long waiting of the dead *in the halls of the Moon*
(1284).

**III**

FAILIVRIN

Flinding go-Fuilin faithful-hearted

the brand of Beleg with blood stained 1340

lifted with loathing from the leafy mould,

and hid it in the hollow of a huge thorn-tree;

then he turned to Turin yet tranced brooding,

and softly said he: \'O son of Húrin,

unhappy-hearted, what helpeth it 1345

to sit thus in sorrow\'s silent torment

without hope or counsel?' But Húrin\'s son,

by those words wakened, wildly answered:

'I abide by Beleg; nor bid me leave him,

thou voice unfaithful. Vain are all things. 1 *350*

O Death dark-handed, draw thou near me;

if remorse may move thee, from mourning loosed

crush me conquered to his cold bosom! '
:::

::: {#calibre_link-2 .calibre}
Flinding answered, and fear left him

for wrath and pity: 'Arouse thy pride! 1355

Not thus unthinking on Thangorodrim\'s

heights enchained did Húrin speak.'

'Curse thy comfort! Less cold were steel.

If Death comes not to the death-craving,

I will seek him by the sword. The sword-where lies it? 1360

O cold and cruel, where cowerest now,

murderer of thy master? Amends shalt work,

and slay me swift, O sleep-giver.'

'Look not, luckless, thy life to steal,

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF** HÚRIN 57

nor sully anew his sword unhappy 1 *365*

in the flesh of the friend whose freedom seeking

he fell by fate, by foes unwounded.

Yea, think that amends are thine to make,

his wronged blade with wrath appeasing,

its thirst cooling in the thrice-abhorred 1370

blood of Bauglir\'s baleful legions.

Is the feud achieved thy father\'s chains

on thee laid, or lessened by this last evil?

Dream not that Morgoth will mourn thy death,

or thy dirges chant the dread Glamhoth- 1375

less would like them thy living hatred

and vows of vengeance; nor vain is courage,

though victory seldom be valour\'s ending.'

Then fiercely Turin to his feet leaping

cried new-crazed: 'Ye coward Orcs, 1380

why turn ye tail? Why tarry ye now,

when the son of Húrin and the sword of Beleg

in wrath await you? For wrong and woe

here is vengeance ready. If ye venture it not,

I will follow your feet to the four corners 1385

of the angry earth. Have after you! '

Fainting Flinding there fought with him,

and words of wisdom to his witless ears

he breathless spake: 'Abide, O Turin,

for need hast thou now to nurse thy hurt, 1390

and strength to gather and strong counsel.

Who flees to fight wears not fear\'s token,

and vengeance delayed its vow achieves.'

The madness passed; amazed pondering

neath the tangled trees sat Turin wordless 1395

brooding blackly on bitter vengeance,

till the dusk deepened on his day of waking,

and the early stars were opened pale.

Then Beleg\'s burial in those bleak regions

did Flinding fashion; where he fell sadly 1400

he left him lying, and lightly o\'er him

with long labour the leaves he poured.

But Turin tearless turning suddenly

on the corse cast him, and kissed the mouth

cold and open, and closed the eyes. 1405

**58 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

His bow laid he black beside him,

and words of parting wove about him:

'Now fare well, Beleg, to feasting long

neath Tengwethil in the timeless halls

where drink the Gods, neath domes golden 1410

o\'er the sea shining.' His song was shaken,

but the tears were dried in his tortured eyes

by the flames of anguish that filled his soul.

His mind once more was meshed in darkness

as heaped they high o\'er the head beloved 1415

a mound of mould and mingled leaves.

Light lay the earth on the lonely dead;

heavy lay the woe on the heart that lived.

That grief was graven with grim token

on his face and form, nor faded ever: 1420

and this was the third of the throes of Turin.

Thence he wandered witless without wish or purpose;

but for Flinding the faithful he had fared to death,

or been lost in the lands of lurking evil.

Renewed in that Gnome of Nargothrond 1425

was heart and valour by hatred wakened,

that he guarded and guided his grim comrade;

with the light of his lamp he lit their ways,

and they hid by day to hasten by night,

by darkness shrouded or dim vapours. 1430

The tale tells not of their travel weary,

how roamed their road by the rim of the forest,

whose beetling branches, black o\'erhanging,

did greedy grope with gloomy malice

to ensnare their souls in silent darkness. 1435

Yet west they wandered by ways of thirst

and haggard hunger, hunted often,

and hiding in holes and hollow caverns,

by their fate defended. At the furthest end

of Dor-na-Fauglith\'s dusty spaces 1440

to a mighty mound in the moon looming

they came at midnight: it was crowned with mist,

bedewed as by drops of drooping tears.

'A! green that hill with grass fadeless,

where sleep the swords of seven kindreds, 1445

where the folk of Faerie once fell uncounted.

THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN **59**

There was fought the field by folk named

Nirnaith Ornoth, Unnumbered Tears.

'Twas built with the blood of the beaten people;

neath moon nor sun is it mounted ever 1450

by Man nor Elf; not Morgoth\'s host

ever dare for dread to delve therein.'

Thus Flinding faltered, faintly stirring

Turin\'s heaviness, that he turned his hand

toward Thangorodrim, and thrice he cursed 1455

the maker of mourning, Morgoth Bauglir.

Thence later led them their lagging footsteps

o\'er the slender stream of Sirion\'s youth;

not long had he leapt a lace of silver

from his shining well in those shrouded hills, 1460

the Shadowy Mountains whose sheer summits

there bend humbled towards the brooding heights

in mist mantled, the mountains of the North.

Here the Orcs might pass him; they else dared not

o\'er Sirion swim, whose swelling water 1465

through moor and marsh, mead and woodland,

through caverns carven in the cold bosom

of Earth far under, through empty lands

and leagues untrodden, beloved of Ylmir,

fleeting floweth, with fame undying 1470

in the songs of the Gnomes, to the sea at last.

Thus reached they the roots and the ruinous feet

of those hoary hills that Hithlum girdle,

the shaggy pinewoods of the Shadowy Mountains.

There the twain enfolded phantom twilight 1475

and dim mazes dark, unholy,

in Nan Dungorthin where nameless gods

have shrouded shrines in shadows secret,

more old than Morgoth or the ancient lords

the golden Gods of the guarded West. 1480

But the ghostly dwellers of that grey valley

hindered nor hurt them, and they held their course

with creeping flesh and quaking limb.

Yet laughter at whiles with lingering echo,

as distant mockery of demon voices 1485

there harsh and hollow in the hushed twilight

Flinding fancied, fell, unwholesome

**ÓO THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

as that leering laughter lost and dreadful

that rang in the rocks in the ruthless hour

of Beleg\'s slaughter. "Tis Bauglir\'s voice 1490

that dogs us darkly with deadly scorn'

he shuddering thought; but the shreds of fear

and black foreboding were banished utterly

when they clomb the cliffs and crumbling rocks

that walled that vale of watchful evil, 1495

and southward saw the slopes of Hithlum

more warm and friendly. That way they fared

during the daylight o\'er dale and ghyll,

o\'er mountain pasture, moor and boulder,

over fell and fall of flashing waters 1500

that slipped down to Sirion, to swell his tide

in his eastward basin onward sweeping

to the South, to the sea, to his sandy delta.

After seven journeys lo! sleep took them

on a night of stars when they nigh had stridden 1505

to those lands beloved that long had known

Flinding aforetime. At first morning

the white arrows of the wheeling sun

gazed down gladly on green hollows

and smiling slopes that swept before them. 1510

There builded boles of beeches ancient

marched in majesty in myriad leaves

of golden russet greyly rooted,

in leaves translucent lightly robed;

their boughs up-bending blown at morning 1515

by the wings of winds that wandered down

o\'er blossomy bent breathing odours

to the wavering water\'s winking margin.

There rush and reed their rustling plumes

and leaves like lances louted trembling 1520

green with sunlight. Then glad the soul

of Flinding the fugitive; in his face the morning

there glimmered golden, his gleaming hair

was washed with sunlight. 'Awake from sadness,

Túrion Thalion, and troublous thoughts! 1525

On Ivrin\'s lake is endless laughter.

Lo! cool and clear by crystal fountains

she is fed unfailing, from defilement warded

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 61**

by Ylmir the old, who in ancient days,

wielder of waters, here worked her beauty. 1530

From outmost Ocean yet often comes

his message hither his magic bearing,

the healing of hearts and hope and valour

for foes of Bauglir. Friend is Ylmir

who alone remembers in the Lands of Mirth 1535

the need of the Gnomes. Here Narog\'s waters

(that in tongue of the Gnomes is 'torrent' named)

are born, and blithely boulders leaping

o\'er the bents bounding with broken foam

swirl down southward to the secret halls 1540

of Nargothrond by the Gnomes builded

that death and thraldom in the dreadful throes

of Nirnaith Ornoth, a number scanty,

escaped unscathed. Thence skirting wild

the Hills of the Hunters, the home of Beren 1545

and the Dancer of Doriath daughter of Thingol,

it winds and wanders ere the willowy meads,

Nan-Tathrin\'s land, for nineteen leagues

it journeys joyful to join its flood

with Sirion in the South. To the salt marshes 1550

where snipe and seamew and the sea-breezes

first pipe and play they press together

sweeping soundless to the seats of Ylmir,

where the waters of Sirion and the waves of the sea

murmurous mingle. A marge of sand 1555

there lies, all lit by the long sunshine;

there all day rustles wrinkled Ocean,

and the sea-birds call in solemn conclave,

whitewingéd hosts whistling sadly,

uncounted voices crying endlessly. 1560

There a shining shingle on that shore lieth,

whose pebbles as pearl or pale marble

by spray and spindrift splashed at evening

in the moon do gleam, or moan and grind

when the Dweller in the Deep drives in fury 1565

the waters white to the walls of the land;

when the long-haired riders on their lathered horses

with bit and bridle of blowing foam,

in wrack wreathed and ropes of seaweed,

to the thunder gallop of the thudding of the surf.' 1570

**62 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Thus Flinding spake the spell feeling

of Ylmir the old and unforgetful,

which hale and holy haunted Ivrin

and foaming Narog, so that fared there never

Orc of Morgoth, and that eager stream 1575

no plunderer passed. If their purpose held

to reach the realms that roamed beyond

(nought yet knew they of Nargothrond)

they harried o\'er Hithlum the heights scaling

that lay behind the lake\'s hollow, 1580

the Shadowy Mountains in the sheen mirrored

of the pools of Ivrin. Pale and eager

Turin hearkened to the tale of Flinding:

the washing of waters in his words sounded,

an echo as of Ylmir\'s awful conches 1585

in the abyss blowing. There born anew

was hope in his heart as they hastened down

to the lake of laughter. A long and narrow

arm it reaches that ancient rocks

o\'ergrown with green girdle strongly, 1590

at whose outer end there open sudden

a gap, a gateway in the grey boulders;

whence thrusteth thin in threadlike jets

newborn Narog, nineteen fathoms

o\'er a flickering force falls in wonder, 1595

and a glimmering goblet with glass-lucent

fountains nils he by his freshets carven

in the cool bosom of the crystal stones.

There deeply drank ere day was fallen

Turin the toilworn and his true comrade; 1600

hurt\'s ease found he, heart\'s refreshment,

from the meshes of misery his mind was loosed,

as they sat on the sward by the sound of water,

and watched in wonder the westering sun

o\'er the wall wading of the wild mountains, 1605

whose peaks empurpled pricked the evening.

Then it dropped to the dark and deep shadows

up the cliffs creeping quenched in twilight

the last beacons leashed with crimson.

To the stars upstanding stony-mantled 161 o

the mountains waited till the moon arose

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 63**

o\'er the endless East, and Ivrin\'s pools

dreaming deeply dim reflected

their pallid faces. In pondering fast

woven, wordless, they waked no sound, 1615

till cold breezes keenly breathing

clear and fragrant curled about them;

then sought they for sleep a sand-paved

cove outcarven; there kindled fire,

that brightly blossomed the beechen faggots 1620

in flowers of flame; floated upward

a slender smoke, when sudden Turin

on the firelit face of Flinding gazed,

and wondering words he wavering spake:

\'O Gnome, I know not thy name or purpose 1625

or father\'s blood - what fate binds thee

to a witless wayworn wanderer\'s footsteps,

the bane of Beleg, his brother-in-arms?'

Then Flinding fearful lest fresh madness

should seize for sorrow on the soul of Turin, 1630

retold the tale of his toil and wandering;

how the trackless folds of Taur-na-Fuin,

Deadly Nightshade, dreadly meshed him;

of Beleg the bowman bold, undaunted,

and that deed they dared on the dim hillside, 1635

that song has since unceasing wakened;

of the fate that fell, he faltering spake,

in the tangled thicket neath the twining thorns

when Morgoth\'s might was moved abroad.

Then his voice vanished veiled in mourning, 1640

and lo! tears trickled on Turin\'s face

till loosed at last were the leashed torrents

of his whelming woe. Long while he wept

soundless, shaken, the sand clutching

with griping fingers in grief unfathomed. 1645

But Flinding the faithful feared no longer;

no comfort cold he kindly found,

for sleep swept him into slumber dead.

There a singing voice sweetly vexed him

and he woke and wondered: the watchfire faded; 1650

the night was aging, nought was moving

but a song upsoaring in the soundless dark

**64 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

went strong and stern to the starlit heaven.

'Twas Turin that towering on the tarn\'s margin,

up high o\'er the head of the hushed water 1655

now falling faintly, let flare and echo

a song of sorrow and sad splendour,

the dirge of Beleg\'s deathless glory.

There wondrous wove he words enchanted,

that woods and water waked and answered, 1660

the rocks were wrung with ruth for Beleg.

That song he sang is since remembered,

by Gnomes renewed in Nargothrond

it widely has wakened warfain armies

to battle with Bauglir--- 'The Bowman\'s Friendship'. 1665

'Tis told that Turin then turned him back

and fared to Flinding, and flung him down

to sleep soundless till the sun mounted

to the high heavens and hasted westward.

A vision he viewed in the vast spaces 1670

of slumber roving: it seemed he roamed

up the bleak boulders of a bare hillside

to a cup outcarven in a cruel hollow,

whose broken brink bushes limb-wracked

by the North-wind\'s knife in knotted anguish 16 *75*

did fringe forbidding. There black unfriendly

was a dark thicket, a dell of thorn-trees

with yews mingled that the years had fretted.

The leafless limbs they lifted hopeless

were blotched and blackened, barkless, naked, 1680

a lifeless remnant of the levin\'s flame,

charred chill fingers changeless pointing

to the cold twilight. There called he longing:

\'O Beleg, my brother, O Beleg, tell me

where is buried thy body in these bitter regions?'- 1685

and the echoes always him answered 'Beleg';

yet a veiled voice vague and distant

he caught that called like a cry at night

o\'er the sea\'s silence: 'Seek no longer.

My bow is rotten in the barrow ruinous; 1690

my grove is burned by grim lightning;

here dread dwelleth, none dare profane

this angry earth, Orc nor goblin;

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 65**

none gain the gate of the gloomy forest

by this perilous path; pass they may not, 1695

yet my life has winged to the long waiting

in the halls of the Moon o\'er the hills of the sea.

Courage be thy comfort, comrade lonely! '

Then he woke in wonder; his wit was healed,

courage him comforted, and he called aloud 1700

Flinding go-Fuilin, to his feet striding.

There the sun slanted its silver arrows

through the wild tresses of the waters tumbling

roofed with a radiant rainbow trembling.

'Whither, O Flinding, our feet now turn we, 1705

or dwell we for ever by the dancing water,

by the lake of laughter, alone, untroubled?'

'To Nargothrond of the Gnomes, methinks,'

said Flinding, 'my feet would fain wander,

that Celegorm and Curufin, the crafty sons 1710

of Fëanor founded when they fled southward;

there built a bulwark against Bauglir\'s hate,

who live now lurking in league secret

with those five others in the forests of the East,

fell unflinching foes of Morgoth. 1 *715*

Maidros whom Morgoth maimed and tortured

is lord and leader, his left wieldeth

his sweeping sword; there is swift Maglor,

there Damrod and Diriel and dark Cranthir,

the seven seekers of their sire\'s treasure. 1720

Now Orodreth rules the realms and caverns,

the numbered hosts of Nargothrond.

There to woman\'s stature will be waxen full

frail Finduilas the fleet maiden

his daughter dear, in his darkling halls 1725

a light, a laughter, that I loved of yore,

and yet love in longing, and love calls me.'

Where Narog\'s torrent gnashed and spouted

down his stream bestrewn with stone and boulder,

swiftly southward they sought their paths, 1730

and summer smiling smoothed their journey

through day on day, down dale and wood

where birds blithely with brimming music

thrilled and trembled in thronging trees.

**66 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

No eyes them watched onward wending 173 5

till they gained the gorge where Ginglith turns

all glad and golden to greet the Narog.

There her gentler torrent joins his tumult,

and they glide together on the guarded plain

to the Hunters\' Hills that high to southward 1740

uprear their rocks robed in verdure.

There watchful waited the Wards of Narog,

lest the need of the Gnomes from the North should come, for the sea in
the South them safe guarded,

and eager Narog the East defended. 1745

Their treegirt towers on the tall hilltops

no light betrayed in the trees lurking,

no horns hooted in the hills ringing

in loud alarm; a leaguer silent

unseen, stealthy, beset the stranger, 1750

as of wild things wary that watch moveless,

then follow fleetly with feet of velvet

their heedless prey with padding hatred.

In this fashion fought they, phantom hunters

that wandering Orc and wild foeman 1755

unheard harried, hemmed in ambush.

The slain are silent, and silent were the shafts

of the nimble Gnomes of Nargothrond,

who word or whisper warded sleepless

from their homes deep-hidden, that hearsay never 1760

was to Bauglir brought. Bright hope knew they,

and east over Narog to open battle

no cause or counsel had called them yet,

though of shield and shaft and sheathed swords,

of warriors wieldy now waxed their host 1 *765*

to power and prowess, and paths afar

their scouts and woodmen scoured in hunting.

Thus the twain were tracked till the trees thickened

and the river went rushing neath a rising bank,

in foam hastened o\'er the feet of the hills. 1770

In a gloom of green there they groped forward;

there his fate defended from flying death

Turin Thalion --- a twisted thong

of writhing roots enwrapped his foot;

as he fell there flashed, fleet, whitewingéd, 1775

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 67**

a shrill-shafted arrow that shore his hair,

and trembled sudden in a tree behind.

Then Flinding o\'er the fallen fiercely shouted:

'Who shoots unsure his shafts at friends?

Flinding go-Fuilin of the folk of Narog 1780

and the son of Húrin his sworn comrade

here flee to freedom from the foes of the North.'

His words in the woods awoke no echo;

no leaf there lisped, nor loosened twig

there cracked, no creak of crawling movement 1 *785*

stirred the silence. Still and soundless

in the glades about were the green shadows.

Thus fared they on, and felt that eyes

unseen saw them, and swift footsteps

unheard hastened behind them ever, *1190*

till each shaken bush or shadowy thicket

they fled furtive in fear needless,

for thereafter was aimed no arrow winged,

and they came to a country kindly tended;

through flowery frith and fair acres 1795

they fared, and found of folk empty

the leas and leasows and the lawns of Narog,

the teeming tilth by trees enfolded

twixt hills and river. The hoes unrecked

in the fields were flung, and fallen ladders 1800

in the long grass lay of the lush orchards;

every tree there turned its tangled head

and eyed them secretly, and the ears listened

of the nodding grasses; though noontide glowed

on land and leaf, their limbs were chilled. 1805

Never hall or homestead its high gables

in the light uplifting in that land saw they,

but a pathway plain by passing feet

was broadly beaten. Thither bent their steps

Flinding go-Fuilin, whose feet remembered 1810

that white roadway. In a while they reached

to the acres\' end, that ever narrowing

twixt wall and water did wane at last

to blossomy banks by the borders of the way.

A spuming torrent, in spate tumbling 1815

from the highest hill of the Hunters\' Wold

**68 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

clove and crossed it; there of carven stone

with slim and shapely slender archway

a bridge was builded, a bow gleaming

in the froth and flashing foam of Ingwil, 1820

that headlong hurried and hissed beneath.

Where it found the flood, far-journeyed Narog,

there steeply stood the strong shoulders

of the hills, o\'erhanging the hurrying water;

there shrouded in trees a sheer terrace, 1825

wide and winding, worn to smoothness,

was fashioned in the face of the falling slope.

Doors there darkly dim gigantic

were hewn in the hillside; huge their timbers,

and their posts and lintels of ponderous stone. 1830

They were shut unshakeable. Then shrilled a trumpet

as a phantom fanfare faintly winding

in the hill from hollow halls far under;

a creaking portal with clangour backward

was flung, and forth there flashed a throng, 1835

leaping lightly, lances wielding,

and swift encircling seized bewildered

the wanderers wayworn, wordless haled them

through the gaping gateway to the glooms beyond.

Ground and grumbled on its great hinges 1840

the door gigantic; with din ponderous

it clanged and closed like clap of thunder,

and echoes awful in empty corridors

there ran and rumbled under roofs unseen;

the light was lost. Then led them on 1845

down long and winding lanes of darkness

their guards guiding their groping feet,

till the faint flicker of fiery torches

flared before them; fitful murmur

as of many voices in meeting thronged 1850

they heard as they hastened. High sprang the roof.

Round a sudden turning they swung amazed,

and saw a solemn silent conclave,

where hundreds hushed in huge twilight

neath distant domes darkly vaulted 1855

them wordless waited. There waters flowed

with washing echoes winding swiftly

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 69**

amid the multitude, and mounting pale

for fifty fathoms a fountain sprang,

and wavering wan, with winking redness 1860

flushed and flickering in the fiery lights,

it fell at the feet in the far shadows

of a king with crown and carven throne.

A voice they heard neath the vault rolling,

and the king them called: 'Who come ye here 1865

from the North unloved to Nargothrond,

a Gnome of bondage and a nameless Man?

No welcome finds here wandering outlaw;

save his wish be death he wins it not,

for those that have looked on our last refuge 1870

it boots not to beg other boon of me.'

Then Flinding go-Fuilin freely answered:

'Has the watch then waned in the woods of Narog,

since Orodreth ruled this realm and folk?

Or how have the hunted thus hither wandered, 18 *75*

if the warders willed it not thy word obeying;

or how hast not heard that thy hidden archer,

who shot his shaft in the shades of the forest,

there learned our lineage, O Lord of Narog,

and knowing our names his notched arrows, 1880

loosed no longer?' Then low and hushed

a murmur moved in the multitude,

and some were who said: "Tis the same in truth:

the long looked-for, the lost is found,

the narrow path he knew to Nargothrond 1885

who was born and bred here from babe to youth';

and some were who said: 'The son of Fuilin

was lost and looked for long years agone.

What sign or token that the same returns

have we heard or seen? Is this haggard fugitive 1890

with back bended the bold leader,

the scout who scoured, scorning danger,

most far afield of the folk of Narog?'

'That tale was told us,' returned answer

the Lord Orodreth, 'but belief were rash. 1895

That alone of the lost, whom leagues afar

the Orcs of Angband in evil bonds

have dragged to the deeps, thou darest home,

**70 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

*by* grace or valour, from grim thraldom,

what proof dost thou proffer? What plea dost show 1900

that a Man, a mortal, on our mansions hidden

should look and live, our league sharing?'

Thus the curse on the kindred for the cruel slaughter at the Swans\'
Haven there swayed his heart,

but Fundinggo-Fuilin fiercely answered: 1 *905*

'Is the son of Húrin, who sits on high

in a deathless doom dreadly chained,

unknown, nameless, in need of plea

to fend from him the fate of foe and spy?

Flinding the faithful, the far wanderer, 1910

though form and face fires of anguish

and bitter bondage, Balrogs' torment,

have seared and twisted, for a song of welcome

had hoped in his heart at that home-coming

that he dreamed of long in dark labour. 1915

Are these deep places to dungeons turned,

a lesser Angband in the land of the Gnomes?'

Thereat was wrath aroused in Orodreth\'s heart,

and the muttering waxed to many voices,

and this and that the throng shouted; 1920

when sweet and sudden a song awoke,

a voice of music o\'er that vast murmur

mounted in melody to the misty domes;

with clear echoes the caverned arches

it filled, and trembled frail and slender, 1925

those words weaving of welcome home

that the wayweary had wooed from care

since the Gnomes first knew need and wandering.

Then hushed was the host; no head was turned,

for long known and loved was that lifted voice, 1 *930*

and Flinding knew it at the feet of the king

like stone graven standing silent

with heart laden; but Hurin\'s son

was waked to wonder and to wistful thought,

and searching the shadows that the seat shrouded, 1935

the kingly throne, there caught he thrice

a gleam, a glimmer, as of garments white.

'Twas frail Finduilas, fleet and slender,

to woman\'s stature, wondrous beauty,

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF** HÚRIN 71

now grown in glory , that glad welcome 1 940

there raised in ruth, and wrath was stilled.

Locked fast the love had lain in her heart

that in laughter grew long years agone

when in the meads merrily a maiden played

with fleet-footed Fuilin\'s youngling. 1945

No searing scars of sundering years

could blind those eyes bright with welcome,

and wet with tears wistful trembling

at the grief there graven in grim furrows

on the face of Flinding. 'Father, 'said she, I95°

'what dream of doubt dreadly binds thee?

'Tis Flinding go-Fuilin, whose faith of yore

none dared to doubt. This dark, lonely,

mournful-fated Man beside him

if his oath avows the very off spring 1955

of Húrin Thalion, what heart in this throng

shall lack belief or love refuse?

But are none yet nigh us that knew of yore

that mighty of Men, mark of kinship

to seek and see in these sorrow-laden 1 960

form and features? The friends of Morgoth

not thus, methinks, through thirst and hunger

come without comrades, nor have countenance

thus grave and guileless, glance unflinching.'

Then did Turin\'s heart tremble wondering 1965

at the sweet pity soft and gentle

of that tender voice touched with wisdom

that years of yearning had yielded slow;

and Orodreth, whose heart knew ruth seldom,

yet loved deeply that lady dear, 1 *970*

gave ear and answer to her eager words,

and his doubt and dread of dire treachery,

and his quick anger, he quelled within him.

No few were there found who had fought of old

where Finweg fell in flame of swords, 1975

and Húrin Thalion had hewn the throngs,

the dark Glamhoth\'s demon legions,

and who called there looked and cried aloud:

"Tis the face of the father new found on earth,

and his strong stature and stalwart arms; 1980

**72 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

though such care and sorrow never claimed his sire,

whose laughing eyes were lighted clear

at board or battle, in bliss or in woe. '

Nor could lack belief for long the words

and faith of Flinding when friend and kin 1985

and his father hastening that face beheld.

Lo! sire and son did sweet embrace

neath trees entwining tangled branches

at the dark doorways of those deep mansions

that Fuilin\'s folk afar builded, 1990

and dwelt in the deep of the dark woodland

to the West on the slopes of the Wold of Hunters.

Of the four kindreds that followed the king,

the watchtowers' lords, the wold\'s keepers

and the guards of the bridge, the gleaming bow 1995

that was flung o\'er the foaming froth of Ingwil,

from Fuilin\'s children were first chosen,

most noble of name, renewed in valour.

In those halls in the hills at that homecoming

mirth was mingled with melting tears 2000

for the unyielding years whose yoke of pain

the form and face of Fuilin\'s son

had changed and burdened, chilled the laughter

that leapt once lightly to his lips and eyes.

Now in kindly love was care lessened, 2005

with song assuaged sadness of hearts;

the lights were lit and lamps kindled

o\'er the burdened board; there bade they feast

Turin Thalion with his true comrade

at the long tables\' laden plenty, 2010

where dish and goblet on the dark-gleaming

wood well-waxed, where the wine-flagons

engraven glistened gold and silver.

Then Fuilin filled with flowing mead,

dear-hoarded drink dark and potent 2015

a carven cup with curious brim,

by ancient art of olden smiths

fairly fashioned, filled with marvels;

there gleamed and lived in grey silver

the folk of Faerie in the first noontide 2020

of the Blissful Realms; with their brows wreathed

THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 73

in garlands golden with their gleaming hair

in the wind flying and their wayward feet

fitful flickering, on unfading lawns

the ancient Elves there everlasting 2025

danced undying in the deep pasture

of the gardens of the Gods; there Glingol shone

and Bansil bloomed with beams shimmering,

mothwhite moonlight from its misty flowers;

the hilltops of Tun there high and green 2030

were crowned by Côr, climbing, winding,

town white-walled where the tower of Ing

with pale pinnacle pierced the twilight,

and its crystal lamp illumined clear

with slender shaft the Shadowy Seas. 2035

Through wrack and ruin, the wrath of the Gods,

through weary wandering, waste and exile,

had come that cup, carved in gladness,

in woe hoarded, in waning hope

when little was left of the lore of old. 2040

Now Fuilin at feast filled it seldom

save in pledge of love to proven friend;

blithely bade he of that beaker drink

for the sake of his son that sate nigh him

Turin Thalion in token sure 2045

of a league of love long enduring.

\'O Hurin\'s child chief of Hithlum,

with mourning marred, may the mead of the Elves

thy heart uplift with hope lightened;

nor fare thou from us the feast ended, 2050

here deign to dwell; if this deep mansion

thus dark-dolven dimly vaulted

displease thee not, a place awaits thee.'

There deeply drank a draught of sweetness

Turin Thalion and returned his thanks 2055

in eager earnest, while all the folk

with loud laughter and long feasting,

with mournful lay or music wild

of magic minstrels that mighty songs

did weave with wonder, there wooed their hearts 2060

from black foreboding; there bed\'s repose

their guest was granted, when in gloom silent

the light and laughter and the living voices

**74 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

were quenched in slumber. Now cold and slim

the sickle of the Moon was silver tilted 2065

o\'er the wan waters that washed unsleeping,

nightshadowed Narog, the Gnome-river.

In tall treetops of the tangled wood

there hooted hollow the hunting owls.

Thus fate it fashioned that in Fuilin\'s house 2070

the dark destiny now dwelt awhile

of Turin the tall. There he toiled and fought

with the folk of Fuilin for Flinding\'s love;

lore long forgotten learned among them,

for light yet lingered in those leaguered places, 2075

and wisdom yet lived in that wild people,

whose minds yet remembered the Mountains of the West

and the faces of the Gods, yet filled with glory

more clear and keen than kindreds of the dark

or Men unwitting of the mirth of old. 2080

Thus Fuilin and Flinding friendship showed him,

and their halls were his home, while high summer

waned to autumn and the western gales

the leaves loosened from the labouring boughs;

the feet of the forest in fading gold 2085

and burnished brown were buried deeply;

a restless rustle down the roofless aisles

sighed and whispered. Lo! the Silver Wherry,

the sailing Moon with slender mast,

was filled with fires as of furnace golden 2090

whose hold had hoarded the heats of summer,

whose shrouds were shaped of shining flame

uprising ruddy o\'er the rim of Evening

by the misty wharves on the margin of the world.

Thus the months fleeted and mightily he fared 2095

in the forest with Flinding, and his fate waited

slumbering a season, while he sought for joy

the lore learning and the league sharing

of the Gnomes renowned of Nargothrond.

The ways of the woods he wandered far, 2100

and the land\'s secrets he learned swiftly

by winter unhindered to weathers hardened,

whether snow or sleet or slanting rain

THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 75

from glowering heavens grey and sunless

cold and cruel was cast to earth, 2105

till the floods were loosed and the fallow waters

of sweeping Narog, swollen, angry,

were filled with flotsam and foaming turbid

passed in tumult; or twinkling pale

ice-hung evening was opened wide, 2110

a dome of crystal o\'er the deep silence

of the windless wastes and the woods standing

like frozen phantoms under flickering stars.

By day or night danger needless

he dared and sought for, his dread vengeance 2115

ever seeking unsated on the sons of Angband;

yet as winter waxed wild and pathless,

and biting blizzards the bare faces

lashed and tortured of the lonely tors

and haggard hilltops, in the halls more often 2120

was he found in fellowship with the folk of Narog,

and cunning there added in the crafts of hand,

and in subtle mastery of song and music

and peerless poesy, to his proven lore

and wise woodcraft; there wondrous tales 2125

were told to Turin in tongues of gold

in those mansions deep, there many a day

to the hearth and halls of the haughty king

did those friends now fare to feast and game,

for frail Finduilas her father urged 2130

to his board and favour to bid those twain,

and it grudging her granted that grimhearted

king deep-counselled - cold his anger,

his ruth unready, his wrath enduring;

yet fierce and fell by the fires of hate 2135

his breast was burned for the broods of Hell

(his son had they slain, the swift-footed

Halmir the hunter of hart and boar),

and kinship therein the king ere long

in his heart discovered for Húrin\'s son, 2140

dark and silent, as in dreams walking

of anguish and regret and evergrowing

feud unsated. Thus favour soon

by the king accorded of the company of his board

he was member made, and in many a deed 2145

76 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

and wild venture to West and North

he achieved renown among the chosen warriors

and fearless bowmen; in far battles

in secret ambush and sudden onslaught,

where fell-tonguéd flew the flying serpents, 2150

their shafts envenomed, in valleys shrouded

he played his part, but it pleased him little,

who trusted to targe and tempered sword,

whose hand was hungry for the hilts it missed

but dared never a blade since the doom of Beleg 2155

to draw or handle. Dear-holden was he,

though he wished nor willed it, and his works were praised.

When tales were told of times gone by,

of valour they had known, of vanished triumph,

glory half-forgot, grief remembered, 2160

then they bade and begged him be blithe and sing

of deeds in Doriath in the dark forest

by the shadowy shores that shunned the light

where Esgalduin the Elf-river

by root-fenced pools roofed with silence, 2165

by deep eddies darkly gurgling,

flowed fleetly on past the frowning portals

of the Thousand Caves. Thus his thought recalled

the woodland ways where once of yore

Beleg the bowman had a boy guided 2170

by slade and slope and swampy thicket

neath trees enchanted; then his tongue faltered

and his tale was stilled.

At Turin\'s sorrow

one marvelled and was moved, a maiden fair

the frail Finduilas that Failivrin, 2175

the glimmering sheen on the glassy pools

of Ivrin\'s lake the Elves in love

had named anew. By night she pondered

and by day wondered what depth of woe

lay locked in his heart his life marring; 2180

for the doom of dread and death that had fallen

on Beleg the bowman in unbroken silence

Turin warded, nor might tale be won

of Flinding the faithful of their fare and deeds

in the waste together. Now waned her love 2185

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF** HÚRIN 77

for the form and face furrowed with anguish,

for the bended back and broken strength,

the wistful eyes and the withered laughter

of Flinding the faithful, though filled was her heart with deepwelling
pity and dear friendship. 2190

Grown old betimes and grey-frosted,

he was wise and kindly with wit and counsel,

with sight and foresight, but slow to wrath

nor fiercely valiant, yet if fight he must

his share he shirked not, though the shreds of fear 2195

in his heart yet hung; he hated no man,

but he seldom smiled, save suddenly a light

in his grave face glimmered and his glance was fired: Finduilas maybe
faring lightly

on the sward he saw or swinging pale, 2200

a sheen of silver down some shadowy hall.\*

Yet to Turin was turned her troublous heart

against will and wisdom and waking thought:

in dreams she sought him, his dark sorrow

with love lightening, so that laughter shone 2205

in eyes new-kindled, and her Elfin name

he eager spake, as in endless spring

they fared free-hearted through flowers enchanted

with hand in hand o\'er the happy pastures

of that land that is lit by no light of Earth, 2210

by no moon nor sun, down mazy ways

to the black abysmal brink of waking.

From woe unhealed the wounded heart

of Turin the tall was turned to her.

Amazed and moved, his mind\'s secret 2215

half-guessed, half-guarded, in gloomy hour

of night\'s watches, when down narrow winding

paths of pondering he paced wearily,

he would lonely unlock, then loyal-hearted

shut fast and shun, or shroud his grief 2220

in dreamless sleep, deep oblivion

where no echo entered of the endless war

of waking worlds, woe nor friendship,

flower nor firelight nor the foam of seas,

\* Here the B-typescript ends, and the remainder of the text is
manuscript. See the Note on the Texts, p. 81.

**78 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

a land illumined by no light at all. 2225

\'O! hands unholy, O! heart of sorrow,

O! outlaw whose evil is yet unatonéd,

wilt thou, troth-breaker, a treason new

to thy burden bind; thy brother-in-arms,

Flindinggo-Fuilin thus foully betray, 2230

who thy madness tended in mortal perils,

to thy waters of healing thy wandering feet

did lead at the last to lands of peace,

where his life is rooted and his love dwelleth?

O! stained hands his hope steal not!' 2235

Thus love was fettered in loyal fastness

and coldly clad in courteous word;

yet he would look and long for her loveliness,

in her gentle words his joy finding,

her face watching when he feared no eye 2240

might mark his mood. One marked it all -

Failivrin\'s face, the fleeting gleams,

like sun through clouds sailing hurriedly

over faded fields, that flickered and went out

as Turin passed; the tremulous smiles, 2245

his grave glances out of guarded shade,

his sighs in secret --- one saw them all,

Flinding go-Fuilin, who had found his home

and lost his love to the lying years,

he watched and wondered, no word speaking, 2250

and his heart grew dark 'twixt hate and pity,

bewildered, weary, in the webs of fate.

Then Finduilas, more frail and wan

twixt olden love now overthrown

and new refused, did nightly weep; 2255

and folk wondered at the fair pallor

of the hands upon her harp, her hair of gold

on slender shoulders slipped in tumult,

the glory of her eyes that gleamed with fires

of secret thought in silent deeps. 2260

Many bosoms burdened with foreboding vague

their glooms disowned neath glad laughter.

In song and silence, snow and tempest,

winter wore away; to the world there came

![](images/000117.png){.calibre1}

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 79**

a year once more in youth unstained, 2265

nor were leaves less green, light less golden,

the flowers less fair, though in faded hearts

no spring was born, though speeding nigh

danger and dread and doom\'s footsteps

to their halls hasted. Of the host of iron 2270

came tale and tidings ever treading nearer;

Orcs unnumbered to the East of Narog

roamed and ravened on the realm\'s borders,

the might of Morgoth was moved abroad.

No ambush stayed them; the archers yielded 2275

each vale by vale, though venomed arrows

Here both A and B end abruptly, and I think it is certain that no more
of the poem was ever written.

NOTES

1409 *Tengwethil* B, *Taingwethil* A. This is the reverse of the
previous occurrences; see lines 431, 636.

1417-18 These lines are bracketed in B, and line 1418 struck through; in
the margin is a mark of deletion, but with a query beside it.

1448 *Nirnaith Unoth* A, and B as typed; emended in pencil in B to
*Nirnaith Omoth.* Earlier in the poem (lines 13, 218) the forms were
*Ninin Udathriol* emended in B to *Ninin* *Unothradin* (also *Nirnaithos
Unothradin* at line 13). Cf.

line 1543.

1469 *Ulmo A,* and B as typed; in B *Ulmo* struck through in pencil and
replaced by *Ylmir,* but this also struck through. I read *Ylmir;* see
note to line 1529.

1525 *Turin Thalion* A, and B as typed (not *Turin Thaliodrin,* see note
to line 1324).

1529 *Ylmir:* so already in A and B as typed; so also at lines 1534,
1553, 1572, 1585. See note to line 1469.

1537 This line was struck through in pencil in B.

1542---3 These lines were bracketed in pencil in B, and *Not so* written
in margin. Though *Unoth* was not here emended I read *Ornoth* (see note
to line 1448).

1558 *the sea-birds call in solemn conclave:* cf. the tale of *The*
*Coming of the Elves and the Making of Kôr,* 1.124.

1673-6 Cf. lines 1036-9.

**8o THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

1696-7 Cf. lines 1283-4.

1710-11 Line 1710 is wholly and 1711 partly crossed out in B, with
marginal additions to make 1711 read:

\[by\] Felagund founded flying southward

Also written in the margin is: *'before* Nirnaith Unoth'. At line 1711 A
*has found lor founded,* but as the manuscript was written very rapidly
this may not be significant.

1713---20 These lines are bracketed in B, as if needing revision, and
two lines are written in the margin for insertion after 1715: that home
came never to their halls of old

since the field of tears was fought and lost.

I have not included these lines (written, it seems, at the same time as
the other marginal comments in this passage) in the text in view of the
complexity of the 'historical background' at this point; see the
Commentary, pp. 84-5.

Against this passage is written in the margin:

but Nargothrond was founded by *Felagund* Finrod\'s son (whose brothers
were Angrod Egnor & Orodreth). Curufin and Celegorm dwelt at
Nargothrond.

1719 *Cranthor* A, *Cranthir* B as typed.

1724 *Finduilas: Failivrin* A, and B as typed; *Finduilas* written in
pencil in the margin of B; so also at line 1938. See lines 2130,
2175,2199.

1938 *Finduilas:* as at line 1724.

1945 The word *youngling* is struck out in B and *Flinding* written
against it, but the resulting *Fuilin\'s Flinding* (with alliteration in
the second half-line) cannot possibly have been intended. Subsequently
another word was written in the margin, but this is illegible.

1974---5 *Not so* written in the margin of B.

1975 *Finweg* A, and B as typed; late emendation to *Fingon* in B.

I retain *Finweg* since that is still the name in the 1930

'Silmarillion'.

1993---8 In A and in B as typed these lines were differently ordered: Of
the four kindreds that followed the king,

most noble of name, renowned in valour,

the watchtowers' lords, the wold\'s keepers

from Fuilin\'s children were first chosen,

and the guards of the bridge, the gleaming bow

that was flung o\'er the foaming froth of Ingwil.

2027 *Glingol* A, and B as typed; late emendation to *Glingal* in B. I
retain *Glingol,* the form in the Los? *Tales* and still in the 1930

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF** HÚRIN 81

'Silmarillion'; in the published work *Glingal* is the name of the
golden tree of Gondolin.

*2028 Bansil A,* and B as typed; late emendation to *Belthil* in B. I
retain *Bansil* for the same reason as *Glingol* in line 2027.

2030 *there high and green the hill of Tun A,* and B as typed; emended
in pencil in B to the reading given; *was* 2031 not corrected to *were,*
but that *hilltops* (plural) was intended is shown by the text C, see p.
82.

2130 I give *Finduilas,* though *Failivrin* was not so emended here in
B, as it was at lines 1724, 1938. See notes to lines 2175.

2109\.

2164 *Esgaduin A,* and B as typed; emended in pencil to *Esgalduin* inB.

2175 *the frail Finduilas that Failivrin* as typed B; *the frail*
*Failivrin* changed at the time of writing in A *toFindóriel* (sc.

*the frail Findóriel that Failivrin* & c.).

2199 *Finduilas A* and B; *Failivrin* written in the margin of A. At the
subsequent occurrences *(Failivrin* 2242, *Finduilas* 2253) the names
both in A and in B are as in the printed text.

*Note on the texts of the section 'Failivrin '*

B comes to an end as a typescript at line 2201, but continues as a
well-written manuscript for a further 75 lines. This last part is
written on the paper of good quality that my father used for many years
in all his writing (University lectures, *The Silmarillion, The Lord of
the Rings,* etc.) in ink or pencil (i.e. when not typing): this plain
paper was supplied to him by the Examination Schools at Oxford
University, being the unused pages of the booklets of paper provided for
examination candi-dates. The change in paper does not show however that
he had moved from Leeds to Oxford (cf. p. 3), since he acted as an
external examiner at Oxford in 1924 and 1925; but it does suggest that
the final work on the Lay (before *Leithian* was begun) dates from the
latter part of the one year or the earlier part of the next. The
conclusion of A is also written on this paper.

There is a further short text to be considered here, a well-written
manuscript that extends from line 2005 to line 2225, which I will call
\'C\'.

Textual details show clearly that C followed B - not, I think, at any
long interval. Some emendations made to B were made to C also. I give
here a list of the more important differences of C from B (small changes
of punctuation and sentence-connection are not noticed).

C bears the title *Turin in the House of Fuilin and his son Flinding.*

It is not clear whether this was to be the title of a fourth section of
the poem, but it seems unlikely, if the third section was to remain
'Failivrin'.

2005 *Now was care lessened in kindly love C*

2020 *noontide\] summer* pencil emendation in C

**82 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

2027-8 *Glingol \> Glingal* and *Bansil \> Belthil* pencil emendations
in C as in B

2029 The original reading of B and C was *like magic moonlight from its
mothwhite flowers;* this was differently emended in C, to *like moths of
pearl in moonlit flowers.*

2030-2 C as written was exactly as the text of B after emendation (with
*were* for *was* 2031); these lines were then crossed out and the
following substituted:

there high and green that hill by the sea

was crowned by Tun, climbing, winding

in tall walls of white, where the tower of Ing

2036---53 are omitted in C (with *Thence* for *There* 2054).

2069 After *hunting owls C* has lines of omission dots, and the text
takes up again at line 2081.

2083 *waned to autumn\] waned towards winter* pencil emendations in C

2090 *as of furnace golden\] as a furnace of gold C*

2114-16 are omitted in C.

2123-8 C omits 2124, 2125b-7, and reads:

and in subtle mastery of song and music

to his wise woodcraft and wielding of arms.

To the hearth and halls of the haughty king

2135-8 C omits these lines (referring to Orodreth\'s son Halmir, slain
by Orcs) and reads:

his ruth unready, his wrath enduring.

But kinship of mood the king ere long

2142b-2143a C omits these lines, and reads:

of anguish and regret. Thus was honour granted

by the king to Turin; of the company of his board

2158 *were told\] men told* emendation in C.

2164- *Esgalduin* C as written; see note to this line above.

Commentary on *Part HI 'Failivrin '*

In this very remarkable section of the poem a great development has
taken place in the story since the *Tale of Turambar* (if there was an
intervening stage there is now no trace of it); while concurrently the
history of the exiled Noldoli was being deepened and extended from its
representation in the outlines for *Gilfanon \'s Tale* - a factor that
compli-

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 83**

cates the presentation of the poems, since statements about that history
were often superseded during the long process of composition.

Most notable of all in this part of the poem is the description of
Nargothrond, unique in the Lay. In all the later rewritings and
restructurings of the Turin saga this part was never touched, apart from
the development of the relations between Turin, Gwindor, and Finduilas
which I have given in *Unfinished Tales,* pp. 155-9. In this there is a
parallel to Gondolin, very fully described in the tale of *The Fall of*
*Gondolin,* but never again. As I said in the introduction to
*Unfinished* *Tales (p. 5):*

It is thus the remarkable fact that the only full account that my father
ever wrote of the story of Tuor\'s sojourn in Gondolin, his union with
Idril Celebrindal, the birth of Earendil, the treachery of Maeglin, the
sack of the city, and the escape of the fugitives - a story that was a
central element in his imagination of the First Age - was the narrative
composed in his youth.

Gondolin and Nargothrond were each made once, and not remade. They
remained powerful sources and images --- the more powerful, perhaps,
because never remade, and never remade, perhaps, because so powerful.

Both *Tuor* and *Turin* were indeed to receive written form outside the
condensed *Silmarillion* as long prose narratives, and what my father
achieved of this intention I have given in the first two sections of
*Unfinished Tales;* but though he set out to remake Gondolin he never
reached the city again: after climbing the endless slope of the Orfalch
Echor and passing through the long line of heraldic gates he paused with
Tuor at the vision of Gondolin amid the plain, and never recrossed
Tumladen. The remaking of *Turin* went much further, but here too he
skirted the imaginative focus of Nargothrond.

*The founding of Nargothrond*

I shall discuss first the 'background' history, which centres on the
complex question of the founding of Nargothrond. In the Tale (II.81---2)
Nargothrond is not named, and is represented by the Caves of the
Rodothlim; as in the poem, Orodreth was the chief of these Gnomes, but
he was then an isolated figure, and not yet associated in kinship with
other princes. Nothing is said there of the origin of the redoubt, but
that it was imagined to have arisen (like Gondolin) after the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears is, I think, certain, since in the earliest phase of
the legends, as I remarked in commenting on *Gilfanon\'s Tale* (I. 242),
the entire later history of the long years of the Siege of Angband,
ending with the Battle of Sudden Flame (Dagor Bragollach), of the
passage of Men over the Mountains into Beleriand and their taking
service with the Noldorin Kings, had yet to emerge; indeed these
outlines give the effect of only a brief time elapsing between the **84
THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

coming of the Noldoli from Kôr and their great defeat \[in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears\].

In the poem, this idea is still clearly present in lines 1542-4: the
secret halls

of Nargothrond by the Gnomes builded

that death and thraldom in the dreadful throes

of Nirnaith Ornoth, a number scanty,

escaped unscathed.

Against this passage my father wrote 'Not so'; and this comment
obviously means 'Nargothrond was *not* founded after the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears\', as is further shown by his note to lines 1710-11:
(to Nargothrond)

that Celegorm and Curufin, the crafty sons

of Fëanor founded when they fled southward

against which he wrote: *'before* Nirnaith Unoth'. When, then, was it
founded? The 'Sketch of the Mythology', certainly later than the poem
(the background of which it was written to explain), already in its
earliest form knows of the Leaguer of Angband and of Morgoth\'s breaking
of the Leaguer - though described in the barest possible way, without
any reference to the battle that ended it; and it is said there that at
that time

'Gnomes and Ilkorins and Men are scattered . . . Celegorm and Curufin
found the realm of Nargothrond on the banks of Narog in the south of the
Northern lands.' The 'Sketch' (again, in its earliest, unrevised, form)
also states that Celegorm and Curufin despatched a host from Nargothrond
to the Battle of Unnumbered Tears, that this host joined with that of
Maidros and Maglor, but 'arrived too late for the main battle'.

'They are beaten back and driven into the South-east, where they long
time dwelt, and did not go back to Nargothrond. There Orodreth ruled the
remnant.'

The problem is to explain how it comes about in the earlier story, as
found in the poem (Nargothrond founded by Celegorm and Curufin *after*
the Battle of Unnumbered Tears), that Celegorm and Curufin are no longer
there when Turin comes, and Orodreth is king. Why do they *live now
lurking . . . in the forests of the East* with their five brothers
(1713-14)?

The only explanation that I can put forward is as follows. When my
father wrote lines 1542-4 his view was that Nargothrond was founded
after the Battle of Unnumbered Tears (this is quite explicit). But when
he wrote lines 1710---15

(to Nargothrond)

that Celegorm and Curufin, the crafty sons 1710

of Fëanor founded when they fled southward;

there built a bulwark against Bauglir\'s hate,

THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN ' 85

who live now lurking in league secret

with those five others in the forests of the East

fell unflinching foes of Morgoth 1715

the later story was already present. (There would be nothing
uncharacteristic about this; in the *Lay of Leithian* the story changes
from one Canto to the next.) Thus *when they fled southward* refers to
the flight of Celegorm and Curufin from the battle that ended the
Leaguer of Angband; *they live now lurking . . . in the forests of the
East* refers to the period after the Battle of Unnumbered Tears, when
'they did not go back to Nargothrond' and 'Orodreth ruled the remnant',
as stated in the

'Sketch'.\* On this view, my father\'s note against lines 1710-11
*('before* Nirnaith Unoth') was mistaken - he took the lines to refer to
the old story (as 1542---4 certainly do), whereas in fact they refer to
the later. This explanation may seem far-fetched, but it is less so than
the demonstrably correct solutions to other puzzles in the history of
'The Silmarillion', and I see no other way out of the difficulty. - The
two additional lines to follow 1715:

that home came never to their halls of old

since the field of tears was fought and lost

refer (I think) to Celegorm and Curufin, and reinforce the reference to
the later story (i.e. that after the Battle of Unnumbered Tears they did
not return to Nargothrond).

The change of lines 1710-11 to make the passage read

(to Nargothrond)

by Felagund founded flying southward

and the marginal note against 1713---20 'but Nargothrond was founded by
*Felagund* Finrod\'s son' etc., reflect of course a further stage,
though a stage that came in soon after the 'Sketch' was first written.
The essential shifts in the history of Nargothrond to this point are
certainly thus: (1) Orodreth ruled the Rodothlim in their caves, first
inhabited after the Battle of Unnumbered Tears.

\(2\) Celegorm and Curufin founded Nargothrond after the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears.

\(3\) Celegorm and Curufin founded Nargothrond after the breaking of the
Leaguer of Angband; they went with a host to the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears and did not return, but remained in the East; Orodreth ruled the
remnant of the Gnomes of Nargothrond.

\(4\) Felagund son of Finrod and his brothers Angrod, Egnor, and

\*Cf. lines 1873-4:

Has the watch then waned in the woods of Narog

*since Orodreth ruled this realm and folk?*

**86 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Orodreth founded Nargothrond after the breaking of the Leaguer of
Angband; Celegorm and Curufin dwelt there.

Another sign of development in the history and genealogy of the Gnomish
princes is the mention of *Finweg,* later emended in the B-text to
*Fingon, who fell in flame of swords* at the Battle of Unnumbered Tears
(1975). *Finweg* has appeared early in the poem (line 29), but there as
a spelling or form of Finwë (Nólemë), founder of the line; this *Finweg*
appears in the 'Sketch', as originally written, as the son of Fingolfin.

The Sons of Fëanor have previously all been named only in the *Tale of*
*the Nauglafring* (II.241); now (17ff.), with *Cranthir* (emended from
*Cranthor* in B), and *Diriel* for earlier *Dinithel (?Durithel),* they
reach the forms they long retained. Characteristic epithets appear:
Maglor is 'swift', Cranthir 'dark', and Curufin\'s 'craftiness', already
appearing in the *Tale of the Nauglafring,* extends here to Celegorm.

Maidros' wielding his sword with his left hand is mentioned, which
clearly implies that the story that Morgorth had him hung from a cliff
by his right hand, and that Finweg (\> Fingon) rescued him, was already
present, as it is in the 'Sketch'. His torment and maiming was mentioned
in the outlines for *Gilfanon\'s Tale* (I. 238, 240), but not described.

To turn now to the foreground narrative of this part of the poem. The
poem advances on the *Tale* by mentioning the disposal of Beleg\'s
sword, not mentioned in the *Tale;* but here Flinding hides it in the
hollow of a tree (1342), and it plays no further part in the story. If
the poem had gone further Turin would have received his black sword in
Nargothrond in gift from Orodreth, as happens in the *Tale* (II. 83). In
the *Tale* it is said that Turin 'had not wielded a sword since the
slaying of Beleg, but rather had he been contented with a mighty club';
in the poem this reappears with the implication made explicit (2155-6):

dared never a blade since the doom of Beleg

to draw or handle.

The burial of Beleg now appears, with his great bow beside him
(1399ff.), and Turin\'s kiss survives from the *Tale;* that the mark of
his grief over the death of Beleg (called the third of his sorrows,
1421) never left his face was an enduring feature of the legend.

*Geography*

In the *Tale* (II. 80---1) very little is made of the journey of
Flinding and Turin from the place of Beleg\'s death to Nargothrond: by
the light of Flinding\'s lamp they 'fared by night and hid by day and
were lost in the hills, and the Orcs found them not'. In the poem, on
the other hand, the journey is quite fully described, and contains some
noteworthy features; moreover there is nothing in the description that
contradicts the earliest **THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 87**

'Silmarillion\* map (to be given in the next volume), which dates from
this period and may have been made originally in association with this
poem.

The wanderers pass at midnight by the Mound of Slain, looming up under
the moon *at the furthest end/of Dor-na-Fauglith\'s dusty* *spaces (*
1439-40); this feature does not recur again in the story of Turin.

The only previous reference to the great burial-mound is in the outlines
for *Gilfanon\'s Tale,* where it is called the Hill of Death, and was
raised by the Sons of Feanor (I. 241). It is said in the poem that Turin
despite his heavy listlessness *turned his hand / toward Thangorodrim*
at Flinding\'s words concerning the Mound, and cursed Morgoth thrice -
as did Fëanor in the hour of his death after the Battle-under-Stars
*(The* *Silmarillion* p. 107); the one was doubtless the precursor of
the other.

The inviolability of the Mound now appears (1450-2).

Turin and Funding now crossed Sirion not far from his source in the
Shadowy Mountains, where the river was fordable (i457ff.); this is the
first reference to Sirion\'s Well. Sirion\'s great journey to the Sea is
described, with references to his passage underground (1467; cf. II.195,
217) and through lands *beloved of Ylmir* (Ulmo). The travellers then
find themselves in Nan Dungorthin, which was mentioned in the *Tale of*
*Tinúviel* (see II. 35, 62-3): Huan found Beren and Tinúviel after their
escape from Angband in 'that northward region of Artanor that was called
afterward Nan Dumgorthin, the land of the dark idols\', 'even then a
dark land and gloomy and foreboding, and dread wandered beneath its
lowering trees\'. My father hesitated long about the placing of this
land: in the Gnomish dictionary it was east of Artanor (II. 62), in the
*Tale of* *Tinúviel* a 'northward region of Artanor', while here it is
west of Sirion, in a valley of the southern slopes of the Shadowy
Mountains. In the earliest 'Silmarillion' map Nan Dungorthin was first
likewise placed west of Sirion (west of the Isle of Werewolves), before
being returned once more to the region north of Doriath, where it
remained.

It is said that when Turin and Flinding climbed out of the vale of Nan
Dungorthin they *southward saw the slopes of Hithlumlmore* *warm and
friendly* (1496-7). At first sight this seems difficult to understand,
but I think that the meaning is: they were indeed on *the slopes- of
Hithlum* at the time (i.e. below the southern faces of the Shadowy
Mountains that fenced Hithlum), but looking southward (actually south
west ward) they saw more agreeable regions further along the foothills,
towards Ivrin. This is the first appearance of Ivrin, source of the
Narog, and it is seen very clearly. The line (1537) giving the meaning
*of Narog* (Gnomish, 'torrent') was struck out, but this (I think) was
because my father felt that it was intrusive, not that the etymology was
rejected. In this connection it may be mentioned that in a list of Old
English equivalents of Elvish names, composed some years after the time
of the present poem and associated with Ǽlfwine\'s translations of
Elvish texts into his own language, occur *Narog: Hlýda* and
*Nargothrond:* *Hlýdingaburg.* Hlýda was the name in Old English of
March ('the noisy **THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 89**

is the first appearance of this stream (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 122:
'the short and foaming stream Ringwil tumbled headlong into Narog from
the High Faroth'), and the bridge over it is mentioned nowhere else.

The Land of the Dead that Live (Beren and Tinúviel after their return)
is now placed in the Hills of the Hunters (1545-6), where it was
originally placed also on the map. This land was moved even more often
than was Nan Dungorthin. In the *Tale of the Nauglafring* it was in
Hisilómë (but with a note on the manuscript saying that it must be
placed in 'Doriath beyond Sirion', II. 249); in the *Tale of Tinúviel*
Beren and Tinúviel 'became mighty fairies in the lands about the north
of Sirion'

(II. 41). From the Hills of the Hunters it would subsequently be moved
several times more.

Before leaving the Narog, we meet here for the first time in narrative
writing the name *Nan-Tathrin* (1548), in *the Lost* *Tales* always
called by its name in Eldarissa, *Tasarinan* (but *Nantathrin* occurs in
the Gnomish dictionary, I. 265, entry *Sirion* and *Dor-tathrin* in the
Name-list to *The Fall of Gondolin,* II. 346).

Far fuller than in any later account is the story in the poem of the
sojourn of Turin and his companion at Ivrin, and much that lies behind
the passage in *The Silmarillion* (p. 209) is here revealed. In *The
Silmarillion* Turin drank from the water of Ivrin and was at last able
to weep, and his madness passed; then he made a song for Beleg *(Laer
Cú* *Beleg,* the Song of the Great Bow), 'singing it aloud heedless of
peril'; and then he asked Gwindor who he was. In the Lay all these
features of the story are present, somewhat differently ordered.
Flinding describes to Turin the courses of Narog and Sirion and the
protection of Ulmo, and Turin feels some return of hope (1586-7); they
hasten down to the lake and drink (1599-1600); and *front the meshes of
misery his* *mind was loosed* (1602). In the early night, as they sat
beside their fire by the pools of Ivrin, Turin asked Flinding his name
and fate, and it was Flinding\'s reply that led Turin at last to weep.
Flinding fell asleep, but woke towards the end of the night to hear
Turin singing the dirge of Beleg by the edge of the lake (and here the
song is called 'the Bowman\'s Friendship'). Turin then himself fell
asleep, and in his sleep he returned to the terrible place on the edge
of Taur-na-Fuin where he slew Beleg, seeking the place of his burial and
the lightning-blackened trees, and heard the voice of Beleg far off
telling him to seek no longer but to take comfort in courage.

Then he woke in wonder; his wit was healed,

courage him comforted, and he called aloud

Flinding go-Fuilin, to his feet striding. (1699-1701) The structure of
the episode in the Lay is firm and clear, the images strong and
enduring. I said in the introduction to *Unfinished Tales* that it was
grievous that my father went no further, in the later Tale of Tuor, THE
LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 89

is the first appearance of this stream (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 122:
'the short and foaming stream Ringwil tumbled headlong into Narog from
the High Faroth'), and the bridge over it is mentioned nowhere else.

The Land of the Dead that Live (Beren and Tinúviel after their return)
is now placed in the Hills of the Hunters (1545-6), where it was
originally placed also on the map. This land was moved even more often
than was Nan Dungorthin. In the *Tale of the Nauglafring* it was in
Hisilómë (but with a note on the manuscript saying that it must be
placed in 'Doriath beyond Sirion', II. 249); in the *Tale of Tinúviel*
Beren and Tinúviel 'became mighty fairies in the lands about the north
of Sirion'

(II. 41). From the Hills of the Hunters it would subsequently be moved
several times more.

Before leaving the Narog, we meet here for the first time in narrative
writing the name *Nan- Tathrin* (1548), in *the Lost* *Tales* always
called by its name in Eldarissa, *Tasarinan* (but *Nantathrin* occurs in
the Gnomish dictionary, I. 265, entry *Sirion* and *Dor-tathrin* in the
Name-list to *The Fall of Gondolin,* II. 346).

Far fuller than in any later account is the story in the poem of the
sojourn of Turin and his companion at Ivrin, and much that lies behind
the passage in *The Silmarillion* (p. 209) is here revealed. In *The
Silmarillion* Turin drank from the water of Ivrin and was at last able
to weep, and his madness passed; then he made a song for Beleg *(Laer
Cú* *Beleg,* the Song of the Great Bow), 'singing it aloud heedless of
peril'; and then he asked Gwindor who he was. In the Lay all these
features of the story are present, somewhat differently ordered. Funding
describes to Turin the courses of Narog and Sirion and the protection of
Ulmo, and Turin feels some return of hope (1586---7); they hasten down
to the lake and drink (1599-1600); *and from the meshes of misery his*
*mind was loosed* (1602). In the early night, as they sat beside their
fire by the pools of Ivrin, Turin asked Flinding his name and fate, and
it was Flinding\'s reply that led Turin at last to weep. Flinding fell
asleep, but woke towards the end of the night to hear Turin singing the
dirge of Beleg by the edge of the lake (and here the song is called 'the
Bowman\'s Friendship'). Turin then himself fell asleep, and in his sleep
he returned to the terrible place on the edge of Taur-na-Fuin where he
slew Beleg, seeking the place of his burial and the lightning-blackened
trees, and heard the voice of Beleg far off telling him to seek no
longer but to take comfort in courage.

Then he woke in wonder; his wit was healed,

courage him comforted, and he called aloud

Flindinggo-Fuilin, to his feet striding. (1699-1701)

The structure of the episode in the Lay is firm and clear, the images
strong and enduring. I said in the introduction to *Unfinished Tales*
that it was grievous that my father went no further, in the later Tale
of Tuor, 9o THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

than the coming of Tuor and Voronwë to the last gate and Tuor\'s sight
of Gondolin across the plain. It is no less grievous that he never
retold, in his later prose, the story of Turin and Gwindor at the Lake
of Ivrin. The passage in *The Silmarillion* is no substitute; and it is
only from this poem that we can fully grasp the extremity of the
disaster for Turin, that he had killed his friend.

The description in the poem of the stealth and secrecy of the defenders
of Nargothrond is derived, in concept, from the *Tale* (II. 81). *In the
Tale* the spies and watchers of the Rodothlim . . . gave warning of
their approach, and the folk withdrew before them, such as were abroad
from their dwelling. Then they closed their doors and hoped that the
strangers might not discover their caves . . .

When Flinding and Turin came to the mouths of the caves, the Rodothlim
sallied and made them prisoners and drew them within their rocky halls,
and they were led before the chief, Orodreth.

All this is taken up into the poem and greatly elaborated; there is also
the incident of Turin\'s stumbling on a root and thus being missed by
the arrow aimed at him, and Flinding\'s cry of reproach to the unseen
archers, after which they were not further molested. It is perhaps not
so clear in the poem as in the *Tale* that the farmlands and orchards of
Nargothrond were deserted lest the travellers should find the entrance
to the caves, especially since a *pathway plain by passing feet / was
broadly* *beaten* (1808-9) - though it is said that the throng in the
great hall of Nargothrond was waiting for them (1856). Moreover, in the
*Tale* they were not attacked. As the story is told in the poem, one
might wonder why the hidden archers in the woods, if they believed
Flinding\'s cry sufficiently to withhold their arrows, did not emerge at
that point and conduct them as prisoners to the caves. The new element
of the arrow shot in the woods has not, I think, been altogether
assimilated to the old account of the timorous withdrawal of the
Rodothlim in the hope that Turin and Flinding would not find the
entrance. But the passage describing the 'home-fields\' of Nargothrond
is of great interest in itself, for rarely are there references to the
agriculture of the peoples of Middle-earth in the Elder Days.

The great Doors of Nargothrond are here first described - the triple
doors of timber as my father imagined them are seen in his drawing of
the entrance made in Dorset in the summer of 1928, and (in a different
conception) *their posts and lintels of ponderous stone* (1830) in the
watercolour of the same period referred to above *(Pictures* nos 33,
34).

In the *Tale* the fear and suspicion among the Rodothlim of Noldoli who
had been slaves is attributed to 'the evil deeds of the Gnomes at Cópas
Alqalunten', and this element reappears in the poem (1903-4).

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 91**

Nevertheless, there is no suggestion in the *Tale* of any serious
questioning of the identity and goodwill of Funding, greatly changed in
aspect though he was, so that 'few knew him again'. In the poem, on the
other hand, Orodreth emerges as hostile and formidable, and his
character is carefully outlined: he is quick to anger (1973) but his
wrath is cold and long-enduring (2133-4), he is seldom moved to pity
(1969, 2134), grim-hearted and deep-counselled (2132-3), but capable of
deep love (1970) as also of fierce hate (2135). Afterwards, as the
legends developed, Orodreth underwent a steady decline into weakness and
insignificance, which is very curious. Many years later, when meditating
the development of the Turin saga, my father noted that Orodreth was

'rather a weak character'; cf. the *Narn,* p. 160: 'he turned as he ever
did to Turin for counsel'. Ultimately he was to be displaced as the
second King of Nargothrond *(Unfinished Tales* p. 255, note 20). But all
this is a far cry from the hard and grim king in his underground hall
depicted in the poem; Felagund had not yet emerged, nor the rebellious
power of Celegorm and Curufin in Nargothrond (see further p. 246).

The killing of Orodreth\'s son Halmir the hunter by Orcs (2137---8;
omitted in the C-text, p. 82) is a new element, which will reappear,
though not found in *The Silmarillion,* where the name *Halmir* is borne
by a ruler of the People of Haleth.

In the *Tale,* as I noticed in my commentary (II. 124), Failivrin is
already present, and her unrequited love for Turin, but the complication
of her former relation with Gwindor is quite absent, and she is not the
daughter of Orodreth the King but of one Galweg (who was to disappear
utterly).

In the poem Galweg has already disappeared, and Failivrin has become
Orodreth\'s daughter, loved by Funding and returning his love before his
captivity; and it is her plea to her father before the assembled
multitude that sways the king and leads to the admission of Flinding and
Turin to Nargothrond. Of this intervention there is probably a trace in
the very condensed account in *The Silmarillion* (p. 209): At first his
own people did not know Gwindor, who went out young and strong, and
returned now seeming as one of the aged among mortal Men, because of his
torments and his labours; but Finduilas daughter of Orodreth the King
knew him and welcomed him, for she had loved him before the Nirnaeth,
and so greatly did Gwindor love her beauty that he named her Faelivrin,
which is the gleam of the sun on the pools of Ivrin.

In the poem she is called *Failivrin* in A and B as written, emended or
not in B to *Finduilas* (1724, 1938, 2130), but the name *Finduilas*
emerges towards the end in the texts as first written (2175, 2199), and
*Failivrin (the glimmering sheen on the glassy pools / of Ivrin\'s*
*lake)* is the name by which the Elves renamed *Finduilas.*

92 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

In the Lay as in the *Tale* there is no hiding of Turin\'s identity, as
there is in *The Silmarillion,* where he checked Gwindor, when Gwindor
would declare his name, saying that he was Agarwaen, the Bloodstained,
son of Umarth, Ill-fate (p. 210). Finduilas (Failivrin) asks: But are
none yet nigh us that knew of yore

that mighty of Men \[Húrin\], mark of kinship

to seek and see in these sorrow-laden

form and features? (1958---61)

and then

No few were there found who had fought of old

where Finweg fell in flame of swords

and Húrin Thalion had hewn the throngs,

the dark Glamhoth\'s demon legions (1974-7)

and they declared that Turin\'s face was *the face of the father new*
*found on earth.* Against the second of these passages my father wrote
in the margin: 'Not so.' This is a comment on the idea that there were
many Gnomes in Nargothrond who had fought in the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears (see pp. 84-5); according to the later story scarcely any went
from Nargothrond, and of the small company that did none came back, save
Flinding / Gwindor himself. - In *The Silmarillion* (p. 210) Turin is
not said to be the image of his father; on the contrary,

he was in truth the son of Morwen Eledhwen to look upon: dark-haired and
pale-skinned, with grey eyes.

Cf. also *the Narn, p.* 161, where Turin said to Arminas: But if my head
be dark and not golden, of that I am not ashamed. For I am not the first
of sons in the likeness of his mother.

Húrin himself was

shorter in stature than other men of his kin; in this he took after his
mother\'s people, but in all else he was like Hador his grandfather,
fair of face and golden-haired, strong in body and fiery of mood *(Narn*
*p.* 57).

But Turin was already conceived to be dark-haired in the Lay: the
black-haired boy from the beaten people (417)

and in the second version of the poem Húrin also has *dark tresses* (p.
97, line 88).

At the feast of welcome in the house of Fuilin Flinding\'s father, deep
in the woods on the slopes of the Hunters\' Wold (1989-92), Fuilin
filled with mead a great ancient silver cup that had come from Valinor:
**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 93**

carved in gladness,

in woe hoarded, in waning hope

when little was left of the lore of old. (2038-40)

It was of such things as that cup, carved with images of *the folk of*
*Faerie in the first noontide / of the Blissful Realms,* of the Two
Trees, and of the tower of Ing on the hill of Côr, that my father was
thinking when he wrote of the treasures that Finrod Felagund brought out
of Tirion *(The Silmarillion* p. 114); 'a solace and a burden on the
road' *(ibid.* p. 85). - This is the first reference to the tower of Ing
(Ingwë, see p. 28) in the Elvish city, whose

pale pinnacle pierced the twilight,

and its crystal lamp illumined clear

with slender shaft the Shadowy Seas (2033-5)

as afterwards the silver lamp of the Mindon Eldaliéva 'shone far out
into the mists of the sea' *(The Silmarillion* p. 59).

According to the readings of the A and B texts at lines 2030-2 the hill
on which the Elvish city was built, figured on Fuilin\'s cup, is *Tun,*
crowned by the white-walled city of Côr; and this is anomalous, since
the name *Tun* certainly arose as the name of the city (see II. 292),
and in the

'Sketch of the Mythology' and the 1930 'Silmarillion' Kôr is the hill
and Tun the city. In the C-text of the poem, however, these lines were
changed, and the city is named Tun (p. 82).

The elaboration at the end of the relationship of Turin and Finduilas is
an indication of the large scale on which this work was planned: seeing
how much in bare narrative terms is yet to come (the fall of
Nargothrond, the Dragon, the loss of Finduilas, Turin\'s journey to
Dor-lómin, Morwen and Nienor in Doriath and the journey to Nargothrond,
the enspelling of Nienor, Turin and Nienor among the Woodmen, the coming
and death of the Dragon, and the deaths of Nienor and Turin) it must
have run to many more thousands of lines.

There remain a few isolated matters. The name, *Esgalduin* now first
appears, but the form in A and B as typed (2164), *Esgaduin,* is the
original name. The C-text *has Esgalduin* (p. 82).

The Moon is seen in lines 2088-94 as a ship, the Silver Wherry, with
mast, hold, and shrouds, sailing from wharves on the margin of the
world; but the imagery has no real point of contact with the Ship of the
Moon in the *Tale of the Sun and Moon* (1.192-3).

Ulmo is now called *Ylmir* (first appearing by emendation in B at line
1469, but thereafter in both A and B as first written); in the 'Sketch'
he first appears as *Ulmo (Ylmir),* thereafter as *Ylmir,* suggesting
that at this time *Ylmir* was the Gnomish form of his name (in the
Gnomish dictionary it was *Gulma,* I. 270). He is also called *the
Dweller in the Deep* at line **94 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

1565, as he is in the later *Tuor (Unfinished Tales* pp. 22, 28).
Flinding mentions messages from Ulmo that are heard at Ivrin, and says
that Ulmo *alone remembers in the Lands of Mirth I the need of the*
*Gnomes* (1531 ff.); cf. the *Tale,* II. 77.

Lastly may be noticed Turin\'s words of parting to Beleg at his burial
(1408-11), in which he foresees for him an afterlife in Valinor, in the
halls of the Gods, and does not speak of a time of 'waiting'; cf. lines
1283-4, 1696-7.

THE SECOND VERSION

OF

THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN

This version of the poem (II) is extant in a bundle of very rough
manuscript notes (IIA), which do not constitute a complete text, and a
typescript (IIB) ---the twin of the typescript (IB) of the first
version, done with the same distinctive purple ribbon --- based on IIA.
That II is a later work than I is obvious from a casual scrutiny --- to
give a single example, the name *Morwen* appears thus both in IIA and
IIB. As I have said (p. 4), I do not think that II is significantly
later than I, and may indeed have been composed before my rather ceased
work on I.\* Towards the end of II the amount of expansion and change
from I becomes very much less, but it seems best to give II in full.

The text of the opening of the second version *is* complicated by the
existence of two further texts, both extending from lines II. 1-94. The
earlier of these is another typescript (IIC), which takes up emendations
made to IIB and is itself emended: the second is a manuscript (IID)
written on 'Oxford' paper (see p. 81), which takes up the changes made
to IIC and introduces yet further changes. At the beginning of the poem,
therefore, we have lines that exhibit a continuous development through
six different texts, as for example line 18 in the first version, which
is line 34 in the second:

IA Yet in host upon host the hillfiends, the orcs *emended in the*
*manuscript to:*

Yet in host upon host the hillfiend orcs

IB There in host on host the hill-fiend Orcs

•The only external evidence for date (other than the physical nature of
the texts, which were clearly made at Leeds, not at Oxford) is the fact
that a page of IIA is written on the back of a formal letter from *The
Microcosm* (a Leeds literary quarterly, in which my father published the
poem *The City of the Gods* in the Spring 1923 issue, sec 1.136)
acknowledging receipt of a subscription for 1922; the letter was
evidently written in 1923.

**94 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

1565, as he is in the later *Tuor (Unfinished Tales* pp. 22, 28).
Flinding mentions messages from Ulmo that are heard at Ivrin, and says
that Ulmo *alone remembers in the Lands of Mirth I the need of the*
*Gnomes* (1531 ff.); cf. the *Tale,* II. 77.

Lastly may be noticed Turin\'s words of parting to Beleg at his burial
(1408-11), in which he foresees for him an afterlife in Valinor, in the
halls of the Gods, and does not speak of a time of 'waiting'; cf. lines
1283-4, 1696-7.

THE SECOND VERSION

OF

THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN

This version of the poem (II) is extant in a bundle of very rough
manuscript notes (IIA), which do not constitute a complete text, and a
typescript (IIB) ---the twin of the typescript (IB) of the first
version, done with the same distinctive purple ribbon --- based on IIA.
That II is a later work than I is obvious from a casual scrutiny --- to
give a single example, the name *Morwen* appears thus both in IIA and
IIB. As I have said (p. 4), I do not think that II is significantly
later than I, and may indeed have been composed before my rather ceased
work on I.\* Towards the end of II the amount of expansion and change
from I becomes very much less, but it seems best to give II in full.

The text of the opening of the second version *is* complicated by the
existence of two further texts, both extending from lines II. 1-94. The
earlier of these is another typescript (IIC), which takes up emendations
made to IIB and is itself emended: the second is a manuscript (IID)
written on 'Oxford' paper (see p. 81), which takes up the changes made
to IIC and introduces yet further changes. At the beginning of the poem,
therefore, we have lines that exhibit a continuous development through
six different texts, as for example line 18 in the first version, which
is line 34 in the second:

IA Yet in host upon host the hillfiends, the orcs *emended in the*
*manuscript to:*

Yet in host upon host the hillfiend orcs

IB There in host on host the hill-fiend Orcs

•The only external evidence for date (other than the physical nature of
the texts, which were clearly made at Leeds, not at Oxford) is the fact
that a page of IIA is written on the back of a formal letter from *The
Microcosm* (a Leeds literary quarterly, in which my father published the
poem *The City of the Gods* in the Spring 1923 issue, sec 1.136)
acknowledging receipt of a subscription for 1922; the letter was
evidently written in 1923.

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 95**

IIA but in host on host from the hills of darkness *(with* from the
hills swarming *as an alternative')*

IIB but in host on host from the hills swarming

IIC *as IIB but emended on the typescript to:*

and in host on host from the hills swarming

IID In host upon host from the hills swarming

The majority of the changes throughout the successive texts of the poem
were made for metrical reasons - in the later revisions, especially for
the removal of 'little words\', to achieve an effect nearer to that of
Old English lines, and to get rid of metrical aids such as *-éd*
pronounced as a separate syllable; and as I have said, the provision of
a full apparatus would be exceedingly lengthy and complex (and in places
scarcely possible, for the actual texts are often more obscure than
appears in print). For the second version of the poem, therefore, I give
the text of IID (the last one) to its end at line 94 (since the changes
from IIB though pervasive are extremely minor), and continue thereafter
with IIB (the major typescript of the second version); and as before
purely verbal/metrical alterations that have no bearing on the story or
on names are not cited in the notes.

HA has no title; in IIB it was TURIN, then THE CHILDREN OF

HÚRIN, which is also the title in IIC and IID.

The 'Prologue', greatly expanded in the second version, is still given
no subheading, except that in IIC it is marked \'I\'; in IIB *Turin\'s*
*Fostering* is a section-heading, to which my father afterwards added
\'II\'.

THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN

I

Ye Gods who girt your guarded realms

with moveless pinnacles, mountains pathless,

o\'er shrouded shores sheer uprising

of the Bay of Faery on the borders of the World!

Ye Men unmindful of the mirth of yore, 5

wars and weeping in the worlds of old,

of Morgoth\'s might remembering nought!

Lo! hear what Elves with ancient harps,

lingering forlorn in lands untrodden,

fading faintly down forest pathways, 10

in shadowy isles on the Shadowy Seas,

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 95**

IIA but in host on host from the hills of darkness *(with* from the
hills swarming *as an alternative')*

IIB but in host on host from the hills swarming

IIC *as IIB but emended on the typescript to:*

and in host on host from the hills swarming

![](images/000001.png){.calibre1}

IID In host upon host from the hills swarming

The majority of the changes throughout the successive texts of the poem
were made for metrical reasons - in the later revisions, especially for
the removal of 'little words\', to achieve an effect nearer to that of
Old English lines, and to get rid of metrical aids such as *-éd*
pronounced as a separate syllable; and as I have said, the provision of
a full apparatus would be exceedingly lengthy and complex (and in places
scarcely possible, for the actual texts are often more obscure than
appears in print). For the second version of the poem, therefore, I give
the text of IID (the last one) to its end at line 94 (since the changes
from IIB though pervasive are extremely minor), and continue thereafter
with IIB (the major typescript of the second version); and as before
purely verbal/metrical alterations that have no bearing on the story or
on names are not cited in the notes.

HA has no title; in IIB it was TURIN, then THE CHILDREN OF

HÚRIN, which is also the title in IIC and IID.

The 'Prologue', greatly expanded in the second version, is still given
no subheading, except that in IIC it is marked \'I\'; in IIB *Turin\'s*
*Fostering* is a section-heading, to which my father afterwards added
\'II\'.

THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN

I

Ye Gods who girt your guarded realms

with moveless pinnacles, mountains pathless,

o\'er shrouded shores sheer uprising

of the Bay of Faery on the borders of the World!

Ye Men unmindful of the mirth of yore, 5

wars and weeping in the worlds of old,

of Morgoth\'s might remembering nought!

Lo! hear what Elves with ancient harps,

lingering forlorn in lands untrodden,

fading faintly down forest pathways, 10

in shadowy isles on the Shadowy Seas,

**96 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

sing still in sorrow of the son of Húrin,

how his webs of doom were woven dark

with Niniel\'s sorrow: names most mournful.

A! Húrin Thalion in the hosts of battle 15

was whelmed in war, when the white banners

of the ruined king were rent with spears,

in blood beaten; when the blazing helm

of Finweg fell in flame of swords,

and his gleaming armies\' gold and silver 20

shields were shaken, shining emblems

in darkling tide of dire hatred,

the cruel Glamhoth\'s countless legions,

were lost and foundered --- their light was quenched!

That field yet now the folk name it 25

Nirnaith Ornoth, Unnumbered Tears:

the seven chieftains of the sons of Men

fled there and fought not, the folk of the Elves

betrayed with treason. Their troth alone

unmoved remembered in the mouths of Hell 30

Thalion Erithámrod and his thanes renowned.

Torn and trampled the triple standard

of the house of Hithlum was heaped with slain.

In host upon host from the hills swarming

with hideous arms the hungry Orcs 35

enmeshed his might, and marred with wounds

pulled down the proud Prince of Mithrim.

At Bauglir\'s bidding they bound him living;

to the halls of Hell neath the hills builded,

to the Mountains of Iron, mournful, gloomy, 40

they led the lord of the Lands of Mist,

Húrin Thalion, to the throne of hate

in halls upheld with huge pillars

of black basalt. There bats wandered,

worms and serpents enwound the columns; 45

there Bauglir\'s breast was burned within

with blazing rage, baulked of purpose:

from his trap had broken Turgon the mighty,

Fingolfin\'s son; Fëanor\'s children,

the makers of the magic and immortal gems. 50

For Húrin standing storm unheeding,

unbent in battle, with bitter laughter

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 97**

his axe wielded --- as eagle\'s wings

the sound of its sweep, swinging deadly;

as livid lightning it leaped and fell, 55

as toppling trunks of trees riven

his foes had fallen. Thus fought he on,

where blades were blunted and in blood foundered

the Men of Mithrim; thus a moment stemmed

with sad remnant the raging surge 60

of ruthless Orcs, and the rear guarded,

that Turgon the terrible towering in anger

a pathway clove with pale falchion

from swirling slaughter. Yea! his swath was plain

through the hosts of Hell, as hay that is laid 65

on the lea in lines, where long and keen

goes sweeping scythe. Thus seven kindreds,

a countless company, that king guided

through darkened dales and drear mountains

out of ken of his foes --- he comes no more 70

in the tale of Turin. Triumph of Morgoth

thus to doubt was turned, dreams of vengeance,

thus his mind was moved with malice fathomless,

thoughts of darkness, when the Thalion stood

bound, unbending, in his black dungeon. 75

Said the dread Lord of Hell: 'Dauntless Húrin,

stout steel-handed, stands before me

yet quick a captive, as a coward might be!

Then knows he my name, or needs be told

what hope he has in the halls of iron ? 80

The bale most bitter, Balrogs' torment! '

Then Húrin answered, Hithlum\'s chieftain -

his shining eyes with sheen of fire

in wrath were reddened: \'O ruinous one,

by fear unfettered I have fought thee long, 85

nor dread thee now, nor thy demon slaves,

fiends and phantoms, thou foe of Gods! '

His dark tresses, drenched and tangled,

that fell o\'er his face he flung backward,

in the eye he looked of the evil Lord- 90

since that day of dread to dare his glance

has no mortal Man, had might of soul.

There the mind of Húrin in a mist of dark

**98 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

neath gaze unfathomed groped and foundered,\*

yet his heart yielded not nor his haughty pride. 95

But Lungorthin Lord of Balrogs

on the mouth smote him, and Morgoth smiled:

'Nay, fear when thou feelest, when the names lick thee and the whistling
whips thy white body

and wilting flesh weal and torture!' 100

Then hung they helpless Húrin dauntless

in chains by fell enchantments forged

that with fiery anguish his flesh devoured,

yet loosed not lips locked in silence

to pray for pity. Thus prisoned saw he 105

on the sable walls the sultry glare

of far-off fires fiercely burning

down deep corridors and dark archways

in the blind abysses of those bottomless halls;

there with mourning mingled mighty tumult no

the throb and thunder of the thudding forges\'

brazen clangour; belched and spouted

flaming furnaces; there faces sad

through the glooms glided as the gloating Orcs

their captives herded under cruel lashes. 115

Many a hopeless glance on Húrin fell,

for his tearless torment many tears were spilled.

Lo! Morgoth remembered the mighty doom,

the weird of old, that the Elves in woe,

in ruin and wrack by the reckless hearts 120

of mortal Men should be meshed at last;

that treason alone of trusted friend

should master the magic whose mazes wrapped

the children of Côr, cheating his purpose,

from defeat fending Fingolfin\'s son, 125

Turgon the terrible, and the troth-brethren

the sons of Fëanor, and secret, far,

homes hid darkly in the hoar forest

where Thingol was throned in the Thousand Caves.

Then the Lord of Hell lying-hearted 130

to where Húrin hung hastened swiftly,

•Here the latest text IID ends, and IIB is followed from this point; see
p. 95.

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 99**

and the Balrogs about him brazen-handed

with flails of flame and forged iron

there laughed as they looked on his lonely woe;

but Bauglir said: \'O bravest of Men, 135

\'tis fate unfitting for thus fellhanded

warrior warfain that to worthless friends

his sword he should sell, who seek no more

to free him from fetters or his fall avenge.

While shrinking in the shadows they shake fearful 140

in the hungry hills hiding outcast

their league belying, lurking faithless,

he by evil lot in everlasting

dungeons droopeth doomed to torment

and anguish endless. That thy arms unchained 145

I had fainer far should a falchion keen

or axe with edge eager flaming

wield in warfare where the wind bloweth

the banners of battle --- such a brand as might

in my sounding smithies on the smitten anvil 150

of glowing steel to glad thy soul

be forged and fashioned, yea, and fair harness

and mail unmatched - than that marred with flails

my mercy waiving thou shouldst moan enchained

neath the brazen Balrogs' burning scourges: 155

who art worthy to win reward and honour

as a captain of arms when cloven is mail

and shields are shorn, when they shake the hosts

of their foes like fire in fell onset.

Lo! receive my service; forswear hatred, 160

ancient enmity thus ill-counselled ---

I am a mild master who remembers well

his servants\' deeds. A sword of terror

thy hand should hold, and a high lordship

as Bauglir\'s champion, chief of Balrogs, 165

to lead o\'er the lands my loud armies,

whose royal array I already furnish;

on Turgon the troll (who turned to flight

and left thee alone, now leaguered fast

in waterless wastes and weary mountains) 170

my wrath to wreak, and on redhanded

robber-Gnomes, rebels, and roaming Elves,

that forlorn witless the Lord of the World

100 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

defy in their folly --- they shall feel my might.

I will bid men unbind thee, and thy body comfort! 175

Go follow their footsteps with fire and steel,

with thy sword go search their secret dwellings;

when in triumph victorious thou returnest hither,

I have hoards unthought-of ' - but Húrin Thalion

suffered no longer silent wordless; 180

through clenched teeth in clinging pain,

\'O accursed king', cried unwavering,

'thy hopes build not so high, Bauglir;

no tool am I for thy treasons vile,

who tryst nor troth ever true holdest--- 185

seek traitors elsewhere.'

Then returned answer

Morgoth amazed his mood hiding:

'Nay, madness holds thee; thy mind wanders;

my measureless hoards are mountains high

in places secret piled uncounted 190

agelong unopened; Elfin silver

and gold in the gloom there glister pale;

the gems and jewels once jealous-warded

in the mansions of the Gods, who mourn them yet,

are mine, and a meed I will mete thee thence 195

of wealth to glut the Worm of Greed. '

Then Húrin, hanging, in hate answered:

'Canst not learn of thy lore when thou look\'st on a foe, O Bauglir
unblest ? Bray no longer

of the things thou hast thieved from the Three Kindreds! 200

In hate I hold thee. Thou art humbled indeed

and thy might is minished if thy murderous hope

and cruel counsels on a captive sad

must wait, on a weak and weary man.'

To the hosts of Hell his head then he turned: 205

'Let thy foul banners go forth to battle,

ye Balrogs and Orcs; let your black legions

go seek the sweeping sword of Turgon.

Through the dismal dales you shall be driven wailing

like startled starlings from the stooks of wheat. 210

Minions miserable of master base,

your doom dread ye, dire disaster!

The tide shall turn; your triumph brief

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 101**

and victory shall vanish. I view afar

the wrath of the Gods roused in anger.' 215

Then tumult awoke, a tempest wild

in rage roaring that rocked the walls;

consuming madness seized on Morgoth,

yet with lowered voice and leering mouth

thus Thalion Erithámrod he threatened darkly: 220

'Thou hast said it! See how my swift purpose

shall march to its mark unmarred of thee,

nor thy aid be asked, overweening

mortal mightless. I command thee gaze

on my deeds of power dreadly proven. 225

Yet if little they like thee, thou must look thereon

helpless to hinder or thy hand to raise,

and thy lidless eyes lit with anguish

shall not shut for ever, shorn of slumber

like the Gods shall gaze there grim, tearless, 230

on the might of Morgoth and the meed he deals

to fools who refuse fealty gracious.'

To Thangorodrim was the Thalion borne,

that mountain that meets the misty skies

on high over the hills that Hithlum sees 235

blackly brooding on the borders of the North.

There stretched on the stone of steepest peak

in bonds unbreakable they bound him living;

there the lord of woe in laughter stood,

there cursed him for ever and his kindred all 240

that should walk and wander in woe\'s shadow

to a doom of death and dreadful end.

There the mighty man unmoved sat,

but unveiled was his vision that he viewed afar

with eyes enchanted all earthly things, 245

and the weird of woe woven darkly

that fell on his folk - a fiend\'s torment.

**IO2 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

**NOTES**

14 After this line IIB had the following:

how the golden dragon of the God of darkness

wrought wrack and ruin in realms now lost ---

only the mighty of soul, of Men or Elves,

doom can conquer, and in death only.

These lines were struck out in IIB, and do not appear in IIC, IID.

19 Cf. 1.1975:

where Finweg fell in flame of swords

with *Finweg* \> *Fingon* a later pencilled change in IB. All the texts
of II have *Finweg* (IIA *Fingweg),* but *Fingon* appears in a late
pencilled emendation to IID.

26 *Nirnaith Únoth* IIB, IIC; *Nirnaith Ornoth* IID, emended in pencil
to *Nirnaith Arnediad.* For *Únoth, Ornoth* in the first version see p.
79, notes to lines 1448, 1542-3. I read *Ornoth* here, since *Arnediad*
is a form that arose much later.

27 All the texts of II have *the chosen chieftains of the children* *of
Men,* but IID is emended in pencil to *the seven chieftains of* *the
sons of Men.*

49 *Fingolfin\'s son:* see p. 21, note to line 29.

*Fëanor\'s children* IID; *andFëanor\'s children* IIA, B, C.

76 7s *it dauntless Húrin,' quoth Delu-Morgoth* IIB, as in IB

(line 51).

157 *as a captain among them* IIB as typed. Cf line 165.

Commentary on Part I

of the second version

This part has been expanded to two and a half times its former length,
partly through the introduction of descriptions of Angband (42-5,
105-15) - to be greatly enlarged some years later in the Lay *of
Leithian,* and of Húrin\'s last stand (51-61), but chiefly through the
much extended account of Morgoth\'s dealings with Húrin, his attempted
seduction of 'the Thalion', and his great rage (not found at all in the
first version) at his failure to break his will. The rewritten scene is
altogether fiercer, the sense of lying, brutality, and pain (and the
heroic power of Húrin\'s resistance) much stronger.

There are some interesting details in this opening section. Húrin\'s
dark hair (88) has been referred to above (p. 92). The *thane of
Morgoth* who smote him on the mouth (version I, 59) now becomes
*Lungorthin, Lord ofBalrogs* (96) - which is probably to be interpreted
as 'a **THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 103**

Balrog lord', since Gothmog, Lord or Captain of the Balrogs in *The
Fall* *of Gondolin,* soon reappears in the 'Silmarillion' tradition.
Notable is the passage (88-94) in which Húrin, thrusting back his long
hair, looked into Morgoth\'s eye, and his mind *in a mist of dark . . .
groped and* *foundered:* the originator of the power of the eye of
Glórund his servant, which this poem did not reach.

A line that occurs much later in the first version (1975) where Finweg
\[\> Fingon\] fell in flame of swords

is introduced here (19), and there is mention also of his *white banners
. . . in blood beaten,* and his *blazing helm:* this is ultimately the
origin of the passage in *The Silmarillion* (pp. 193-4): a white flame
sprang up from the helm of Fingon as it was cloven . . .

they beat him into the dust with their maces, and his banner, blue and
silver, they trod into the mire of his blood.

At line 26 is the first occurrence of *Nirnaith Arnediad,* but this is a
hasty pencilled change to the last text (IID) and belongs to a later
phase of nomenclature.

It is said that Turgon guided *seven kindreds* (67) out of the battle;
in the tale of *The Fall of Gondolin* there were twelve kindreds of the
Gondothlim.

Húrin is named the Prince of Mithrim (37), and his men the Men of
Mithrim (59). This may suggest that the meaning of Mithrim, hitherto the
name of the lake only, was being extended to the region in which the
lake lay; on the earliest 'Silmarillion' map, however, this is not
suggested.

*The land of Mithrim* occurs at line 248, but the phrase was changed.

The passage in the first version (46-50) saying that Morgoth remembered
well

how Men were accounted all mightless and frail

by the Elves and their kindred; how only treason

could master the magic whose mazes wrapped

the children of Corthûn

is changed in the second (118---24) to

Lo! Morgoth remembered the mighty doom,

the weird of old, that the Elves in woe,

in ruin and wrack by the reckless hearts

of mortal Men should be meshed at last;

that treason alone of trusted friend

should master the magic whose mazes wrapped

the children of Côr

There has been no reference in the *Last Tales* to any such ancient
'doom'

or 'weird'. It is possible that the reference to 'treason' is to the
'Prophecy of the North', spoken by Mandos or his messenger as the host
of the **104 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Noldor moved northward up the coast of Valinor after the Kinslaying
*(The Silmarillion* pp. 87-8); in the earliest version of this, in the
tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.167), there is no trace of the
idea, but it is already explicit in the 1930 'Silmarillion' that the
Gnomes should pay for the deeds at Swanhaven in 'treachery and the fear
of treachery among their own kindred'. On the other hand, to *the mighty
doom, the weird* *of old* is ascribed also the ultimate ruin of the
Elves which is to come to pass through Men; and this is not found in any
version of the Prophecy of the North. This passage in the revised
version of the poem is echoed in the same scene in the 1930
'Silmarillion':

Afterward Morgoth remembering that treachery or the fear of it, and
especially the treachery of Men, alone would work the ruin of the
Gnomes, came to Húrin . . .

II

TURIN\'S FOSTERING

Lo! the lady Morwen in the land of shadow

waited in the woodland for her well-beloved,

but he came never to clasp her nigh 250

from that black battle. She abode in vain;

no tidings told her whether taken or dead

or lost in flight he lingered yet.

Laid waste his lands and his lieges slain,

and men unmindful of that mighty lord 255

in Dorlómin dwelling dealt unkindly

with his wife in widowhood; she went with child,

and a son must succour sadly orphaned,

Turin Thalion of tender years.

In days of blackness was her daughter born, 260

and named Nienor, a name of tears

that in language of eld is Lamentation.

Then her thoughts were turned to Thingol the Elf,

and Lúthien the lissom with limbs shining,

his daughter dear, by Dairon loved, 265

who Tinúviel was named both near and far,

the Star-mantled, still remembered,

who light as leaf on linden tree

had danced in Doriath in days agone,

on the lawns had lilted in the long moonshine, 270

**104 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Noldor moved northward up the coast of Valinor after the Kinslaying
*(The Silmarillion* pp. 87-8); in the earliest version of this, in the
tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.167), there is no trace of the
idea, but it is already explicit in the 1930 'Silmarillion' that the
Gnomes should pay for the deeds at Swanhaven in 'treachery and the fear
of treachery among their own kindred'. On the other hand, to *the mighty
doom, the weird* *of old* is ascribed also the ultimate ruin of the
Elves which is to come to pass through Men; and this is not found in any
version of the Prophecy of the North. This passage in the revised
version of the poem is echoed in the same scene in the 1930
'Silmarillion':

Afterward Morgoth remembering that treachery or the fear of it, and
especially the treachery of Men, alone would work the ruin of the
Gnomes, came to Húrin . . .

II

TURIN\'S FOSTERING

Lo! the lady Morwen in the land of shadow

waited in the woodland for her well-beloved,

but he came never to clasp her nigh 250

from that black battle. She abode in vain;

no tidings told her whether taken or dead

or lost in flight he lingered yet.

Laid waste his lands and his lieges slain,

and men unmindful of that mighty lord 255

in Dorlómin dwelling dealt unkindly

with his wife in widowhood; she went with child,

and a son must succour sadly orphaned,

Turin Thalion of tender years.

In days of blackness was her daughter born, 260

and named Nienor, a name of tears

that in language of eld is Lamentation.

Then her thoughts were turned to Thingol the Elf,

and Lúthien the lissom with limbs shining,

his daughter dear, by Dairon loved, 265

who Tinúviel was named both near and far,

the Star-mantled, still remembered,

who light as leaf on linden tree

had danced in Doriath in days agone,

on the lawns had lilted in the long moonshine, 270

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF** HÚRIN 105

while deftly was drawn Dairon\'s music

with fingers fleet from flutes of silver.

The boldest of the brave, Beren Ermabwed,

to wife had won her, who once of old

had vowed fellowship and friendly love 275

with Húrin of Hithlum, hero dauntless

by the marge of Mithrim\'s misty waters.

Thus to her son she said: 'My sweetest child,

our friends are few; thy father is gone.

Thou must fare afar to the folk of the wood, 280

where Thingol is throned in the Thousand Caves.

If he remember Morwen and thy mighty sire

he will foster thee fairly, and feats of arms,

the trade he will teach thee of targe and sword,

that no slave in Hithlum shall be son of Húrin. 285

A! return my Turin when time passeth;

remember thy mother when thy manhood cometh

or when sorrows snare thee.' Then silence took her,

for fears troubled her trembling voice.

Heavy boded the heart of Húrin\'s son, 290

who unwitting of her woe wondered vaguely,

yet weened her words were wild with grief

and denied her not; no need him seemed.

Lo! Mailrond and Halog, Morwen\'s henchmen,

were young of yore ere the youth of Húrin, 295

and alone of the lieges of that lord of Men

now steadfast in service stayed beside her:

now she bade them brave the black mountains

and the woods whose ways wander to evil;

though Turin be tender, to travail unused, 300

they must gird them and go. Glad they were not,

but to doubt the wisdom dared not openly

of Morwen who mourned when men saw not.

Came a day of summer when the dark silence

of the towering trees trembled dimly 305

to murmurs moving in the milder airs

far and faintly; flecked with dancing

sheen of silver and shadow-filtered

sudden sunbeams were the secret glades

where winds came wayward wavering softly 310

warm through the woodland\'s woven branches.

**106 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Then Morwen stood, her mourning hidden,

by the gate of her garth in a glade of Hithlum;

at her breast bore she her babe unweaned,

crooning lowly to its careless ears 315

a song of sweet and sad cadence,

lest she droop for anguish. Then the doors opened,

and Halog hastened neath a heavy burden,

and Mailrond the old to his mistress led

her gallant Turin, grave and tearless, 320

with heart heavy as stone hard and lifeless,

uncomprehending his coming torment.

There he cried with courage, comfort seeking:

'Lo! quickly will I come from the courts afar,

I will long ere manhood lead to Morwen 325

great tale of treasure and true comrades. '

He wist not the weird woven of Morgoth,

nor the sundering sorrow that them swept between,

as farewells they took with faltering lips.

The last kisses and lingering words 330

are over and ended; and empty is the glen

in the dark forest, where the dwelling faded

in trees entangled. Then in Turin woke

to woe\'s knowledge his bewildered heart,

that he wept blindly awakening echoes 335

sad resounding in sombre hollows,

as he called: 'I cannot, I cannot leave thee.

O! Morwen my mother, why makest me go ?

The hills are hateful, where hope is lost;

O! Morwen my mother, I am meshed in tears, 340

for grim are the hills and my home is gone.'

And there came his cries calling faintly

down the dark alleys of the dreary trees,

that one there weeping weary on the threshold

heard how the hills said 'my home is gone. ' 345

The ways were weary and woven with deceit

o\'er the hills of Hithlum to the hidden kingdom

deep in the darkness of Doriath\'s forest,

and never ere now for need or wonder

had children of Men chosen that pathway, 350

save Beren the brave who bounds knew not

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 107**

to his wandering feet nor feared the woods

or fells or forest or frozen mountain,

and few had followed his feet after.

There was told to Turin that tale by Halog 355

that in the Lay of Leithian, Release from Bonds,

in linked words has long been woven,

of Beren Ermabwed, the boldhearted;

how Lúthien the lissom he loved of yore

in the enchanted forest chained with wonder- 360

Tinúviel he named her, than nightingale

more sweet her voice, as veiled in soft

and wavering wisps of woven dusk

shot with starlight, with shining eyes

she danced like dreams of drifting sheen, 365

pale-twinkling pearls in pools of darkness;

how for love of Lúthien he left the woods

on that quest perilous men quail to tell,

thrust by Thingol o\'er the thirst and terror

of the Lands of Mourning; of Lúthien\'s tresses, 370

and Melian\'s magic, and the marvellous deeds

that after happened in Angband\'s halls,

and the flight o\'er fell and forest pathless

when Carcharoth the cruel-fangéd,

the wolf-warden of the Woeful Gates, 375

whose vitals fire devoured in torment

them hunted howling (the hand of Beren

he had bitten from the wrist where that brave one held the nameless
wonder, the Gnome-crystal

where light living was locked enchanted, 380

all hue\'s essence. His heart was eaten,

and the woods were filled with wild madness

in his dreadful torment, and Doriath\'s trees

did shudder darkly in the shrieking glens);

how the hound of Hithlum, Huan wolf-bane, 385

to the hunt hasted to the help of Thingol,

and as dawn came dimly in Doriath\'s woods

was the slayer slain, but silent lay

there Beren bleeding nigh brought to death,

till the lips of Lúthien in love\'s despair 390

awoke him to words, ere he winged afar

to the long awaiting; thence Lúthien won him,

the Elf-maiden, and the arts of Melian,

**I08 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

her mother Mablui of the moonlit hand,

that they dwell for ever in days ageless 395

and the grass greys not in the green forest

where East or West they ever wander.

Then a song he made them for sorrow\'s lightening,

a sudden sweetness in the silent wood,

that is ' Light as Leaf on Linden' called, 400

whose music of mirth and mourning blended

yet in hearts does echo. This did Halog sing them :\*

The grass was very long and thin,

The leaves of many years lay thick,

The old tree-roots wound out and in, 405

And the early moon was glimmering.

There went her white feet lilting quick,

And Dairon\'s flute did bubble thin,

As neath the hemlock umbels thick

Tinuviel danced a-shimmering. 410

The pale moths lumbered noiselessly,

And daylight died among the leaves,

As Beren from the wild country

Came thither wayworn sorrowing.

He peered between the hemlock sheaves, 415

And watched in wonder noiselessly

Her dancing through the moonlit leaves

And the ghostly moths a-following.

There magic took his weary feet,

And he forgot his loneliness, 420

And out he danced, unheeding, fleet,

Where the moonbeams were a-glistening.

Through the tangled woods of Elfinesse

They fled on nimble fairy feet,

And left him to his loneliness 425

In the silent forest listening,

Still hearkening for the imagined sound

Of lissom feet upon the leaves,

**\* For the textual history of this poem\'s insertion into the Lay sec
the Note on pp, 120-2.**

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 109**

For music welling underground

In the dim-lit caves of Doriath. 430

But withered are the hemlock sheaves,

And one by one with mournful sound

Whispering fall the beechen leaves

In the dying woods of Doriath.

He sought her wandering near and far 435

Where the leaves of one more year were strewn,

By winter moon and frosty star

With shaken light a-shivering.

He found her neath a misty moon,

A silver wraith that danced afar, 440

And the mists beneath her feet were strewn

In moonlight palely quivering.

She danced upon a hillock green

Whose grass unfading kissed her feet,

While Dairon\'s fingers played unseen 445

O\'er his magic flute a-flickering;

And out he danced, unheeding, fleet,

In the moonlight to the hillock green:

No impress found he of her feet

That fled him swiftly flickering. 450

And longing filled his voice that called

'Tinúviel, Tinúviel,'

And longing sped his feet enthralled

Behind her wayward shimmering.

She heard as echo of a spell 455

His lonely voice that longing called

'Tinúviel, Tinúviel':

One moment paused she glimmering.

And Beren caught that elfin maid

And kissed her trembling starlit eyes, 460

Tinúviel whom love delayed

In the woods of evening morrowless.

Till moonlight and till music dies

Shall Beren by the elfin maid

Dance in the starlight of her eyes 465

In the forest singing sorrowless.

**110 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Wherever grass is long and thin,

And the leaves of countless years lie thick,

And ancient roots wind out and in,

As once they did in Doriath, 470

Shall go their white feet lilting quick,

But never Dairon\'s music thin

Be heard beneath the hemlocks thick

Since Beren came to Doriath.

This for hearts\' uplifting did Halog sing them 475

as the frowning fortress of the forest clasped them

and nethermost night in its net caught them.

There Turin and the twain knew torture of thirst

and hunger and fear, and hideous flight

from wolf riders and wandering Orcs 480

and the things of Morgoth that thronged the woods.

There numbed and wetted they had nights of waking

cold and clinging, when the creaking winds

summer had vanquished and in silent valleys

a dismal dripping in the distant shadows 485

ever splashed and spilt over spaces endless

from rainy leaves, till arose the light

greyly, grudgingly, gleaming thinly

at drenching dawn. They were drawn as flies

in the magic mazes; they missed their ways 490

and strayed steerless, and the stars were hid

and the sun sickened. Sombre and weary

had the mountains been; the marches of Doriath

bewildered and wayworn wound them helpless

in despair and error, and their spirits foundered. 495

Without bread or water with bleeding feet

and fainting strength in the forest straying

their death they deemed it to die forwandered,
:::

::: {#calibre_link-3 .calibre}
when they heard a horn that hooted afar

and dogs baying. Lo! the dreary bents 500

and hushed hollows to the hunt wakened,

and echoes answered to eager tongues,

for Beleg the bowman was blowing gaily,

who furthest fared of his folk abroad

by hill and by hollow ahunting far, 505

careless of comrades or crowded halls,

as light as a leaf, as the lusty airs

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN III**

as free and fearless in friendless places.

He was great of growth with goodly limbs

and lithe of girth, and lightly on the ground 510

his footsteps fell as he fared towards them

all garbed in grey and green and brown.

'Who are ye?' he asked. 'Outlaws, maybe,

hiding, hunted, by hatred dogged?'

'Nay, for famine and thirst we faint,' said Halog, 515

'wayworn and wildered, and wot not the road.

Or hast not heard of the hills of slain,

field tear-drenched where in flame and terror

Morgoth devoured the might and valour

of the hosts of Finweg and Hithlum\'s lord ? 520

The Thalion Erithámrod and his thanes dauntless

there vanished from the earth, whose valiant lady

yet weeps in widowhood as she waits in Hithlum.

Thou lookest on the last of the lieges of Morwen,

and the Thalion\'s child who to Thingol\'s court 525

now wend at the word of the wife of Húrin.'

Then Beleg bade them be blithe, saying:

'The Gods have guided you to good keeping;

I have heard of the house of Húrin undaunted,

and who hath not heard of the hills of slain, 530

of Nirnaith Ornoth, Unnumbered Tears!

To that war I went not, yet wage a feud

with the Orcs unending, whom mine arrows fleeting

smite oft unseen swift and deadly.

I am the hunter Beleg of the hidden people; 535

the forest is my father and the fells my home.'

Then he bade them drink from his belt drawing

a flask of leather full-filled with wine

that is bruised from the berries of the burning South ---the Gnome-folk
know it, from Nogrod the Dwarves 540

by long ways lead it to the lands of the North

for the Elves in exile who by evil fate

the vine-clad valleys now view no more

in the land of Gods. There was lit gladly

a fire, with flames that flared and spluttered, 545

of wind-fallen wood that his wizard\'s cunning

rotten, rain-sodden, to roaring life

**112 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

there coaxed and kindled by craft or magic;

there baked they flesh in the brands\' embers;

white wheaten bread to hearts\'delight 550

he haled from his wallet till hunger waned

and hope mounted, but their heads were mazed

by that wine of Dor-Winion that went in their veins,

and they soundly slept on the soft needles

of the tall pinetrees that towered above. 555

Then they waked and wondered, for the woods were light, and merry was
the morn and the mists rolling

from the radiant sun. They soon were ready

long leagues to cover. Now led by ways

devious winding through the dark woodland, 560

by slade and slope and swampy thicket,

through lonely days, long-dragging nights,

they fared unfaltering, and their friend they blessed, who but for Beleg
had been baffled utterly

by the magic mazes of Melian the Queen. 565

To those shadowy shores he showed the way

where stilly the stream strikes before the gates

of the cavernous court of the King of Doriath.

Over the guarded bridge he gained them passage,

and thrice they thanked him, and thought in their hearts 5 70

'the Gods are good' - had they guessed, maybe,

what the future enfolded, they had feared to live.

To the throne of Thingol were the three now come;

there their speech well sped, and he spake them fair, for Húrin of
Hithlum he held in honour, 575

whom Beren Ermabwed as a brother had loved

and remembering Morwen, of mortals fairest,

he turned not Turin in contempt away.

There clasped him kindly the King of Doriath,

for Melian moved him with murmured counsel, 5 80

and he said: 'Lo, O son of the swifthanded,

the light in laughter, the loyal in need,

Húrin of Hithlum, thy home is with me,

and here shall sojourn and be held my son.

In these cavernous courts for thy kindred\'s sake 585

thou shalt dwell in dear love, till thou deemest it time to remember thy
mother Morwen\'s loneliness;

thou shalt wisdom win beyond wit of mortals,

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 113**

and weapons shalt wield as the warrior-Elves,

nor slave in Hithlum shall be son of Húrin. ' 590

There the twain tarried that had tended the child,

till their limbs were lightened and they longed to fare through dread
and danger to their dear lady,

so firm their faith. Yet frore and grey

eld sat more heavy on the aged head 595

of Mailrond the old, and his mistress' love

his might matched not, more marred by years

than Halog he hoped not to home again.

Then sickness assailed him and his sight darkened:

'To Turin I must turn my troth and fealty,' 600

he said and he sighed, 'to my sweet youngling';

but Halog hardened his heart to go.

An Elfin escort to his aid was given,

and magics of Melian, and a meed of gold,

and a message to Morwen for his mouth to bear, 605

words of gladness that her wish was granted,

and Turin taken to the tender care

of the King of Doriath; of his kindly will

now Thingol called her to the Thousand Caves

to fare unfearing with his folk again, 610

there to sojourn in solace till her son be grown;

for Húrin of Hithlum was holden in mind

and no might had Morgoth where Melian dwelt.

Of the errand of the Elves and of eager Halog

the tale tells not, save in time they came 615

to Morwen\'s threshold. There Thingol\'s message

was said where she sat in her solitary hall,

but she dared not do as was dearly bidden,

who Nienor her nursling yet newly weaned

would not leave nor be led on the long marches 620

to adventure her frailty in the vast forest;

the pride of her people, princes ancient,

had suffered her send a son to Thingol

when despair urged her, but to spend her days

an almsguest of others, even Elfin kings, 625

it little liked her; and lived there yet

a hope in her heart that Húrin would come,

and the dwelling was dear where he dwelt of old;

at night she would listen for a knock at the doors

**114 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

or a footstep falling that she fondly knew. 630

Thus she fared not forth; thus her fate was woven.

Yet the thanes of Thingol she thanked nobly,

nor her shame showed she, how shorn of glory

to reward their wending she had wealth too scant,

but gave them in gift those golden things 635

that last lingered, and led they thence

a helm of Húrin once hewn in wars

when he battled with Beren as brother and comrade

against ogres and Orcs and evil foes.

Grey-gleaming steel, with gold adorned 640

wrights had wrought it, with runes graven

of might and victory, that a magic sat there

and its wearer warded from wound or death,

whoso bore to battle brightly shining

dire dragon-headed its dreadful crest. 645

This Thingol she bade and her thanks receive.

Thus Halog her henchman to Hithlum came,

but Thingol\'s thanes thanked her lowly

and girt them to go, though grey winter

enmeshed the mountains and the moaning woods, 650

for the hills hindered not the hidden people.

Lo! Morwen\'s message in a month\'s journey,

so speedy fared they, was spoken in Doriath.

For Morwen Melian was moved to ruth,

but courteously the king that casque received, 655

her golden gift, with gracious words,

who deeply delved had dungeons filled

with elvish armouries of ancient gear,

yet he handled that helm as his hoard were scant:

'That head were high that upheld this thing 660

with the token crowned, the towering crest

to Dorlómin dear, the dragon of the North,

that Thalion Erithámrod the thrice renowned

oft bore into battle with baleful foes.

Would that he had worn it to ward his head 665

on that direst day from death\'s handstroke! '

Then a thought was thrust into Thingol\'s heart,

and Turin was called and told kindly

that his mother Morwen a mighty thing

had sent to her son, his sire\'s heirloom, 670

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 115**

o\'er-written with runes by wrights of yore

in dark dwarfland in the deeps of time,

ere Men to Mithrim and misty Hithlum

o\'er the world wandered; it was worn aforetime

by the father of the fathers of the folk of Húrin, 675

whose sire Gumlin to his son gave it

ere his soul severed from his sundered heart ---

"Tis Telchar\'s work of worth untold,

its wearer warded from wound or magic,

from glaive guarded or gleaming axe. 680

Now Húrin\'s helm hoard till manhood

to battle bids thee, then bravely don it,

go wear it well! ' Woeful-hearted

did Turin touch it but take it not,

too weak to wield that mighty gear, 685

and his mind in mourning for Morwen\'s answer

was mazed and darkened.

Thus many a day

it came to pass in the courts of Thingol

for twelve years long that Turin lived.

But seven winters their sorrows had laid 690

on the son of Húrin when that summer to the world

came glad and golden with grievous parting;

nine years followed of his forest-nurture,

and his lot was lightened, for he learned at whiles

from faring folk what befell in Hithlum, 695

and tidings were told by trusty Elves

how Morwen his mother knew milder days

and easement of evil, and with eager voice

all Nienor named the Northern flower,

the slender maiden in sweet beauty 700

now graceful growing. The gladder was he then

and hope yet haunted his heart at whiles.

He waxed and grew and won renown

in all lands where Thingol as lord was held

for his stoutness of heart and his strong body. 705

Much lore he learned and loved wisdom,

but fortune followed him in few desires;

oft wrong and awry what he wrought turned,

what he loved he lost, what he longed for failed,

and full friendship he found not with ease, 710

**116 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

nor was lightly loved, for his looks were sad;

he was gloomy-hearted and glad seldom

for the sundering sorrow that seared his youth.

On manhood\'s threshold he was mighty-thewed

in the wielding of weapons; in weaving song 715

he had a minstrel\'s mastery, but mirth was not in it, for he mourned
the misery of the Men of Hithlum.

Yet greater his grief grew thereafter

when from Hithlum\'s hills he heard no more

and no traveller told him tidings of Morwen. 720

For those days were drawing to the doom of the Gnomes and the power of
the Prince of the pitiless kingdom,

of the grim Glamhoth, was grown apace,

till the lands of the North were loud with their noise, and they fell on
the folk with fire and slaughter 725

who bent not to Bauglir or the borders passed

of dark Dorlómin with its dreary pines

that Hithlum was called by the unhappy people.

There Morgoth shut them in the Shadowy Mountains,

fenced them from Faerie and the folk of the wood. 730

Even Beleg fared not so far abroad

as once was his wont, for the woods were filled

with the armies of Angband and with evil deeds,

and murder walked on the marches of Doriath;

only the mighty magic of Melian the Queen 735

yet held their havoc from the hidden people.

To assuage his sorrow and to sate his rage,

for his heart was hot with the hurts of his folk,

then Húrin\'s son took the helm of his sire

and weapons weighty for the wielding of men, 740

and he went to the woods with warrior-Elves,

and far in the forest his feet led him

into black battle yet a boy in years.

Ere manhood\'s measure he met and he slew

Orcs of Angband and evil things 745

that roamed and ravened on the realm\'s borders.

There hard his life, and hurts he lacked not,

the wounds of shaft and the wavering sheen

of the sickle scimitars, the swords of Hell,

the bloodfain blades on black anvils 750

in Angband smithied, yet ever he smote

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 117**

unfey, fearless, and his fate kept him.

Thus his prowess was proven and his praise was noised and beyond his
years he was yielded honour,

for by him was holden the hand of ruin 755

from Thingol\'s folk, and Thû feared him,

and wide wandered the word of Turin:

'Lo! we deemed as dead the dragon of the North,

but high o\'er the host its head uprises,

its wings are spread! Who has waked this spirit 760

and the flame kindled of its fiery jaws?

Or is Húrin of Hithlum from Hell broken?'

And Thû who was throned as thane mightiest

neath Morgoth Bauglir, whom that master bade

'go ravage the realm of the robber Thingol 765

and mar the magic of Melian the Queen',

even Thû feared him, and his thanes trembled.

One only was there in war greater,

more high in honour in the hearts of the Elves

than Turin son of Húrin, tower of Hithlum, 770

even the hunter Beleg of the hidden people,

whose father was the forest and the fells his home;

to bend whose bow, Balthronding named,

that the black yewtree once bore of yore,

had none the might; unmatched in knowledge 775

of the woods\' secrets and the weary hills.

He was leader beloved of the light companies

all garbed in grey and green and brown,

the archers arrowfleet with eyes piercing,

the scouts that scoured scorning danger 780

afar o\'er the fells their foemen\'s lair,

and tales and tidings timely won them

of camps and councils, of comings and goings,

all the movements of the might of Morgoth Bauglir.

Thus Turin, who trusted to targe and sword, 785

who was fain of fighting with foes well seen,

where shining swords made sheen of fire,

and his corslet-clad comrades-in-arms

were snared seldom and smote unlooked-for.

Then the fame of the fights on the far marches 790

was carried to the courts of the king of Doriath,

and tales of Turin were told in his halls,

**118 THE** LAYS OF BELERIAND

of the bond and brotherhood of Beleg the ageless

with the blackhaired boy from the beaten people.

Then the king called them to come before him 795

did Ore-raids lessen in the outer lands

ever and often unasked to hasten,

to rest them and revel and to raise awhile

in songs and lays and sweet music

the memory of the mirth ere the moon was old, 800

when the mountains were young in the morning of the world.

On a time was Turin at his table seated,

and Thingol thanked him for his thriving deeds;

there was laughter long and the loud clamour

of a countless company that quaffed the mead 805

and the wine of Dor-Winion that went ungrudged

in their golden goblets; and goodly meats

there burdened the boards neath blazing torches

in those high halls set that were hewn of stone.

There mirth fell on many; there minstrels clear 810

did sing them songs of the city of Côr

that Taingwethil towering mountain

o\'ershadowed sheerly, of the shining halls

where the great gods sit and gaze on the world

from the guarded shores of the gulf of Faërie. 815

One sang of the slaying at the Swans\' Haven

and the curse that had come on the kindreds since

Here the typescript IIB ends abruptly, in the middle of a page; the
manuscript IIA has already ended at line 767.

NOTES

The first page of the typescript of this section of the poem, covering
lines 248-95, is duplicated, the one version (b) taking up changes made
to the other (a) and itself receiving further changes. There is no
corresponding text of IIA until line 283.

248 *in the land of Mithrim* (a), and (b) as typed. The emendation in
(b) reverts to the reading of the first version (105), *in the* *Land of
Shadows.*

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN IIQ**

265 *Dairon\'s sister* (a), and (b) as typed.

266-8 These three lines were inserted in (b), with change of *who* *had
danced* 269 to *had danced.* See below, *Note on the* *poem 'Light as
Leaf on Lindentree'.*

273 *Ermabweth* (a), and (b) as typed. The emendation in (b) to
*Ermabwed* reverts to the form of the name in the *Lost Tales* and in
the first version of the poem (121).

274-8 As typed, (a) was virtually identical with the first version lines
122---5. This was then changed to read:

did win her to wife, who once of old

fellowship had vowed and friendly love

Elf with mortal, even Egnor\'s son

with Húrin of Hithlum, hunting often

by the marge of Mithrim\'s misty waters.

Thus said she to her son . . .

This passage was then typed in (b), with change of *hunting* *often* to
*hero dauntless.* Subsequently the line *Elf with* *mortal, even
Egnor\'s son* was struck out, and other minor changes made to give the
text printed.

294 *Mailrond: Mailgond* IIA, IIB; I read *Mailrond* in view of the
emendations at lines 319, 596.

315 *Mailrond: Mailgond* IIA, and IIB as typed, emended in pencil to
*Mailrond;* similarly at line 596.

356 *Release from Bondage* IIB as typed (the change to *Release* *from
Bonds* was made for metrical reasons). The reference to the *Lay of
Leithian* is not in IIA, but the manuscript is here so scrappy and
disjointed as to be of no service.

358---66 These nine lines are typed on a slip pasted into IIB, replacing
the following which were struck out:

how Lúthien the lissom he loved of yore

in the enchanted forest chained with wonder

as she danced like dreams of drifting whiteness

of shadows shimmering shot with moonlight;

In the first line (358) of the inserted slip *the boldhearted* is an
emendation of *brave undaunted;* and above *Ermabwed* is written (later,
in pencil) *Er(h)amion.*

374 *Carcharoth: Carcharolch* IIA, and IIB as typed.

398---402 These five lines are typed on a slip pasted into 11B at the
same time as that giving lines 358---66, but in this case there was
nothing replaced in the original typescript. Line 400 as typed read:

that 'Light as Leaf on Lind' is called

emended to the reading given.

**I2O** THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

Beneath the five typed lines my father wrote: 'Here follow verses "Light
as leaf on linden-tree".'

*Note on the poem 'Light as Leaf on Undentree'*

Lines 266-8 (see note above) were clearly added to the typescript at the
same time as the two pasted-in slips (giving lines 358-66 and 398-402),
in view of line 268 *who light as* *leaf on linden tree.*

This poem, here to be inset into the *Lay of the Children* *of Húrin,*
is found in three typescripts, here referred to as (a), (b), and (c),
together with a small manuscript page giving reworkings of the
penultimate stanza. These typescripts were made with the same purple
ribbon used for the texts IB and IIB of the Lay and obviously belong to
the same period.

(a), earliest of the three, had no title as typed: the title *Light as
leaf on lind* was written in in ink, and before the poem begins there is
written also in ink:

'Light was Tinuviel as leaf on lind

light as a feather in the laughing wind.'

Tinuviel! Tinuviel!

On this typescript my father wrote some notes on the poem\'s dating:
'first beginnings Oxford 1919---20 Alfred St.', 'Leeds 1923, retouched
1924'. (a) is the 1923 version; it differs from the later (1924) only in
the penultimate stanza, on which see note to lines 459---66 below.

\(b\) again has no title as typed, but As *Light as Leaf on*
*Lindentree* was written in ink. This begins with 15 lines of
alliterative verse:

In the Lay of Leithian, Release from Bondage

in linked words has long been wrought

of Beren Ermabwed, brave, undaunted;

how Lúthien the lissom he loved of yore

in the enchanted forest chained in wonder. 5

Tinuviel he named her, than nightingale

more sweet her voice, as veiled in soft

and wavering wisps of woven dusk

shot with starlight, with shining eyes

she danced like dreams of drifting sheen, 10

pale-twinkling pearls in pools of darkness.

And songs were raised for sorrow\'s lightening,

a sudden sweetness in a silent hour,

that 'Light as Leaf on Linden-tree'

were called --- here caught acadentecho. 15

THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN I2I

\(c\) has the typed title *As Light as Leaf on Lind,* the last word
emended to *Linden-tree.* This has only the text of the poem, without
the alliterative introduction; and the text is identical to that of (b).

It will be seen that of the alliterative verses in (b) lines 1-2

are very close to lines 356-7 of the Lay (which were original lines in
the typescript, not inserted later):

(There was told to Turin that tale by Halog)

that in the Lay of Leithian, Release from Bonds

\[\< Bondage\],

in linked words has long been woven

while lines 3---11 are identical with those on the first pasted-in slip,
358-66 (as typed: *the boldhearted* in line 358 is an emendation from
*brave undaunted).* Further, lines 12-15

are close to those on the second pasted-in slip, 398-402: Then a song he
made them for sorrow\'s lightening,

a sudden sweetness in a silent hour,

that is 'Light as Leaf on Linden' called,

whose music of mirth and mourning blended

yet in hearts does echo. This did Halog sing them:

The order of events is very difficult to determine, but the key is
probably to be found in the fact that lines 356---7 are found in IIB as
originally typed, not in the pasted-in insertion. I think (or perhaps
rather guess) that my father composed an alliterative continuation of 13
lines (beginning *of* *Beren Ermabwed, brave undaunted)* as an
introduction to the poem *Light as Leaf on Lindentree;* and then, at the
same time as he typed text (b) of this poem, with the alliterative
head-piece, he added them to the typescript of the Lay already in
existence.

*Light as Leaf on Lindentree* was published in *The* *Gryphon* (Leeds
University), New Series, Vol. VI, no. 6, June 1925, p. 217. It is here
preceded by nine lines of alliterative verse, beginning

Tis of Beren Ermabwed brokenhearted

and continuing exactly as in (b) above (and in the text of the Lay) as
far as *in pools of darkness;* the last four lines do not appear. In his
cutting from *The Gryphon* my father changed *broken-hearted* (which is
obviously a mere printer\'s error) to *the boldhearted* (as in the Lay,
358); changed the title to As *Light as Leaf on Lindentree;* and wrote
*Erchamion* *above Ermabwed* (see note to lines 358---66).

**122 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

The text of the inserted poem given in the body of the Lay is that
published, which is identical to that of the typescripts (b) and (c). My
father made a very few changes to (c) afterwards (i.e. after the poem
had been printed) and these are given in the notes that follow, as also
are the earlier forms of the penultimate verse.

It may finally be observed that if my deductions are correct the
introduction in the Lay of the reference to the *Lay of* *Leithian* and
the outline of the story told by Halog preceded the publication *of
Light as Leaf on Lindentree* in June 1925-419 *magic \> wonder,* later
emendation made to the typescript (c) of *Light as Leaf on Lindentree*
after the poem was published.

424 *fairy \> elvish,* see note 10419.

459, 464 *elfin* \> *elvish,* see note to 419.

459-66 In the typescript (a) this penultimate stanza reads as follows:
And Beren caught the elfin maid

And kissed her trembling starlit eyes:

The elfin maid that love delayed

In the days beyond our memory.

Till moon and star, till music dies,

Shall Beren and the elfin maid

Dance to the starlight of her eyes

And fill the woods with glamoury.

The single manuscript page (bearing the address 'The

University, Leeds\') has two versions of the stanza intermediate between
that in (a) and the final form. The first of these reads:

Ere Beren caught the elfin maid

And kissed her trembling starlit eyes

Tinúviel, whom love delayed

In the woven woods of Nemorie

In the tangled trees of Tramorie.

Till music and till moonlight dies

Shall Beren by the elfin maid

Dance in the starlight of her eyes

And fill the woods with glamoury.

THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 123

Other variants are suggested for lines 4 and 8:

In the woven woods of Glamoury

O\'er the silver glades of Amoury

and

Ere the birth of mortal memory

And fill the woods with glamoury.

I can cast no light on these names.

The second version advances towards the final form, with for lines 4 and
8 of the stanza:

In the land of laughter sorrowless

\> In spells enchanted sorrowless

In eve unending morrowless

The lines finally achieved are also written here. This rewriting of the
penultimate stanza is unquestionably the 1924

'retouching' referred to in the note on typescript (a) (see p. 120).

475 *did Halog sing them: did Halog recall* IIB as typed. The emendation
was made at the same time as the insertion of *Light as Leaf on
Lindentree;* as originally written the line followed on 397, at the end
of Halog\'s story.

520 *Fimoeg* IIB unemended; see note to second version line 19.

531 *Nirnaith Unoth* IIA, and IIB as typed. See note to second version
line 26.

550 *haled* underlined in IIB and an illegible word substituted, perhaps
*had.*

576 *Ermabuieth* IIA, and IIB as typed. Cf. line 273.

596 *Mailrond:* see note to line 319.

658 *elfin* IIA, *elvish* IIB as typed.

767 The manuscript IIA ends here.

811 *Cor* emended in pencil to *Tun,* but *Tun* later struck out. In the
first version (IB, line 430) the same, but there the emend-

ation *Tun* not struck out.

812 *Taingwethil: Tengwethil* as typed. In the first version IB

introduces *Tain-* for *Ten-* at lines 431, 636, but at line 1409

IB has *Ten-* for IA *Tain-.*

A later pencilled note here says: 'English *Tindbrenting'*

(see Commentary, p. 127).

**124 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND** Commentary on Part II of the second
version

' *Turin\'s Fostering'*

\(i\) *References to the story ofBeren and Lúthien*

In this second part of the second version the major innovation is of
course the introduction of the story of Beren and Lúthien, told to Turin
by his guardian Halog when they were lost in the forest, at once
reminiscent of Aragorn\'s telling of the same story to his companions on
Weathertop before the attack of the Ringwraiths *(The Fellowship of the
Ring* I. 11); and with the further introduction of the poem *Light as
Leaf on* *Hndentree,* the original form of the very song that Aragorn
chanted on Weathertop, we realise that the one scene is actually the
precursor of the other.

At line 264 (an original, not an interpolated line) is the first
appearance of the name *Lúthien* for ThingoPs daughter, so that Tinúviel
becomes her acquired name (given to her by Beren, line 361). The
suggestion of the interpolated lines 266-7 is that Tinúviel meant
'Starmantled', which seems likely enough (see 1.269, entry *Tinwë
Linto;* the Gnomish dictionary, contemporary with the *Lost Tales,*
rather surprisingly gives no indication of the meaning of *Tinúviel).*
On the other hand, in the interpolated line 361 the suggestion is
equally clear that it meant

'Nightingale'. It is difficult to explain this.\*

The original reading at line 265, *Dairon \'s sister,* goes back to the
*Tale* *of Tinúviel,* where Dairon was the son of Tinwelint (II. 10).

I noted earlier (p. 25) that lines 178-9 in the first version and never
ere now for need or wonder

had children of Men chosen that pathway

show that Beren was still an Elf, not a Man; but while these lines are
retained without change in the second version (349-50) their meaning is
reversed by the new line that immediately follows - *save Beren the*
*brave,* which shows equally clearly that Beren was a Man, not an Elf.
At this time my father was apparently in two minds on this subject. At
lines 273 ff. of the second version (referring to Beren\'s friendship
with Húrin) he originally repeated lines 122-5 of the first, which make
no statement on the matter; but in the first revision of this passage
(given in the note to lines 274-8) he explicitly wrote that Beren was an
Elf:

\* A possible if rather finespun explanation is that lines 266-8 were
not in fact written in to the text at the same time as the two pastcd-in
slips (giving lines 358-66 and 398-402), as I have supposed (p. 120),
but were earlier. On this view, when 266-8 were written *Tiauriel* was
not yet Beren\'s name for Lúthien, but was her common *soubriquet,*
known *both near* *and far* (266), and meant 'Star-mantled'. Later, when
358-66 were added, it had become the name given to her by Beren (361),
and meant 'Nightingale'. If this were so, it could also be supposed that
line 268, *who light as leaf on linden tree,* gave rise to the title of
the poem.

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 125**

(Beren) who once of old

fellowship had vowed and friendly love

Elf with mortal, even Egnor\'s son

with Húrin of Hithlum . . .

Since this is a rewriting of the original text of IIB it is presumably a
withdrawal from the idea (that Beren was a Man) expressed in lines
349---50; while the further rewriting of this passage, getting rid of
the line *Elf with mortal, even Egnor\'s son,* presumably represents a
return toil.

In Halog\'s recounting of the story of Beren and Lúthien there are some
apparent differences from that told in the *Tale of the Nauglafring* and
the *Lay of Leithian.* The reference to *Melian\'s magic* in line 371 is
presumably to Melian\'s knowledge of where Beren was; cf. the *Tale of*
*Tinúviel* II. 17: '"O Gwendeling, my mother," said she, "tell *meofthy*
*magic,* if thou canst, how doth Beren fare . . .'" A probable
explanation of the mention later in this passage of *the arts of Melian*
(393), in association with Lúthien\'s winning Beren back from death,
will be given later. But in no other version of the story is there any
suggestion that Carcharoth 'hunted' Beren and Lúthien (377) after he had
devoured Beren\'s hand holding the Silmaril-indeed, the reverse: from
the *Tale of* *Tinúviel* (II. 34) 'Then did Tinúviel and Beren flee like
the wind from the gates, *yet was Karkaras far before them'* to *The
Silmarillion* (p. 181) 'Howling he fled before them'. (The form
*Carcharoth* now first appears, by emendation of *Carcharolch,* which
occurs nowhere else; in the *Tale of Tinúviel* the forms *are Karkaras*
and (in the second version) *Carcaras.)*

More important, lines 395-7

that they dwell for ever in days ageless

and the grass greys not in the green forest

where East or West they ever wander

seems to represent a conception of the second lives of Beren and Lúthien
notably different from that in the *Tale of the Nauglafring* (11.240),
where the doom of mortality that Mandos had spoken fell swiftly upon
them (as also in *The Silmarillion,* p. 236):

nor this time did those twain fare the road together, but when yet was
the child of those twain, Dior the Fair, a little one, did Tinúviel
slowly fade . . . and she vanished in the woods, and none have seen her
dancing ever there again. But Beren searched all the lands of Hithlum
and Artanor ranging after her; and never has any of the Elves had more
loneliness than his, or ever he too faded from life . . .

However this matter is to be interpreted, the lines in the Lay are
clearly to be associated with the end of *Light as Leaf on Lindentree:*
**126 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Till moonlight and till music dies

Shall Beren by the elfin maid

Dance in the starlight of her eyes

In the forest singing sorrowless.

Compare the end of the song that Aragorn sang on Weathertop: The
Sundering Seas between them lay,

And yet at last they met once more,

And long ago they passed away

In the forest singing sorrowless.

\(ii\) *The Dragon-helm and Húrin \'s ancestors*

The elder of Turin\'s guardians, still Gumlin in the first version, is
now named (Mailgond \>) Mailrond; and Gumlin becomes the name of
Hurin\'s father, who has not been even mentioned before (other than in
the reference in the first version to the Dragon-helm being Hurin\'s
*heirloom,* 318). In the second version the Dragon-helm was worn
aforetime

by the father of the fathers of the folk of Húrin,

whose sire Gumlin to his son gave it

ere his soul severed from his sundered heart. (674-7) The last line
suggests that a story of Hurin\'s father had already come into
existence; and line 675 suggests a long line of ancestors behind
Húrin---as also does line 622, *the pride of her people, princes
ancient,* behind Morwen. It is hard to know how my father at this time
conceived the earlier generations of Men; and the question must be
postponed.

The Dragon-helm itself now begins to gather a history: it was made in
dark dwarfland in the deeps of time,

ere Men to Mithrim and misty Hithlum

o\'er the world wandered (672-4)

and was the work of Telchar (678), now named for the first time. But
there is still no indication of the significance attaching to the
dragon-crest.

Lines 758-62 *(Lo! we deemed as dead the dragon of the North*

\... Or *is Húrin of Hithlum from Hell broken?),* to which there is
nothing corresponding in the first version, clearly foreshadows the
*Narn,* p. 79:

and word ran through the woods, and was heard far beyond Doriath, that
the Dragon-helm of Dor-lómin was seen again. Then many wondered, saying:
'Can the spirit of Hador or of Galdor the Tall return from death; or has
Húrin of Hithlum escaped indeed from the pits of Angband?'

THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 127

\(iii\) *Miscellaneous Matters*

The curious references to Beleg in the first version ('son of the
wilderness who wist no sire', see p. 25) reappear in the second, but in
a changed form, and at one of the occurrences put into Beleg\'s own
mouth: *the forest is my* *father* 536, cf. 772. *Beleg the ageless* is
retained in the second version (793), and at lines 544 ff. he shows a
Gandalf-like quality of being able to make fire in wet wood, with *his
wizard\'s cunning* (cf. *The Fellowship of the* *Ring* II. 3).

The great bow of Beleg is now at last named: *Balthronding* (773; later
*Belthronding).*

We learn now that the strong wine of Dor-Winion that Beleg gave to the
travellers and which was drunk at the fateful feast in the Thousand
Caves was brought to the Northern lands from Nogrod by Dwarves (540-1);
and also that there was viticulture in Valinor (543-4), though after the
accounts of life in the halls of Tulkas and Oromë in the tale of *The
Coming of the Valar* (I. 75) this causes no surprise - indeed it is said
that Nessa wife of Tulkas bore 'goblets of the goodliest wine', while
Meássë went among the warriors in her house and 'revived the fainting
with strong wine' (1. 78).

An interesting detail in the second account of Turin\'s reception in
Doriath, not found again, is that Melian played a part in the king\'s
graciousness:

for Melian moved him with murmured counsel. (580)

From the feast at which Turin slew Orgof *the songs of the sons of*
*Ing* of the first version (line 421) have now disappeared.

The chronology of Turin\'s youth is slightly changed in the second
version. In the first, as in the *Tale* (see p. 25), Turin spent seven
years in Doriath while tidings still came from Morwen (line 333); this
now becomes nine years (line 693), as in *The Silmarillion* (p. 199).

Lastly, at line 812 a pencilled note against the name *Taingwethil*
(Taniquetil) says 'English *Tindbrenting'.* This name is found in notes
on the Old English forms of Elvish names (see p. 87), *Tindbrenting þe*
*þa Brega Taniquetil nemnað* ('Tindbrenting which the Valar name
Taniquetil'; Old English *bregu* 'king, lord, ruler' = \'Vala\'). The
name is perhaps to be derived from Old English *tind* 'projecting spike'
(Modern English *tine)* and *brenting* (a derivative of *brant* 'steep,
lofty'), here used in an unrecorded sense *(brenting* occurs only once
in recorded Old English, in *Beowulf,* where it means 'ship').

Verses associated with *The Children of Húrin*

There is a poem found in three manuscripts, all on 'Oxford' paper (see
p. 81), in which my father developed elements in the passage lines **128
THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

2082-2113 in *The Children of Húrin* to a short independent work. The
first text has no title, and reads:

The high summer

waned to autumn, and western gales

.the leaves loosened from labouring boughs.

The feet of the forest in fading gold

and burnished brown were buried deeply; 5

a restless rustle down the roofless aisles

sighed and whispered. The Silver Wherry,

the sailing moon with slender mast

was filled with fires as of furnace hot;

its hold hoarded the heats of summer, 10

its shrouds were shaped of shining flame

uprising ruddy o\'er the rim of Evening

by the misty wharves on the margin of the world.

Then winter hastened and weathers hardened,

and sleet and snow and slanting rain 15

from glowering heaven, grey and sunless,

whistling whiplash whirled by tempest,

the lands forlorn lashed and tortured:

floods were loosened, the fallow waters

sweeping seaward, swollen, angry, 20

filled with flotsam, foaming, turbid

passed in tumult. The tempest failed:

frost descended from the far mountains,

steel-cold and still. Stony-glinting

icehung evening was opened wide, 25

a dome of crystal over deep silence,

the windless wastes, the woods standing

frozen phantoms under flickering stars.

Against *deeply* in line 5 is given *thickly* as an alternative reading,
and against *Wherry* in line 7 is given *vessel.*

The first 13 lines of this are almost identical to 2082---94 in the Lay,
with only a few slight changes (mostly for the common purpose in my
father\'s revisions of his alliterative verse of making the lines more
taut).

Then follow in lines 14-16 adaptations of 2102---4; 17 is a new line; 18

contains a part of 2119; 19-223 are based on 2106-93; 22b---24 are new;
and 25-8 are almost the same as 2110---13.

The second version of the poem bears the title *Storm over Narog,* and
is much developed. This version as written retained lines 14-15 from the
first, but they were changed and expanded to three; and the third text,
entitled *Winter comes to Nargothrond,* is a copy of the second with
this alteration and one or two other very slight changes. I give the
third text here.

**THE LAY OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 129**

*Winter comes to Nargothrond*

The summer slowly in the sad forest

waned and faded. In the west arose

winds that wandered over warring seas.

Leaves were loosened from labouring boughs:

fallow-gold they fell, and the feet buried 5

of trees standing tall and naked,

rustling restlessly down roofless aisles,

shifting and drifting.

The shining vessel

of the sailing moon with slender mast,

with shrouds shapen of shimmering flame, 10

uprose ruddy on the rim of Evening

by the misty wharves on the margin of the world.

With winding horns winter hunted

in the weeping woods, wild and ruthless;

sleet came slashing, and slanting hail 15

from glowering heaven grey and sunless,

whistling whiplash whirled by tempest.

The floods were freed and fallow waters

sweeping seaward, swollen, angry,

filled with flotsam, foaming, turbid, 20

passed in tumult. The tempest died.

Frost descended from far mountains

steel-cold and still. Stony-glinting

icehung evening was opened wide,

a dome of crystal over deep silence, 25

over windless wastes and woods standing

as frozen phantoms under flickering stars.

On the back of *Winter comes to Nargothrond* are written the following
verses, which arose from lines 1554---70 of the Lay. The poem has no
title.

With the seething sea Sirion\'s waters,

green streams gliding into grey furrows,

murmurous mingle. There mews gather,

seabirds assemble in solemn council,

whitewingéd hosts whining sadly 5

with countless voices in a country of sand:

plains and mountains of pale yellow

sifting softly in salt breezes,

sere and sunbleached. At the sea\'s margin

**130 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

a shingle lies, long and shining 10

with pebbles like pearl or pale marble:

when the foam of waves down the wind flieth

in spray they sparkle; splashed at evening

in the moon they glitter; moaning, grinding,

in the dark they tumble; drawing and rolling, 15

when strongbreasted storm the streams driveth

in a war of waters to the walls of land.

When the Lord of Ocean his loud trumpets

in the abyss bloweth to battle sounding,

longhaired legions on lathered horses 20

with backs like whales, bridles spuming,

charge there snorting, champing seaweed;

hurled with thunder of a hundred drums

they leap the bulwarks, burst the leaguer,

through the sandmountains sweeping madly 25

up the river roaring roll in fury.

The last three lines were later placed within brackets.

It may be mentioned here that there exists a poem in rhyming couplets
entitled *The Children of Húrin.* This extends only to 170 lines and
breaks off abruptly, after a short prologue based on the opening of the
later version of the alliterative Lay and an incomplete second section
titled 'The Battle of Unnumbered Tears and Morgoth\'s Curse'. This poem
comes however from a rather later period - approximately the time of the
abandonment of the *Lay of Leithian* in the same metre, in the early
19305, and I do not give it here.

II

POEMS EARLY ABANDONED

During his time at the University of Leeds my father embarked on five
distinct poetical works concerned with the matter of the mythology; but
three of these went no further than the openings. This chapter treats
each of them in turn.

\(i\) *The Flight of the Noldoli*

There do not seem to be any certain indications of the date of this
brief poem in alliterative verse in relation to *The Children of Húrin*
(though it is worth noticing that already in the earliest of the three
texts of *The* *Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor\'s son Cranthir is so
named, whereas this form only arose by emendation of Cranthor in the
typescript text of the Lay (line 1719)). However, both from its general
air and from various details it can be seen that it comes from the same
time; and since it seems unlikely that (on the one hand) my father would
have embarked on a new poem in alliterative verse unless he had laid the
other aside, or that (on the other) he would have returned to this mode
once he was fully engaged on a long poem in rhyming couplets, I think it
very probable that *The Flight of the Noldoli* comes from the earlier
part of 1925 (see pp. 3, 81).

Each of the three manuscripts of the poem (A, B, and C) is differently
titled: A has *The Flight of the Gnomes as sung in the Halls of*
*Thingol;* B (pencilled in later) *Flight of the Gnomes; C The Flight
of* *the Noldoli from Valinor.* A has emendations that are taken up in
the text of B, and B has emendations taken up in C; almost all are
characteristic metrical /verbal rearrangements, as for example in line
17: A *in anguish mourning,* emended to the reading of B; B *and in
anguish mourn,* emended to the reading of C; *C mourning in anguish.*

As generally in this book, earlier variants that have no bearing on
names or story are not cited. Each text ends at the same point, but
three further lines are roughly written in the margin of A (see note to
line 146).

I give now the text of the third version, C.

II

POEMS EARLY ABANDONED

During his time at the University of Leeds my father embarked on five
distinct poetical works concerned with the matter of the mythology; but
three of these went no further than the openings. This chapter treats
each of them in turn.

\(i\) *The Flight of the Noldoli*

There do not seem to be any certain indications of the date of this
brief poem in alliterative verse in relation to *The Children of Húrin*
(though it is worth noticing that already in the earliest of the three
texts of *The* *Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor\'s son Cranthir is so
named, whereas this form only arose by emendation of Cranthor in the
typescript text of the Lay (line 1719)). However, both from its general
air and from various details it can be seen that it comes from the same
time; and since it seems unlikely that (on the one hand) my father would
have embarked on a new poem in alliterative verse unless he had laid the
other aside, or that (on the other) he would have returned to this mode
once he was fully engaged on a long poem in rhyming couplets, I think it
very probable that *The Flight of the Noldoli* comes from the earlier
part of 1925 (see pp. 3, 81).

Each of the three manuscripts of the poem (A, B, and C) is differently
titled: A has *The Flight of the Gnomes as sung in the Halls of*
*Thingol;* B (pencilled in later) *Flight of the Gnomes; C The Flight
of* *the Noldoli from Valinor.* A has emendations that are taken up in
the text of B, and B has emendations taken up in C; almost all are
characteristic metrical /verbal rearrangements, as for example in line
17: A *in anguish mourning,* emended to the reading of B; B *and in
anguish mourn,* emended to the reading of C; *C mourning in anguish.*

As generally in this book, earlier variants that have no bearing on
names or story are not cited. Each text ends at the same point, but
three further lines are roughly written in the margin of A (see note to
line 146).

I give now the text of the third version, C.

**132 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

THE FLIGHT OF THE NOLDOLI

FROM VALINOR

A! the Trees of Light, tall and shapely,

gold and silver, more glorious than the sun,

than the moon more magical, o\'er the meads of the Gods their fragrant
frith and flowerladen

gardens gleaming, once gladly shone. 5

In death they are darkened, they drop their leaves

from blackened branches bled by Morgoth

and Ungoliant the grim the Gloomweaver.

In spider\'s form despair and shadow

a shuddering fear and shapeless night 10

she weaves in a web of winding venom

that is black and breathless. Their branches fail,

the light and laughter of their leaves are quenched.

Mirk goes marching, mists of blackness,

through the halls of the Mighty hushed and empty, 15

the gates of the Gods are in gloom mantled.

Lo! the Elves murmur mourning in anguish,

but no more shall be kindled the mirth of Côr

in the winding ways of their walled city,

towercrownëd Tún, whose twinkling lamps 20

are drowned in darkness. The dim fingers

of fog come floating from the formless waste

and sunless seas. The sound of horns,

of horses\' hooves hastening wildly

in hopeless hunt, they hear afar, 25

where the Gods in wrath those guilty ones

through mournful shadow, now mounting as a tide

o\'er the Blissful Realm, in blind dismay

pursue unceasing. The city of the Elves

is thickly thronged. On threadlike stairs 30

carven of crystal countless torches

stare and twinkle, stain the twilight

and gleaming balusters of green beryl.

A vague rumour of rushing voices,

as myriads mount the marble paths, 35

there fills and troubles those fair places

wide ways of Tun and walls of pearl.

Of the Three Kindreds to that clamorous throng

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 133**

are none but the Gnomes in numbers drawn.

The Elves of Ing to the ancient halls 40

and starry gardens that stand and gleam

upon Timbrenting towering mountain

that day had climbed to the cloudy-domed

mansions of Manwë for mirth and song.

There Bredhil the Blessed thebluemantled, 45

the Lady of the heights as lovely as the snow

in lights gleaming of the legions of the stars,

the cold immortal Queen of mountains,

too fair and terrible too far and high

for mortal eyes, in Manwë\'s court 50

sat silently as they sang to her.

The Foam-riders, folk of waters,

Elves of the endless echoing beaches,

of the bays and grottoes and the blue lagoons,

of silver sands sown with moonlit, 55

starlit, sunlit, stones of crystal,

paleburning gems pearls and opals,

on their shining shingle, where now shadows groping

clutched their laughter, quenched in mourning

their mirth and wonder, in amaze wandered 60

under cliffs grown cold calling dimly,

or in shrouded ships shuddering waited

for the light no more should be lit for ever.

But the Gnomes were numbered by name and kin,

marshalled and ordered in the mighty square 65

upon the crown of Côr. There cried aloud

the fierce son of Finn. Flaming torches

he held and whirled in his hands aloft,

those hands whose craft the hidden secret

knew, that none Gnome or mortal 70

hath matched or mastered in magic or in skill.

'Lo! slain is my sire by the sword of fiends,

his death he has drunk at the doors of his hall

and deep fastness, where darkly hidden

the Three were guarded, the things unmatched 75

that Gnome and Elf and the Nine Valar

can never remake or renew on earth,

recarve or rekindle by craft or magic,

not Feanor Finn\'s son who fashioned them of yore ---

**134 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

the light is lost whence he lit them first, 80

the fate of Faerie hath found its hour

Thus the witless wisdom its reward hath earned

of the Gods\' jealousy, who guard us here

to serve them, sing to them in our sweet cages,

to contrive them gems and jewelled trinkets, 85

their leisure to please with our loveliness,

while they waste and squander work of ages,

nor can Morgoth master in their mansions sitting

at countless councils. Now come ye all,

who have courage and hope! My call harken 90

to flight, to freedom in far places!

The woods of the world whose wide mansions

yet in darkness dream drowned in slumber,

the pathless plains and perilous shores

no moon yet shines on nor mounting dawn 95

in dew and daylight hath drenched for ever,

far better were these for bold footsteps

than gardens of the Gods gloom-encircled

with idleness filled and empty days.

Yea! though the light lit them and the loveliness 100

beyond heart\'s desire that hath held us slaves

here long and long. But that light is dead.

Our gems are gone, our jewels ravished;

and the Three, my Three, thrice-enchanted

globes of crystal by gleam undying 105

illumined, lit by living splendour

and all hues\' essence, their eager flame -

Morgoth has them in his monstrous hold,

my Silmarils. I swear here oaths,

unbreakable bonds to bind me ever, no

by Timbrenting and the timeless halls

of Bredhil the Blessed that abides thereon -

may she hear and heed --- to hunt endlessly

unwearying unwavering through world and sea,

through leaguered lands, lonely mountains, 115

over fens and forest and the fearful snows,

till I find those fair ones, where the fate is hid

of the folk of Elfland and their fortune locked,

where alone now lies the light divine.'

Then his sons beside him, the seven kinsmen, 120

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 135**

**crafty Curufin, Celegorm the fair,**

**Damrod and Diriel and dark Cranthir,**

**Maglor the mighty, and Maidros tall**

(the eldest, whose ardour yet more eager burnt

than his father\'s flame, than Feanor\'s wrath; 125

**him fate awaited with fell purpose),**

these leapt with laughter their lord beside,

with linked hands there lightly took

the oath unbreakable; blood thereafter

it spilled like a sea and spent the swords 130

of endless armies, nor hath ended yet:

**'Be he friend or foe or foul offspring**

of Morgoth Bauglir, be he mortal dark

that in after days on earth shall dwell,

shall no law nor love nor league of Gods, 135

no might nor mercy, not moveless fate,

defend him for ever from the fierce vengeance

of the sons of Fëanor, whoso seize or steal

or finding keep the fair enchanted

globes of crystal whose glory dies not, 140

the Silmarils. We have sworn for ever! '

Then a mighty murmuring was moved abroad

and the harkening host hailed them roaring:

'Let us go! yea go from the Gods for ever

on Morgoth\'s trail o\'er the mountains of the world 145

to vengeance and victory! Your vows are ours!

**The poem ends here (but see note to line 146).**

NOTES

41 *starry gardens C, starlit domes* A, B.

42 *Tengwethil\'s* A (with *Timbrenting* written in margin),
*Timbrenting\'s* B, *Timbrenting* C (with *Taingviethil* written in
margin). See note to *The Children of Húrin* (second version) line 812.

45 *Bridhil* A, B, C, emended in C to *Bredhil;* so also at line 112.

107 *and all hues\' essence:* this half-line (in the form *all hue\'s*
**136 THE** LAYS OF BELERIAND

*essence)* occurs also in the second version of *The Children of*
*Húrin,* line 381, where it is said of the Silmaril of Beren.

111 *Tengwethil* A, *Timbrenting* B, C.

134 *that in after days on earth shall dwell:* this line bracketed later
in pencil in C.

146 There are three roughly-written lines in the margin of the last page
of A which were not taken up in B and C, but which presumably follow on
line 146:

But Finweg cried Fingolfin\'s son

when his father found that fair counsel,

that wit and wisdom were of worth no more:

'Fools

Commentary on *The Flight of the Noldoli*

Sad as it is that this poem was abandoned so soon --- when in full
mastery of the alliterative line my father might have gone on to recount
the Kinslaying of Alqualondë, the Prophecy of the North, the crossing of
the Helcaraxë, and the burning of the ships, there is nonetheless in its
few lines much of interest for the study of the development of the
legend.

Most notably, there here appears the earliest version of the actual
words of the Fëanorian Oath. The Oath was first referred to in the
outlines for *Gilfanon\'s Tale* (I. 238, 240):

The Seven Sons of Fëanor swore their terrible oath of hatred for ever
against all, Gods or Elves or Men, who should hold the Silmarils but it
was there sworn after the coming of the Elves from Valinor, and after
the death of Fëanor. In the present poem is the first appearance of the
story that the Oath was taken in Valinor before the departure of the
Gnomes. It has also been referred to in *The Children of Húrin,* lines
631 ff. of the first version, where it is implied that the mountain of
Tain-Gwethil was taken in witness---as it was in *The Silmarillion* (p.
83): here (line 111) Fëanor himself swears by Timbrenting that he will
never cease to hunt for the Silmarils.

I cannot explain why line 134

that in after days on earth shall dwell

was bracketed (always a mark of exclusion or at least of doubtful
retention) in the C-text. The line reappears in identical form in the
*Lay of* *Leithian* (Canto VI, 1636); cf. *The Silmarillion* 'Vala,
Demon, Elf or Man as yet unborn'.

The fixed epithets of certain of the Sons of Fëanor are changed from
those in *The Children of Húrin* (see p. 86): Celegorm is now 'the fair'

and Maidros 'the tall', as they remained; Maglor is 'the mighty' (in
*The* *Silmarillion* 'the mighty singer'). The line concerning Maidros
POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 137

him fate awaited with fell purpose (126)

may show that a form of the story of his end was already in being (in
the *Tale of the Nauglafring* he survived the attack on Dior the Fair
but nothing more is told of him), but I think it much more likely that
it refers to his capture and maiming by Morgoth.

In Fëanor\'s speech occur two interesting references: to *the Nine
Valar,* and to his father *Finn.* The number of the Valar is nowhere
stated in the *Lost Tales* (where in any

![](images/000002.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000013.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000018.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000019.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000020.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000021.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000022.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000023.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000024.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000003.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000004.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000005.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000006.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000007.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000008.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000009.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000010.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000011.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000012.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000014.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000015.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000016.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000017.png){.calibre1}

case the name includes lesser divine beings; cf. e.g.

1.65---6 'With them came many of those lesser Vali.. .

the Mánir and the Súruli, the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\');
but 'the Nine Valar' are referred to in the

'Sketch of the Mythology' (1926) and named in the 1930

'Silmarillion': Manwë, Ulmo, Ossë, Aulë, Mandos,

Lórien, Tulkas, Oromë, and Melko.

Fëanor\'s father has not been named since the tale of

*The Theft of Melko and the Darkening of Valinor* (1.145

ff. ), where he was called Bruithwir, slain by Melko. In *The Children
of Húrin* there is no indication that Fëanor was akin to other princes
of the Gnomes - though there can be no doubt that by that time he in
fact was so. But the essential features of the Noldorin royal house as
it had now emerged and as it was to remain for many years can now be
deduced. In the first version of *The Children* *of Húrin* (line 29 and
note) Turgon was the son of Finwë (actually spelt *Finweg),* as he had
been in the *Lost Tales* (1.115), but this was changed to Finwe\'s heir,
with the note 'he was Fingolfin\'s son'; and in the second version
*Turgon the mighty, I Fingolfin\'s son* is found in the text as written
(48---9). We thus have:

Further, *Finweg* appears in *The Children of Húrin* (first version
1975, second version 19, 520) as the King of the Gnomes who died in the
Battle of Unnumbered Tears; in two of these cases the name was later
changed to *Fingon.*

In the lines added at the end of the A-text of *The Flight* *of the
Noldoli* (note to line 146) Finweg is Fingolfin\'s son. We can therefore
add:

POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 137

him fate awaited with fell purpose (126)

may show that a form of the story of his end was already in being (in
the *Tale of the Nauglafring* he survived the attack on Dior the Fair
but nothing more is told of him), but I think it much more likely that
it refers to his capture and maiming by Morgoth.

In Fëanor\'s speech occur two interesting references: to *the Nine
Valar,* and to his father *Finn.* The number of the Valar is nowhere
stated in the *Lost Tales* (where in any case the name includes lesser
divine beings; cf. e.g.

1.65---6 'With them came many of those lesser Vali.. .

the Mánir and the Súruli, the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\');
but 'the Nine Valar' are referred to in the

'Sketch of the Mythology' (1926) and named in the 1930

'Silmarillion': Manwë, Ulmo, Ossë, Aulë, Mandos,

Lórien, Tulkas, Oromë, and Melko.

Fëanor\'s father has not been named since the tale of

*The Theft of Melko and the Darkening of Valinor* (1.145

ff. ), where he was called Bruithwir, slain by Melko. In *The Children
of Húrin* there is no indication that Fëanor was akin to other princes
of the Gnomes - though there can be no doubt that by that time he in
fact was so. But the essential features of the Noldorin royal house as
it had now emerged and as it was to remain for many years can now be
deduced. In the first version of *The Children* *of Húrin* (line 29 and
note) Turgon was the son of Finwë (actually spelt *Finweg),* as he had
been in the *Lost Tales* (1.115), but this was changed to Finwe\'s heir,
with the note 'he was Fingolfin\'s son'; and in the second version
*Turgon the mighty, I Fingolfin\'s son* is found in the text as written
(48---9). We thus have:

Further, *Finweg* appears in *The Children of Húrin* (first version
1975, second version 19, 520) as the King of the Gnomes who died in the
Battle of Unnumbered Tears; in two of these cases the name was later
changed to *Fingon.*

In the lines added at the end of the A-text of *The Flight* *of the
Noldoli* (note to line 146) Finweg is Fingolfin\'s son. We can therefore
add:

POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 137

him fate awaited with fell purpose (126)

may show that a form of the story of his end was already in being (in
the *Tale of the Nauglafring* he survived the attack on Dior the Fair
but nothing more is told of him), but I think it much more likely that
it refers to his capture and maiming by Morgoth.

In Fëanor\'s speech occur two interesting references: to *the Nine
Valar,* and to his father *Finn.* The number of the Valar is nowhere
stated in the *Lost Tales* (where in any case the name includes lesser
divine beings; cf. e.g.

1.65---6 'With them came many of those lesser Vali.. .

the Mánir and the Súruli, the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\');
but 'the Nine Valar' are referred to in the

'Sketch of the Mythology' (1926) and named in the 1930

'Silmarillion': Manwë, Ulmo, Ossë, Aulë, Mandos,

Lórien, Tulkas, Oromë, and Melko.

Fëanor\'s father has not been named since the tale of

*The Theft of Melko and the Darkening of Valinor* (1.145

ff. ), where he was called Bruithwir, slain by Melko. In *The Children
of Húrin* there is no indication that Fëanor was akin to other princes
of the Gnomes - though there can be no doubt that by that time he in
fact was so. But the essential features of the Noldorin royal house as
it had now emerged and as it was to remain for many years can now be
deduced. In the first version of *The Children* *of Húrin* (line 29 and
note) Turgon was the son of Finwë (actually spelt *Finweg),* as he had
been in the *Lost Tales* (1.115), but this was changed to Finwe\'s heir,
with the note 'he was Fingolfin\'s son'; and in the second version
*Turgon the mighty, I Fingolfin\'s son* is found in the text as written
(48---9). We thus have:

Further, *Finweg* appears in *The Children of Húrin* (first version
1975, second version 19, 520) as the King of the Gnomes who died in the
Battle of Unnumbered Tears; in two of these cases the name was later
changed to *Fingon.*

In the lines added at the end of the A-text of *The Flight* *of the
Noldoli* (note to line 146) Finweg is Fingolfin\'s son. We can therefore
add:

POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 137

him fate awaited with fell purpose (126)

may show that a form of the story of his end was already in being (in
the *Tale of the Nauglafring* he survived the attack on Dior the Fair
but nothing more is told of him), but I think it much more likely that
it refers to his capture and maiming by Morgoth.

In Fëanor\'s speech occur two interesting references: to *the Nine
Valar,* and to his father *Finn.* The number of the Valar is nowhere
stated in the *Lost Tales* (where in any case the name includes lesser
divine beings; cf. e.g.

1.65---6 'With them came many of those lesser Vali.. .

the Mánir and the Súruli, the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\');
but 'the Nine Valar' are referred to in the

'Sketch of the Mythology' (1926) and named in the 1930

'Silmarillion': Manwë, Ulmo, Ossë, Aulë, Mandos,

Lórien, Tulkas, Oromë, and Melko.

Fëanor\'s father has not been named since the tale of

*The Theft of Melko and the Darkening of Valinor* (1.145

ff. ), where he was called Bruithwir, slain by Melko. In *The Children
of Húrin* there is no indication that Fëanor was akin to other princes
of the Gnomes - though there can be no doubt that by that time he in
fact was so. But the essential features of the Noldorin royal house as
it had now emerged and as it was to remain for many years can now be
deduced. In the first version of *The Children* *of Húrin* (line 29 and
note) Turgon was the son of Finwë (actually spelt *Finweg),* as he had
been in the *Lost Tales* (1.115), but this was changed to Finwe\'s heir,
with the note 'he was Fingolfin\'s son'; and in the second version
*Turgon the mighty, I Fingolfin\'s son* is found in the text as written
(48---9). We thus have:

Further, *Finweg* appears in *The Children of Húrin* (first version
1975, second version 19, 520) as the King of the Gnomes who died in the
Battle of Unnumbered Tears; in two of these cases the name was later
changed to *Fingon.*

In the lines added at the end of the A-text of *The Flight* *of the
Noldoli* (note to line 146) Finweg is Fingolfin\'s son. We can therefore
add:

POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 137

him fate awaited with fell purpose (126)

may show that a form of the story of his end was already in being (in
the *Tale of the Nauglafring* he survived the attack on Dior the Fair
but nothing more is told of him), but I think it much more likely that
it refers to his capture and maiming by Morgoth.

In Fëanor\'s speech occur two interesting references: to *the Nine
Valar,* and to his father *Finn.* The number of the Valar is nowhere
stated in the *Lost Tales* (where in any case the name includes lesser
divine beings; cf. e.g.

1.65---6 'With them came many of those lesser Vali.. .

the Mánir and the Súruli, the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\');
but 'the Nine Valar' are referred to in the

'Sketch of the Mythology' (1926) and named in the 1930

'Silmarillion': Manwë, Ulmo, Ossë, Aulë, Mandos,

Lórien, Tulkas, Oromë, and Melko.

Fëanor\'s father has not been named since the tale of

*The Theft of Melko and the Darkening of Valinor* (1.145

ff. ), where he was called Bruithwir, slain by Melko. In *The Children
of Húrin* there is no indication that Fëanor was akin to other princes
of the Gnomes - though there can be no doubt that by that time he in
fact was so. But the essential features of the Noldorin royal house as
it had now emerged and as it was to remain for many years can now be
deduced. In the first version of *The Children* *of Húrin* (line 29 and
note) Turgon was the son of Finwë (actually spelt *Finweg),* as he had
been in the *Lost Tales* (1.115), but this was changed to Finwe\'s heir,
with the note 'he was Fingolfin\'s son'; and in the second version
*Turgon the mighty, I Fingolfin\'s son* is found in the text as written
(48---9). We thus have:

Further, *Finweg* appears in *The Children of Húrin* (first version
1975, second version 19, 520) as the King of the Gnomes who died in the
Battle of Unnumbered Tears; in two of these cases the name was later
changed to *Fingon.*

In the lines added at the end of the A-text of *The Flight* *of the
Noldoli* (note to line 146) Finweg is Fingolfin\'s son. We can therefore
add:

POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 137

him fate awaited with fell purpose (126)

may show that a form of the story of his end was already in being (in
the *Tale of the Nauglafring* he survived the attack on Dior the Fair
but nothing more is told of him), but I think it much more likely that
it refers to his capture and maiming by Morgoth.

In Fëanor\'s speech occur two interesting references: to *the Nine
Valar,* and to his father *Finn.* The number of the Valar is nowhere
stated in the *Lost Tales* (where in any case the name includes lesser
divine beings; cf. e.g.

1.65---6 'With them came many of those lesser Vali.. .

the Mánir and the Súruli, the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\');
but 'the Nine Valar' are referred to in the

'Sketch of the Mythology' (1926) and named in the 1930

'Silmarillion': Manwë, Ulmo, Ossë, Aulë, Mandos,

Lórien, Tulkas, Oromë, and Melko.

Fëanor\'s father has not been named since the tale of

*The Theft of Melko and the Darkening of Valinor* (1.145

ff. ), where he was called Bruithwir, slain by Melko. In *The Children
of Húrin* there is no indication that Fëanor was akin to other princes
of the Gnomes - though there can be no doubt that by that time he in
fact was so. But the essential features of the Noldorin royal house as
it had now emerged and as it was to remain for many years can now be
deduced. In the first version of *The Children* *of Húrin* (line 29 and
note) Turgon was the son of Finwë (actually spelt *Finweg),* as he had
been in the *Lost Tales* (1.115), but this was changed to Finwe\'s heir,
with the note 'he was Fingolfin\'s son'; and in the second version
*Turgon the mighty, I Fingolfin\'s son* is found in the text as written
(48---9). We thus have:

Further, *Finweg* appears in *The Children of Húrin* (first version
1975, second version 19, 520) as the King of the Gnomes who died in the
Battle of Unnumbered Tears; in two of these cases the name was later
changed to *Fingon.*

In the lines added at the end of the A-text of *The Flight* *of the
Noldoli* (note to line 146) Finweg is Fingolfin\'s son. We can therefore
add:

POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 137

him fate awaited with fell purpose (126)

may show that a form of the story of his end was already in being (in
the *Tale of the Nauglafring* he survived the attack on Dior the Fair
but nothing more is told of him), but I think it much more likely that
it refers to his capture and maiming by Morgoth.

In Fëanor\'s speech occur two interesting references: to *the Nine
Valar,* and to his father *Finn.* The number of the Valar is nowhere
stated in the *Lost Tales* (where in any case the name includes lesser
divine beings; cf. e.g.

1.65---6 'With them came many of those lesser Vali.. .

the Mánir and the Súruli, the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\');
but 'the Nine Valar' are referred to in the

'Sketch of the Mythology' (1926) and named in the 1930

'Silmarillion': Manwë, Ulmo, Ossë, Aulë, Mandos,

Lórien, Tulkas, Oromë, and Melko.

Fëanor\'s father has not been named since the tale of

*The Theft of Melko and the Darkening of Valinor* (1.145

ff. ), where he was called Bruithwir, slain by Melko. In *The Children
of Húrin* there is no indication that Fëanor was akin to other princes
of the Gnomes - though there can be no doubt that by that time he in
fact was so. But the essential features of the Noldorin royal house as
it had now emerged and as it was to remain for many years can now be
deduced. In the first version of *The Children* *of Húrin* (line 29 and
note) Turgon was the son of Finwë (actually spelt *Finweg),* as he had
been in the *Lost Tales* (1.115), but this was changed to Finwe\'s heir,
with the note 'he was Fingolfin\'s son'; and in the second version
*Turgon the mighty, I Fingolfin\'s son* is found in the text as written
(48---9). We thus have:

Further, *Finweg* appears in *The Children of Húrin* (first version
1975, second version 19, 520) as the King of the Gnomes who died in the
Battle of Unnumbered Tears; in two of these cases the name was later
changed to *Fingon.*

In the lines added at the end of the A-text of *The Flight* *of the
Noldoli* (note to line 146) Finweg is Fingolfin\'s son. We can therefore
add:

POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 137

him fate awaited with fell purpose (126)

may show that a form of the story of his end was already in being (in
the *Tale of the Nauglafring* he survived the attack on Dior the Fair
but nothing more is told of him), but I think it much more likely that
it refers to his capture and maiming by Morgoth.

In Fëanor\'s speech occur two interesting references: to *the Nine
Valar,* and to his father *Finn.* The number of the Valar is nowhere
stated in the *Lost Tales* (where in any case the name includes lesser
divine beings; cf. e.g.

1.65---6 'With them came many of those lesser Vali.. .

the Mánir and the Súruli, the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\');
but 'the Nine Valar' are referred to in the

'Sketch of the Mythology' (1926) and named in the 1930

'Silmarillion': Manwë, Ulmo, Ossë, Aulë, Mandos,

Lórien, Tulkas, Oromë, and Melko.

Fëanor\'s father has not been named since the tale of

*The Theft of Melko and the Darkening of Valinor* (1.145

ff. ), where he was called Bruithwir, slain by Melko. In *The Children
of Húrin* there is no indication that Fëanor was akin to other princes
of the Gnomes - though there can be no doubt that by that time he in
fact was so. But the essential features of the Noldorin royal house as
it had now emerged and as it was to remain for many years can now be
deduced. In the first version of *The Children* *of Húrin* (line 29 and
note) Turgon was the son of Finwë (actually spelt *Finweg),* as he had
been in the *Lost Tales* (1.115), but this was changed to Finwe\'s heir,
with the note 'he was Fingolfin\'s son'; and in the second version
*Turgon the mighty, I Fingolfin\'s son* is found in the text as written
(48---9). We thus have:

Further, *Finweg* appears in *The Children of Húrin* (first version
1975, second version 19, 520) as the King of the Gnomes who died in the
Battle of Unnumbered Tears; in two of these cases the name was later
changed to *Fingon.*

In the lines added at the end of the A-text of *The Flight* *of the
Noldoli* (note to line 146) Finweg is Fingolfin\'s son. We can therefore
add:

POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 137

him fate awaited with fell purpose (126)

may show that a form of the story of his end was already in being (in
the *Tale of the Nauglafring* he survived the attack on Dior the Fair
but nothing more is told of him), but I think it much more likely that
it refers to his capture and maiming by Morgoth.

In Fëanor\'s speech occur two interesting references: to *the Nine
Valar,* and to his father *Finn.* The number of the Valar is nowhere
stated in the *Lost Tales* (where in any case the name includes lesser
divine beings; cf. e.g.

1.65---6 'With them came many of those lesser Vali.. .

the Mánir and the Súruli, the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\');
but 'the Nine Valar' are referred to in the

'Sketch of the Mythology' (1926) and named in the 1930

'Silmarillion': Manwë, Ulmo, Ossë, Aulë, Mandos,

Lórien, Tulkas, Oromë, and Melko.

Fëanor\'s father has not been named since the tale of

*The Theft of Melko and the Darkening of Valinor* (1.145

ff. ), where he was called Bruithwir, slain by Melko. In *The Children
of Húrin* there is no indication that Fëanor was akin to other princes
of the Gnomes - though there can be no doubt that by that time he in
fact was so. But the essential features of the Noldorin royal house as
it had now emerged and as it was to remain for many years can now be
deduced. In the first version of *The Children* *of Húrin* (line 29 and
note) Turgon was the son of Finwë (actually spelt *Finweg),* as he had
been in the *Lost Tales* (1.115), but this was changed to Finwe\'s heir,
with the note 'he was Fingolfin\'s son'; and in the second version
*Turgon the mighty, I Fingolfin\'s son* is found in the text as written
(48---9). We thus have:

Further, *Finweg* appears in *The Children of Húrin* (first version
1975, second version 19, 520) as the King of the Gnomes who died in the
Battle of Unnumbered Tears; in two of these cases the name was later
changed to *Fingon.*

In the lines added at the end of the A-text of *The Flight* *of the
Noldoli* (note to line 146) Finweg is Fingolfin\'s son. We can therefore
add:

POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 137

him fate awaited with fell purpose (126)

may show that a form of the story of his end was already in being (in
the *Tale of the Nauglafring* he survived the attack on Dior the Fair
but nothing more is told of him), but I think it much more likely that
it refers to his capture and maiming by Morgoth.

In Fëanor\'s speech occur two interesting references: to *the Nine
Valar,* and to his father *Finn.* The number of the Valar is nowhere
stated in the *Lost Tales* (where in any case the name includes lesser
divine beings; cf. e.g.

1.65---6 'With them came many of those lesser Vali.. .

the Mánir and the Súruli, the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\');
but 'the Nine Valar' are referred to in the

'Sketch of the Mythology' (1926) and named in the 1930

'Silmarillion': Manwë, Ulmo, Ossë, Aulë, Mandos,

Lórien, Tulkas, Oromë, and Melko.

Fëanor\'s father has not been named since the tale of

*The Theft of Melko and the Darkening of Valinor* (1.145

ff. ), where he was called Bruithwir, slain by Melko. In *The Children
of Húrin* there is no indication that Fëanor was akin to other princes
of the Gnomes - though there can be no doubt that by that time he in
fact was so. But the essential features of the Noldorin royal house as
it had now emerged and as it was to remain for many years can now be
deduced. In the first version of *The Children* *of Húrin* (line 29 and
note) Turgon was the son of Finwë (actually spelt *Finweg),* as he had
been in the *Lost Tales* (1.115), but this was changed to Finwe\'s heir,
with the note 'he was Fingolfin\'s son'; and in the second version
*Turgon the mighty, I Fingolfin\'s son* is found in the text as written
(48---9). We thus have:

Further, *Finweg* appears in *The Children of Húrin* (first version
1975, second version 19, 520) as the King of the Gnomes who died in the
Battle of Unnumbered Tears; in two of these cases the name was later
changed to *Fingon.*

In the lines added at the end of the A-text of *The Flight* *of the
Noldoli* (note to line 146) Finweg is Fingolfin\'s son. We can therefore
add:

POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 137

him fate awaited with fell purpose (126)

may show that a form of the story of his end was already in being (in
the *Tale of the Nauglafring* he survived the attack on Dior the Fair
but nothing more is told of him), but I think it much more likely that
it refers to his capture and maiming by Morgoth.

In Fëanor\'s speech occur two interesting references: to *the Nine
Valar,* and to his father *Finn.* The number of the Valar is nowhere
stated in the *Lost Tales* (where in any case the name includes lesser
divine beings; cf. e.g.

1.65---6 'With them came many of those lesser Vali.. .

the Mánir and the Súruli, the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\');
but 'the Nine Valar' are referred to in the

'Sketch of the Mythology' (1926) and named in the 1930

'Silmarillion': Manwë, Ulmo, Ossë, Aulë, Mandos,

Lórien, Tulkas, Oromë, and Melko.

Fëanor\'s father has not been named since the tale of

*The Theft of Melko and the Darkening of Valinor* (1.145

ff. ), where he was called Bruithwir, slain by Melko. In *The Children
of Húrin* there is no indication that Fëanor was akin to other princes
of the Gnomes - though there can be no doubt that by that time he in
fact was so. But the essential features of the Noldorin royal house as
it had now emerged and as it was to remain for many years can now be
deduced. In the first version of *The Children* *of Húrin* (line 29 and
note) Turgon was the son of Finwë (actually spelt *Finweg),* as he had
been in the *Lost Tales* (1.115), but this was changed to Finwe\'s heir,
with the note 'he was Fingolfin\'s son'; and in the second version
*Turgon the mighty, I Fingolfin\'s son* is found in the text as written
(48---9). We thus have:

Further, *Finweg* appears in *The Children of Húrin* (first version
1975, second version 19, 520) as the King of the Gnomes who died in the
Battle of Unnumbered Tears; in two of these cases the name was later
changed to *Fingon.*

In the lines added at the end of the A-text of *The Flight* *of the
Noldoli* (note to line 146) Finweg is Fingolfin\'s son. We can therefore
add:

POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 137

him fate awaited with fell purpose (126)

may show that a form of the story of his end was already in being (in
the *Tale of the Nauglafring* he survived the attack on Dior the Fair
but nothing more is told of him), but I think it much more likely that
it refers to his capture and maiming by Morgoth.

In Fëanor\'s speech occur two interesting references: to *the Nine
Valar,* and to his father *Finn.* The number of the Valar is nowhere
stated in the *Lost Tales* (where in any case the name includes lesser
divine beings; cf. e.g.

1.65---6 'With them came many of those lesser Vali.. .

the Mánir and the Súruli, the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\');
but 'the Nine Valar' are referred to in the

'Sketch of the Mythology' (1926) and named in the 1930

'Silmarillion': Manwë, Ulmo, Ossë, Aulë, Mandos,

Lórien, Tulkas, Oromë, and Melko.

Fëanor\'s father has not been named since the tale of

*The Theft of Melko and the Darkening of Valinor* (1.145

ff. ), where he was called Bruithwir, slain by Melko. In *The Children
of Húrin* there is no indication that Fëanor was akin to other princes
of the Gnomes - though there can be no doubt that by that time he in
fact was so. But the essential features of the Noldorin royal house as
it had now emerged and as it was to remain for many years can now be
deduced. In the first version of *The Children* *of Húrin* (line 29 and
note) Turgon was the son of Finwë (actually spelt *Finweg),* as he had
been in the *Lost Tales* (1.115), but this was changed to Finwe\'s heir,
with the note 'he was Fingolfin\'s son'; and in the second version
*Turgon the mighty, I Fingolfin\'s son* is found in the text as written
(48---9). We thus have:

Further, *Finweg* appears in *The Children of Húrin* (first version
1975, second version 19, 520) as the King of the Gnomes who died in the
Battle of Unnumbered Tears; in two of these cases the name was later
changed to *Fingon.*

In the lines added at the end of the A-text of *The Flight* *of the
Noldoli* (note to line 146) Finweg is Fingolfin\'s son. We can therefore
add:

![](images/000025.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000034.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000035.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000036.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000037.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000038.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000039.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000040.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000041.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000026.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000027.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000028.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000029.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000030.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000031.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000032.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000033.png){.calibre1}

POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 137

him fate awaited with fell purpose (126)

may show that a form of the story of his end was already in being (in
the *Tale of the Nauglafring* he survived the attack on Dior the Fair
but nothing more is told of him), but I think it much more likely that
it refers to his capture and maiming by Morgoth.

In Fëanor\'s speech occur two interesting references: to *the Nine
Valar,* and to his father *Finn.* The number of the Valar is nowhere
stated in the *Lost Tales* (where in any case the name includes lesser
divine beings; cf. e.g.

1.65---6 'With them came many of those lesser Vali.. .

the Mánir and the Súruli, the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\');
but 'the Nine Valar' are referred to in the

'Sketch of the Mythology' (1926) and named in the 1930

'Silmarillion': Manwë, Ulmo, Ossë, Aulë, Mandos,

Lórien, Tulkas, Oromë, and Melko.

Fëanor\'s father has not been named since the tale of

*The Theft of Melko and the Darkening of Valinor* (1.145

ff. ), where he was called Bruithwir, slain by Melko. In *The Children
of Húrin* there is no indication that Fëanor was akin to other princes
of the Gnomes - though there can be no doubt that by that time he in
fact was so. But the essential features of the Noldorin royal house as
it had now emerged and as it was to remain for many years can now be
deduced. In the first version of *The Children* *of Húrin* (line 29 and
note) Turgon was the son of Finwë (actually spelt *Finweg),* as he had
been in the *Lost Tales* (1.115), but this was changed to Finwe\'s heir,
with the note 'he was Fingolfin\'s son'; and in the second version
*Turgon the mighty, I Fingolfin\'s son* is found in the text as written
(48---9). We thus have:

Further, *Finweg* appears in *The Children of Húrin* (first version
1975, second version 19, 520) as the King of the Gnomes who died in the
Battle of Unnumbered Tears; in two of these cases the name was later
changed to *Fingon.*

In the lines added at the end of the A-text of *The Flight* *of the
Noldoli* (note to line 146) Finweg is Fingolfin\'s son. We can therefore
add:

POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 137

him fate awaited with fell purpose (126)

may show that a form of the story of his end was already in being (in
the *Tale of the Nauglafring* he survived the attack on Dior the Fair
but nothing more is told of him), but I think it much more likely that
it refers to his capture and maiming by Morgoth.

In Fëanor\'s speech occur two interesting references: to *the Nine
Valar,* and to his father *Finn.* The number of the Valar is nowhere
stated in the *Lost Tales* (where in any case the name includes lesser
divine beings; cf. e.g.

1.65---6 'With them came many of those lesser Vali.. .

the Mánir and the Súruli, the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\');
but 'the Nine Valar' are referred to in the

'Sketch of the Mythology' (1926) and named in the 1930

'Silmarillion': Manwë, Ulmo, Ossë, Aulë, Mandos,

Lórien, Tulkas, Oromë, and Melko.

Fëanor\'s father has not been named since the tale of

*The Theft of Melko and the Darkening of Valinor* (1.145

ff. ), where he was called Bruithwir, slain by Melko. In *The Children
of Húrin* there is no indication that Fëanor was akin to other princes
of the Gnomes - though there can be no doubt that by that time he in
fact was so. But the essential features of the Noldorin royal house as
it had now emerged and as it was to remain for many years can now be
deduced. In the first version of *The Children* *of Húrin* (line 29 and
note) Turgon was the son of Finwë (actually spelt *Finweg),* as he had
been in the *Lost Tales* (1.115), but this was changed to Finwe\'s heir,
with the note 'he was Fingolfin\'s son'; and in the second version
*Turgon the mighty, I Fingolfin\'s son* is found in the text as written
(48---9). We thus have:

Further, *Finweg* appears in *The Children of Húrin* (first version
1975, second version 19, 520) as the King of the Gnomes who died in the
Battle of Unnumbered Tears; in two of these cases the name was later
changed to *Fingon.*

In the lines added at the end of the A-text of *The Flight* *of the
Noldoli* (note to line 146) Finweg is Fingolfin\'s son. We can therefore
add:

POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 137

him fate awaited with fell purpose (126)

may show that a form of the story of his end was already in being (in
the *Tale of the Nauglafring* he survived the attack on Dior the Fair
but nothing more is told of him), but I think it much more likely that
it refers to his capture and maiming by Morgoth.

In Fëanor\'s speech occur two interesting references: to *the Nine
Valar,* and to his father *Finn.* The number of the Valar is nowhere
stated in the *Lost Tales* (where in any case the name includes lesser
divine beings; cf. e.g.

1.65---6 'With them came many of those lesser Vali.. .

the Mánir and the Súruli, the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\');
but 'the Nine Valar' are referred to in the

'Sketch of the Mythology' (1926) and named in the 1930

'Silmarillion': Manwë, Ulmo, Ossë, Aulë, Mandos,

Lórien, Tulkas, Oromë, and Melko.

Fëanor\'s father has not been named since the tale of

*The Theft of Melko and the Darkening of Valinor* (1.145

ff. ), where he was called Bruithwir, slain by Melko. In *The Children
of Húrin* there is no indication that Fëanor was akin to other princes
of the Gnomes - though there can be no doubt that by that time he in
fact was so. But the essential features of the Noldorin royal house as
it had now emerged and as it was to remain for many years can now be
deduced. In the first version of *The Children* *of Húrin* (line 29 and
note) Turgon was the son of Finwë (actually spelt *Finweg),* as he had
been in the *Lost Tales* (1.115), but this was changed to Finwe\'s heir,
with the note 'he was Fingolfin\'s son'; and in the second version
*Turgon the mighty, I Fingolfin\'s son* is found in the text as written
(48---9). We thus have:

Further, *Finweg* appears in *The Children of Húrin* (first version
1975, second version 19, 520) as the King of the Gnomes who died in the
Battle of Unnumbered Tears; in two of these cases the name was later
changed to *Fingon.*

In the lines added at the end of the A-text of *The Flight* *of the
Noldoli* (note to line 146) Finweg is Fingolfin\'s son. We can therefore
add:

POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 137

him fate awaited with fell purpose (126)

may show that a form of the story of his end was already in being (in
the *Tale of the Nauglafring* he survived the attack on Dior the Fair
but nothing more is told of him), but I think it much more likely that
it refers to his capture and maiming by Morgoth.

In Fëanor\'s speech occur two interesting references: to *the Nine
Valar,* and to his father *Finn.* The number of the Valar is nowhere
stated in the *Lost Tales* (where in any case the name includes lesser
divine beings; cf. e.g.

1.65---6 'With them came many of those lesser Vali.. .

the Mánir and the Súruli, the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\');
but 'the Nine Valar' are referred to in the

'Sketch of the Mythology' (1926) and named in the 1930

'Silmarillion': Manwë, Ulmo, Ossë, Aulë, Mandos,

Lórien, Tulkas, Oromë, and Melko.

Fëanor\'s father has not been named since the tale of

*The Theft of Melko and the Darkening of Valinor* (1.145

ff. ), where he was called Bruithwir, slain by Melko. In *The Children
of Húrin* there is no indication that Fëanor was akin to other princes
of the Gnomes - though there can be no doubt that by that time he in
fact was so. But the essential features of the Noldorin royal house as
it had now emerged and as it was to remain for many years can now be
deduced. In the first version of *The Children* *of Húrin* (line 29 and
note) Turgon was the son of Finwë (actually spelt *Finweg),* as he had
been in the *Lost Tales* (1.115), but this was changed to Finwe\'s heir,
with the note 'he was Fingolfin\'s son'; and in the second version
*Turgon the mighty, I Fingolfin\'s son* is found in the text as written
(48---9). We thus have:

Further, *Finweg* appears in *The Children of Húrin* (first version
1975, second version 19, 520) as the King of the Gnomes who died in the
Battle of Unnumbered Tears; in two of these cases the name was later
changed to *Fingon.*

In the lines added at the end of the A-text of *The Flight* *of the
Noldoli* (note to line 146) Finweg is Fingolfin\'s son. We can therefore
add:

POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 137

him fate awaited with fell purpose (126)

may show that a form of the story of his end was already in being (in
the *Tale of the Nauglafring* he survived the attack on Dior the Fair
but nothing more is told of him), but I think it much more likely that
it refers to his capture and maiming by Morgoth.

In Fëanor\'s speech occur two interesting references: to *the Nine
Valar,* and to his father *Finn.* The number of the Valar is nowhere
stated in the *Lost Tales* (where in any case the name includes lesser
divine beings; cf. e.g.

1.65---6 'With them came many of those lesser Vali.. .

the Mánir and the Súruli, the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\');
but 'the Nine Valar' are referred to in the

'Sketch of the Mythology' (1926) and named in the 1930

'Silmarillion': Manwë, Ulmo, Ossë, Aulë, Mandos,

Lórien, Tulkas, Oromë, and Melko.

Fëanor\'s father has not been named since the tale of

*The Theft of Melko and the Darkening of Valinor* (1.145

ff. ), where he was called Bruithwir, slain by Melko. In *The Children
of Húrin* there is no indication that Fëanor was akin to other princes
of the Gnomes - though there can be no doubt that by that time he in
fact was so. But the essential features of the Noldorin royal house as
it had now emerged and as it was to remain for many years can now be
deduced. In the first version of *The Children* *of Húrin* (line 29 and
note) Turgon was the son of Finwë (actually spelt *Finweg),* as he had
been in the *Lost Tales* (1.115), but this was changed to Finwe\'s heir,
with the note 'he was Fingolfin\'s son'; and in the second version
*Turgon the mighty, I Fingolfin\'s son* is found in the text as written
(48---9). We thus have:

Further, *Finweg* appears in *The Children of Húrin* (first version
1975, second version 19, 520) as the King of the Gnomes who died in the
Battle of Unnumbered Tears; in two of these cases the name was later
changed to *Fingon.*

In the lines added at the end of the A-text of *The Flight* *of the
Noldoli* (note to line 146) Finweg is Fingolfin\'s son. We can therefore
add:

**138 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Now in *The Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor is called Finn\'s son; and in
the 'Sketch of the Mythology' Finn is given as an alternative to Finwë:

The Eldar are divided into three hosts, one under

Ingwë (Ing) \..., one under Finwë (Finn) after called the Noldoli. . .\*

Thus Fëanor has become Fingolfin\'s brother:

(Only in a later note to lines 1713-20 of *The Children of* *Húrin* has
Finwë\'s third son Finrod appeared, father of Felagund, Angrod, Egnor,
and Orodreth.)

Fëanor\'s speech also contains a curious foreknowledge of the making of
the Sun and Moon (92---6):

The woods of the world whose wide

mansions yet in darkness dream

drowned in slumber, the pathless

plains and perilous shores no moon

yet shines on nor mounting dawn in

dew and daylight hath drenched for

ever

Very notable are Fëanor\'s concluding words (117-18):

till I find those fair ones, where the

fate is hid of the folk of Elfland and

their fortune locked

Cf. *The Silmarillion,* p. 67: 'Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda
lay locked within them', and Thingol\'s

words to Beren *(ibid.* p. 167): 'though the fate of Arda lie within the
Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous'.

It is clear that the Silmarils had already gained greatly in
significance since the earliest period of the mythology (see I. 156, 169
note 2; II. 259).

In no other version is Fëanor seen on this occasion

holding flaming torches in his hands and whirling them aloft.

The lines (38-9)

Of the Three Kindreds to that

clamorous throng are none but the

Gnomes in numbers drawn

go back to the tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.162): 'Now when .
. .

\* In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is expressly stated that *Ing* and
*Finn* arc the Gnomish forms of *Inguie* and *Finwe.*

**138 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Now in *The Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor is called Finn\'s son; and in
the 'Sketch of the Mythology' Finn is given as an alternative to Finwë:

The Eldar are divided into three hosts, one under

Ingwë (Ing) \..., one under Finwë (Finn) after called the Noldoli. . .\*

Thus Fëanor has become Fingolfin\'s brother:

(Only in a later note to lines 1713-20 of *The Children of* *Húrin* has
Finwë\'s third son Finrod appeared, father of Felagund, Angrod, Egnor,
and Orodreth.)

Fëanor\'s speech also contains a curious foreknowledge of the making of
the Sun and Moon (92---6):

The woods of the world whose wide

mansions yet in darkness dream

drowned in slumber, the pathless

plains and perilous shores no moon

yet shines on nor mounting dawn in

dew and daylight hath drenched for

ever

Very notable are Fëanor\'s concluding words (117-18):

till I find those fair ones, where the

fate is hid of the folk of Elfland and

their fortune locked

Cf. *The Silmarillion,* p. 67: 'Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda
lay locked within them', and Thingol\'s

words to Beren *(ibid.* p. 167): 'though the fate of Arda lie within the
Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous'.

It is clear that the Silmarils had already gained greatly in
significance since the earliest period of the mythology (see I. 156, 169
note 2; II. 259).

In no other version is Fëanor seen on this occasion

holding flaming torches in his hands and whirling them aloft.

The lines (38-9)

Of the Three Kindreds to that

clamorous throng are none but the

Gnomes in numbers drawn

go back to the tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.162): 'Now when .
. .

\* In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is expressly stated that *Ing* and
*Finn* arc the Gnomish forms of *Inguie* and *Finwe.*

**138 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Now in *The Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor is called Finn\'s son; and in
the 'Sketch of the Mythology' Finn is given as an alternative to Finwë:

The Eldar are divided into three hosts, one under

Ingwë (Ing) \..., one under Finwë (Finn) after called the Noldoli. . .\*

Thus Fëanor has become Fingolfin\'s brother:

(Only in a later note to lines 1713-20 of *The Children of* *Húrin* has
Finwë\'s third son Finrod appeared, father of Felagund, Angrod, Egnor,
and Orodreth.)

Fëanor\'s speech also contains a curious foreknowledge of the making of
the Sun and Moon (92---6):

The woods of the world whose wide

mansions yet in darkness dream

drowned in slumber, the pathless

plains and perilous shores no moon

yet shines on nor mounting dawn in

dew and daylight hath drenched for

ever

Very notable are Fëanor\'s concluding words (117-18):

till I find those fair ones, where the

fate is hid of the folk of Elfland and

their fortune locked

Cf. *The Silmarillion,* p. 67: 'Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda
lay locked within them', and Thingol\'s

words to Beren *(ibid.* p. 167): 'though the fate of Arda lie within the
Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous'.

It is clear that the Silmarils had already gained greatly in
significance since the earliest period of the mythology (see I. 156, 169
note 2; II. 259).

In no other version is Fëanor seen on this occasion

holding flaming torches in his hands and whirling them aloft.

The lines (38-9)

Of the Three Kindreds to that

clamorous throng are none but the

Gnomes in numbers drawn

go back to the tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.162): 'Now when .
. .

\* In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is expressly stated that *Ing* and
*Finn* arc the Gnomish forms of *Inguie* and *Finwe.*

**138 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Now in *The Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor is called Finn\'s son; and in
the 'Sketch of the Mythology' Finn is given as an alternative to Finwë:

The Eldar are divided into three hosts, one under

Ingwë (Ing) \..., one under Finwë (Finn) after called the Noldoli. . .\*

Thus Fëanor has become Fingolfin\'s brother:

(Only in a later note to lines 1713-20 of *The Children of* *Húrin* has
Finwë\'s third son Finrod appeared, father of Felagund, Angrod, Egnor,
and Orodreth.)

Fëanor\'s speech also contains a curious foreknowledge of the making of
the Sun and Moon (92---6):

The woods of the world whose wide

mansions yet in darkness dream

drowned in slumber, the pathless

plains and perilous shores no moon

yet shines on nor mounting dawn in

dew and daylight hath drenched for

ever

Very notable are Fëanor\'s concluding words (117-18):

till I find those fair ones, where the

fate is hid of the folk of Elfland and

their fortune locked

Cf. *The Silmarillion,* p. 67: 'Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda
lay locked within them', and Thingol\'s

words to Beren *(ibid.* p. 167): 'though the fate of Arda lie within the
Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous'.

It is clear that the Silmarils had already gained greatly in
significance since the earliest period of the mythology (see I. 156, 169
note 2; II. 259).

In no other version is Fëanor seen on this occasion

holding flaming torches in his hands and whirling them aloft.

The lines (38-9)

Of the Three Kindreds to that

clamorous throng are none but the

Gnomes in numbers drawn

go back to the tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.162): 'Now when .
. .

\* In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is expressly stated that *Ing* and
*Finn* arc the Gnomish forms of *Inguie* and *Finwe.*

**138 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Now in *The Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor is called Finn\'s son; and in
the 'Sketch of the Mythology' Finn is given as an alternative to Finwë:

The Eldar are divided into three hosts, one under

Ingwë (Ing) \..., one under Finwë (Finn) after called the Noldoli. . .\*

Thus Fëanor has become Fingolfin\'s brother:

(Only in a later note to lines 1713-20 of *The Children of* *Húrin* has
Finwë\'s third son Finrod appeared, father of Felagund, Angrod, Egnor,
and Orodreth.)

Fëanor\'s speech also contains a curious foreknowledge of the making of
the Sun and Moon (92---6):

The woods of the world whose wide

mansions yet in darkness dream

drowned in slumber, the pathless

plains and perilous shores no moon

yet shines on nor mounting dawn in

dew and daylight hath drenched for

ever

Very notable are Fëanor\'s concluding words (117-18):

till I find those fair ones, where the

fate is hid of the folk of Elfland and

their fortune locked

Cf. *The Silmarillion,* p. 67: 'Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda
lay locked within them', and Thingol\'s

words to Beren *(ibid.* p. 167): 'though the fate of Arda lie within the
Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous'.

It is clear that the Silmarils had already gained greatly in
significance since the earliest period of the mythology (see I. 156, 169
note 2; II. 259).

In no other version is Fëanor seen on this occasion

holding flaming torches in his hands and whirling them aloft.

The lines (38-9)

Of the Three Kindreds to that

clamorous throng are none but the

Gnomes in numbers drawn

go back to the tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.162): 'Now when .
. .

\* In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is expressly stated that *Ing* and
*Finn* arc the Gnomish forms of *Inguie* and *Finwe.*

**138 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Now in *The Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor is called Finn\'s son; and in
the 'Sketch of the Mythology' Finn is given as an alternative to Finwë:

The Eldar are divided into three hosts, one under

Ingwë (Ing) \..., one under Finwë (Finn) after called the Noldoli. . .\*

Thus Fëanor has become Fingolfin\'s brother:

(Only in a later note to lines 1713-20 of *The Children of* *Húrin* has
Finwë\'s third son Finrod appeared, father of Felagund, Angrod, Egnor,
and Orodreth.)

Fëanor\'s speech also contains a curious foreknowledge of the making of
the Sun and Moon (92---6):

The woods of the world whose wide

mansions yet in darkness dream

drowned in slumber, the pathless

plains and perilous shores no moon

yet shines on nor mounting dawn in

dew and daylight hath drenched for

ever

Very notable are Fëanor\'s concluding words (117-18):

till I find those fair ones, where the

fate is hid of the folk of Elfland and

their fortune locked

Cf. *The Silmarillion,* p. 67: 'Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda
lay locked within them', and Thingol\'s

words to Beren *(ibid.* p. 167): 'though the fate of Arda lie within the
Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous'.

It is clear that the Silmarils had already gained greatly in
significance since the earliest period of the mythology (see I. 156, 169
note 2; II. 259).

In no other version is Fëanor seen on this occasion

holding flaming torches in his hands and whirling them aloft.

The lines (38-9)

Of the Three Kindreds to that

clamorous throng are none but the

Gnomes in numbers drawn

go back to the tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.162): 'Now when .
. .

\* In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is expressly stated that *Ing* and
*Finn* arc the Gnomish forms of *Inguie* and *Finwe.*

**138 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Now in *The Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor is called Finn\'s son; and in
the 'Sketch of the Mythology' Finn is given as an alternative to Finwë:

The Eldar are divided into three hosts, one under

Ingwë (Ing) \..., one under Finwë (Finn) after called the

![](images/000042.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000045.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000046.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000047.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000048.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000049.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000050.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000051.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000052.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000043.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000044.png){.calibre1}

Noldoli. . .\*

Thus Fëanor has become Fingolfin\'s brother:

(Only in a later note to lines 1713-20 of *The Children of* *Húrin* has
Finwë\'s third son Finrod appeared, father of Felagund, Angrod, Egnor,
and Orodreth.)

Fëanor\'s speech also contains a curious foreknowledge of the making of
the Sun and Moon (92---6):

The woods of the world whose wide

mansions yet in darkness dream

drowned in slumber, the pathless

plains and perilous shores no moon

yet shines on nor mounting dawn in

dew and daylight hath drenched for

ever

Very notable are Fëanor\'s concluding words (117-18):

till I find those fair ones, where the

fate is hid of the folk of Elfland and

their fortune locked

Cf. *The Silmarillion,* p. 67: 'Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda
lay locked within them', and Thingol\'s

words to Beren *(ibid.* p. 167): 'though the fate of Arda lie within the
Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous'.

It is clear that the Silmarils had already gained greatly in
significance since the earliest period of the mythology (see I. 156, 169
note 2; II. 259).

In no other version is Fëanor seen on this occasion

holding flaming torches in his hands and whirling them aloft.

The lines (38-9)

Of the Three Kindreds to that

clamorous throng are none but the

Gnomes in numbers drawn

go back to the tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.162): 'Now when .
. .

\* In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is expressly stated that *Ing* and
*Finn* arc the Gnomish forms of *Inguie* and *Finwe.*

**138 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Now in *The Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor is called Finn\'s son; and in
the 'Sketch of the Mythology' Finn is given as an alternative to Finwë:

The Eldar are divided into three hosts, one under

Ingwë (Ing) \..., one under Finwë (Finn) after called the Noldoli. . .\*

Thus Fëanor has become Fingolfin\'s brother:

(Only in a later note to lines 1713-20 of *The Children of* *Húrin* has
Finwë\'s third son Finrod appeared, father of Felagund, Angrod, Egnor,
and Orodreth.)

Fëanor\'s speech also contains a curious foreknowledge of the making of
the Sun and Moon (92---6):

The woods of the world whose wide

mansions yet in darkness dream

drowned in slumber, the pathless

plains and perilous shores no moon

yet shines on nor mounting dawn in

dew and daylight hath drenched for

ever

Very notable are Fëanor\'s concluding words (117-18):

till I find those fair ones, where the

fate is hid of the folk of Elfland and

their fortune locked

Cf. *The Silmarillion,* p. 67: 'Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda
lay locked within them', and Thingol\'s

words to Beren *(ibid.* p. 167): 'though the fate of Arda lie within the
Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous'.

It is clear that the Silmarils had already gained greatly in
significance since the earliest period of the mythology (see I. 156, 169
note 2; II. 259).

In no other version is Fëanor seen on this occasion

holding flaming torches in his hands and whirling them aloft.

The lines (38-9)

Of the Three Kindreds to that

clamorous throng are none but the

Gnomes in numbers drawn

go back to the tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.162): 'Now when .
. .

\* In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is expressly stated that *Ing* and
*Finn* arc the Gnomish forms of *Inguie* and *Finwe.*

**138 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Now in *The Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor is called Finn\'s son; and in
the 'Sketch of the Mythology' Finn is given as an alternative to Finwë:

The Eldar are divided into three hosts, one under

Ingwë (Ing) \..., one under Finwë (Finn) after called the Noldoli. . .\*

Thus Fëanor has become Fingolfin\'s brother:

(Only in a later note to lines 1713-20 of *The Children of* *Húrin* has
Finwë\'s third son Finrod appeared, father of Felagund, Angrod, Egnor,
and Orodreth.)

Fëanor\'s speech also contains a curious foreknowledge of the making of
the Sun and Moon (92---6):

The woods of the world whose wide

mansions yet in darkness dream

drowned in slumber, the pathless

plains and perilous shores no moon

yet shines on nor mounting dawn in

dew and daylight hath drenched for

ever

Very notable are Fëanor\'s concluding words (117-18):

till I find those fair ones, where the

fate is hid of the folk of Elfland and

their fortune locked

Cf. *The Silmarillion,* p. 67: 'Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda
lay locked within them', and Thingol\'s

words to Beren *(ibid.* p. 167): 'though the fate of Arda lie within the
Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous'.

It is clear that the Silmarils had already gained greatly in
significance since the earliest period of the mythology (see I. 156, 169
note 2; II. 259).

In no other version is Fëanor seen on this occasion

holding flaming torches in his hands and whirling them aloft.

The lines (38-9)

Of the Three Kindreds to that

clamorous throng are none but the

Gnomes in numbers drawn

go back to the tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.162): 'Now when .
. .

\* In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is expressly stated that *Ing* and
*Finn* arc the Gnomish forms of *Inguie* and *Finwe.*

**138 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Now in *The Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor is called Finn\'s son; and in
the 'Sketch of the Mythology' Finn is given as an alternative to Finwë:

The Eldar are divided into three hosts, one under

Ingwë (Ing) \..., one under Finwë (Finn) after called the Noldoli. . .\*

Thus Fëanor has become Fingolfin\'s brother:

(Only in a later note to lines 1713-20 of *The Children of* *Húrin* has
Finwë\'s third son Finrod appeared, father of Felagund, Angrod, Egnor,
and Orodreth.)

Fëanor\'s speech also contains a curious foreknowledge of the making of
the Sun and Moon (92---6):

The woods of the world whose wide

mansions yet in darkness dream

drowned in slumber, the pathless

plains and perilous shores no moon

yet shines on nor mounting dawn in

dew and daylight hath drenched for

ever

Very notable are Fëanor\'s concluding words (117-18):

till I find those fair ones, where the

fate is hid of the folk of Elfland and

their fortune locked

Cf. *The Silmarillion,* p. 67: 'Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda
lay locked within them', and Thingol\'s

words to Beren *(ibid.* p. 167): 'though the fate of Arda lie within the
Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous'.

It is clear that the Silmarils had already gained greatly in
significance since the earliest period of the mythology (see I. 156, 169
note 2; II. 259).

In no other version is Fëanor seen on this occasion

holding flaming torches in his hands and whirling them aloft.

The lines (38-9)

Of the Three Kindreds to that

clamorous throng are none but the

Gnomes in numbers drawn

go back to the tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.162): 'Now when .
. .

\* In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is expressly stated that *Ing* and
*Finn* arc the Gnomish forms of *Inguie* and *Finwe.*

**138 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Now in *The Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor is called Finn\'s son; and in
the 'Sketch of the Mythology' Finn is given as an alternative to Finwë:

The Eldar are divided into three hosts, one under

Ingwë (Ing) \..., one under Finwë (Finn) after called the Noldoli. . .\*

Thus Fëanor has become Fingolfin\'s brother:

(Only in a later note to lines 1713-20 of *The Children of* *Húrin* has
Finwë\'s third son Finrod appeared, father of Felagund, Angrod, Egnor,
and Orodreth.)

Fëanor\'s speech also contains a curious foreknowledge of the making of
the Sun and Moon (92---6):

The woods of the world whose wide

mansions yet in darkness dream

drowned in slumber, the pathless

plains and perilous shores no moon

yet shines on nor mounting dawn in

dew and daylight hath drenched for

ever

Very notable are Fëanor\'s concluding words (117-18):

till I find those fair ones, where the

fate is hid of the folk of Elfland and

their fortune locked

Cf. *The Silmarillion,* p. 67: 'Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda
lay locked within them', and Thingol\'s

words to Beren *(ibid.* p. 167): 'though the fate of Arda lie within the
Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous'.

It is clear that the Silmarils had already gained greatly in
significance since the earliest period of the mythology (see I. 156, 169
note 2; II. 259).

In no other version is Fëanor seen on this occasion

holding flaming torches in his hands and whirling them aloft.

The lines (38-9)

Of the Three Kindreds to that

clamorous throng are none but the

Gnomes in numbers drawn

go back to the tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.162): 'Now when .
. .

\* In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is expressly stated that *Ing* and
*Finn* arc the Gnomish forms of *Inguie* and *Finwe.*

**138 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Now in *The Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor is called Finn\'s son; and in
the 'Sketch of the Mythology' Finn is given as an alternative to Finwë:

The Eldar are divided into three hosts, one under

Ingwë (Ing) \..., one under Finwë (Finn) after called the Noldoli. . .\*

Thus Fëanor has become Fingolfin\'s brother:

(Only in a later note to lines 1713-20 of *The Children of* *Húrin* has
Finwë\'s third son Finrod appeared, father of Felagund, Angrod, Egnor,
and Orodreth.)

Fëanor\'s speech also contains a curious foreknowledge of the making of
the Sun and Moon (92---6):

The woods of the world whose wide

mansions yet in darkness dream

drowned in slumber, the pathless

plains and perilous shores no moon

yet shines on nor mounting dawn in

dew and daylight hath drenched for

ever

Very notable are Fëanor\'s concluding words (117-18):

till I find those fair ones, where the

fate is hid of the folk of Elfland and

their fortune locked

Cf. *The Silmarillion,* p. 67: 'Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda
lay locked within them', and Thingol\'s

words to Beren *(ibid.* p. 167): 'though the fate of Arda lie within the
Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous'.

It is clear that the Silmarils had already gained greatly in
significance since the earliest period of the mythology (see I. 156, 169
note 2; II. 259).

In no other version is Fëanor seen on this occasion

holding flaming torches in his hands and whirling them aloft.

The lines (38-9)

Of the Three Kindreds to that

clamorous throng are none but the

Gnomes in numbers drawn

go back to the tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.162): 'Now when .
. .

\* In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is expressly stated that *Ing* and
*Finn* arc the Gnomish forms of *Inguie* and *Finwe.*

**138 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Now in *The Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor is called Finn\'s son; and in
the 'Sketch of the Mythology' Finn is given as an alternative to Finwë:

The Eldar are divided into three hosts, one under

Ingwë (Ing) \..., one under Finwë (Finn) after called the Noldoli. . .\*

Thus Fëanor has become Fingolfin\'s brother:

(Only in a later note to lines 1713-20 of *The Children of* *Húrin* has
Finwë\'s third son Finrod appeared, father of Felagund, Angrod, Egnor,
and Orodreth.)

Fëanor\'s speech also contains a curious foreknowledge of the making of
the Sun and Moon (92---6):

The woods of the world whose wide

mansions yet in darkness dream

drowned in slumber, the pathless

plains and perilous shores no moon

yet shines on nor mounting dawn in

dew and daylight hath drenched for

ever

Very notable are Fëanor\'s concluding words (117-18):

till I find those fair ones, where the

fate is hid of the folk of Elfland and

their fortune locked

Cf. *The Silmarillion,* p. 67: 'Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda
lay locked within them', and Thingol\'s

words to Beren *(ibid.* p. 167): 'though the fate of Arda lie within the
Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous'.

It is clear that the Silmarils had already gained greatly in
significance since the earliest period of the mythology (see I. 156, 169
note 2; II. 259).

In no other version is Fëanor seen on this occasion

holding flaming torches in his hands and whirling them aloft.

The lines (38-9)

Of the Three Kindreds to that

clamorous throng are none but the

Gnomes in numbers drawn

go back to the tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.162): 'Now when .
. .

\* In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is expressly stated that *Ing* and
*Finn* arc the Gnomish forms of *Inguie* and *Finwe.*

**138 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Now in *The Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor is called Finn\'s son; and in
the 'Sketch of the Mythology' Finn is given as an alternative to Finwë:

The Eldar are divided into three hosts, one under

Ingwë (Ing) \..., one under Finwë (Finn) after called the Noldoli. . .\*

Thus Fëanor has become Fingolfin\'s brother:

(Only in a later note to lines 1713-20 of *The Children of* *Húrin* has
Finwë\'s third son Finrod appeared, father of Felagund, Angrod, Egnor,
and Orodreth.)

Fëanor\'s speech also contains a curious foreknowledge of the making of
the Sun and Moon (92---6):

The woods of the world whose wide

mansions yet in darkness dream

drowned in slumber, the pathless

plains and perilous shores no moon

yet shines on nor mounting dawn in

dew and daylight hath drenched for

ever

Very notable are Fëanor\'s concluding words (117-18):

till I find those fair ones, where the

fate is hid of the folk of Elfland and

their fortune locked

Cf. *The Silmarillion,* p. 67: 'Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda
lay locked within them', and Thingol\'s

words to Beren *(ibid.* p. 167): 'though the fate of Arda lie within the
Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous'.

It is clear that the Silmarils had already gained greatly in
significance since the earliest period of the mythology (see I. 156, 169
note 2; II. 259).

In no other version is Fëanor seen on this occasion

holding flaming torches in his hands and whirling them aloft.

The lines (38-9)

Of the Three Kindreds to that

clamorous throng are none but the

Gnomes in numbers drawn

go back to the tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.162): 'Now when .
. .

\* In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is expressly stated that *Ing* and
*Finn* arc the Gnomish forms of *Inguie* and *Finwe.*

**138 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Now in *The Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor is called Finn\'s son; and in
the 'Sketch of the Mythology' Finn is given as an alternative to Finwë:

The Eldar are divided into three hosts, one under

Ingwë (Ing) \..., one under Finwë (Finn) after called the Noldoli. . .\*

Thus Fëanor has become Fingolfin\'s brother:

(Only in a later note to lines 1713-20 of *The Children of* *Húrin* has
Finwë\'s third son Finrod appeared, father of Felagund, Angrod, Egnor,
and Orodreth.)

Fëanor\'s speech also contains a curious foreknowledge of the making of
the Sun and Moon (92---6):

The woods of the world whose wide

mansions yet in darkness dream

drowned in slumber, the pathless

plains and perilous shores no moon

yet shines on nor mounting dawn in

dew and daylight hath drenched for

ever

Very notable are Fëanor\'s concluding words (117-18):

till I find those fair ones, where the

fate is hid of the folk of Elfland and

their fortune locked

Cf. *The Silmarillion,* p. 67: 'Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda
lay locked within them', and Thingol\'s

words to Beren *(ibid.* p. 167): 'though the fate of Arda lie within the
Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous'.

It is clear that the Silmarils had already gained greatly in
significance since the earliest period of the mythology (see I. 156, 169
note 2; II. 259).

In no other version is Fëanor seen on this occasion

holding flaming torches in his hands and whirling them aloft.

The lines (38-9)

Of the Three Kindreds to that

clamorous throng are none but the

Gnomes in numbers drawn

go back to the tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.162): 'Now when .
. .

\* In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is expressly stated that *Ing* and
*Finn* arc the Gnomish forms of *Inguie* and *Finwe.*

**138 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Now in *The Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor is called Finn\'s son; and in
the 'Sketch of the Mythology' Finn is given as an alternative to Finwë:

The Eldar are divided into three hosts, one under

Ingwë (Ing) \..., one under Finwë (Finn) after called the Noldoli. . .\*

Thus Fëanor has become Fingolfin\'s brother:

(Only in a later note to lines 1713-20 of *The Children of* *Húrin* has
Finwë\'s third son Finrod appeared, father of Felagund, Angrod, Egnor,
and Orodreth.)

Fëanor\'s speech also contains a curious foreknowledge of the making of
the Sun and Moon (92---6):

The woods of the world whose wide

mansions yet in darkness dream

drowned in slumber, the pathless

plains and perilous shores no moon

yet shines on nor mounting dawn in

dew and daylight hath drenched for

ever

Very notable are Fëanor\'s concluding words (117-18):

till I find those fair ones, where the

fate is hid of the folk of Elfland and

their fortune locked

Cf. *The Silmarillion,* p. 67: 'Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda
lay locked within them', and Thingol\'s

words to Beren *(ibid.* p. 167): 'though the fate of Arda lie within the
Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous'.

It is clear that the Silmarils had already gained greatly in
significance since the earliest period of the mythology (see I. 156, 169
note 2; II. 259).

In no other version is Fëanor seen on this occasion

holding flaming torches in his hands and whirling them aloft.

The lines (38-9)

Of the Three Kindreds to that

clamorous throng are none but the

Gnomes in numbers drawn

go back to the tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.162): 'Now when .
. .

\* In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is expressly stated that *Ing* and
*Finn* arc the Gnomish forms of *Inguie* and *Finwe.*

**138 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Now in *The Flight of the Noldoli* Fëanor is called Finn\'s son; and in
the 'Sketch of the Mythology' Finn is given as an alternative to Finwë:

The Eldar are divided into three hosts, one under

Ingwë (Ing) \..., one under Finwë (Finn) after called the Noldoli. . .\*

Thus Fëanor has become Fingolfin\'s brother:

(Only in a later note to lines 1713-20 of *The Children of* *Húrin* has
Finwë\'s third son Finrod appeared, father of Felagund, Angrod, Egnor,
and Orodreth.)

Fëanor\'s speech also contains a curious foreknowledge of the making of
the Sun and Moon (92---6):

The woods of the world whose wide

mansions yet in darkness dream

drowned in slumber, the pathless

plains and perilous shores no moon

yet shines on nor mounting dawn in

dew and daylight hath drenched for

ever

Very notable are Fëanor\'s concluding words (117-18):

till I find those fair ones, where the

fate is hid of the folk of Elfland and

their fortune locked

Cf. *The Silmarillion,* p. 67: 'Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda
lay locked within them', and Thingol\'s

words to Beren *(ibid.* p. 167): 'though the fate of Arda lie within the
Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous'.

It is clear that the Silmarils had already gained greatly in
significance since the earliest period of the mythology (see I. 156, 169
note 2; II. 259).

In no other version is Fëanor seen on this occasion

holding flaming torches in his hands and whirling them aloft.

The lines (38-9)

Of the Three Kindreds to that

clamorous throng are none but the

Gnomes in numbers drawn

go back to the tale of *The Flight of the Noldoli* (1.162): 'Now when .
. .

\* In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is expressly stated that *Ing* and
*Finn* arc the Gnomish forms of *Inguie* and *Finwe.*

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 139**

Fëanor sees that far the most of the company is of the kin of the
Noldor', on which I noted (1.169) 'It is to be remembered that in the
old story the Teleri (i.e. the later Vanyar) had not departed from Kôr.'
Later evidence shows that the old story had not been changed; but the
fact that in the present poem *the Elves of Ing* (Ingwë) were on
Timbrenting (Taniquetil) in the mansions of Manwë and Varda shows the
entry of the later narrative (found in the 'Sketch') of the destruction
of the Trees. In the old tale of *The Theft of Melko and the Darkening
of Valinor* (1.143 ff. and commentary I. 157) the great festival was the
occasion of Melko\'s attack on the place of the Gnomes\' banishment
northward in Valinor, the slaying of Fëanor\'s father, and the theft of
the Silmarils; and the destruction of the Trees followed some time
afterwards. Now however the festival is the occasion of the attack on
the Trees; the First Kindred are on Taniquetil but most of the Gnomes
are not.

The name by which Varda is here called, Bridhil the Blessed (changed in
C to Bredhil), is found in the old Gnomish dictionary, and also
Timbridhil (1.269, 273\> entries *Tinwetári, Varda).* On *Timbrenting*
see p. 127, where the form *Tindbrenting* occurring in *The Children of*
*Húrin* (in a note to second version line 812) is discussed. Both forms
are found in the 'Sketch':

Timbrenting or Tindbrenting in English, Tengwethil in Gnomish,
Taniquetil in Elfin.

The form with *-m-* is therefore evidently due to a change of
pronunciation in English, *ndb \> mb.*

In line 41 the earlier reading *starlit domes,* changed to *starry*
*gardens,* is probably to be related to the account in the tale of *The*
*Coming of the Valar and the Building of Valinor* of Manwë\'s abode on
Taniquetil (1. 73):

That house was builded of marbles white and blue and stood amid the
fields of snow, and its roofs were made of a web of that blue air called
*ilwë* that is above the white and grey. This web did Aulë and his wife
contrive, but Varda spangled it with stars, and Manwë dwelt thereunder.

This idea of a roof lit with stars was never lost and appears in a
changed form long after, though it is not mentioned in *The
Silmarillion.*

The lines (21-3)

The dim fingers

of fog came floating from the formless waste

and sunless seas

find an echo in *The Silmarillion* (p. 76):

it blew chill from the East in that hour, and the vast shadows of the
sea **were** rolled against the walls of the shore.

**140 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

![](images/000053.png){.calibre1}

The lines at the end of the A-text (note to line 146) show that
Fingolfin has taken Finwë Nólemë\'s place as the voice of reason and
moderation amid the revolutionary enthusiasm of the Noldoli in the great
square of Kor(seel. 162, 171).

Lastly may be noticed the term 'Foam-riders\' used (line 52) of the
Third Kindred (the Solosimpi of the *Lost Tales,* later the Teleri);
this has been used once before, in *Ǽlfwine of England* (II. 314), where
it is said of Ǽlfwine\'s mother Éadgifu that when he was born

the Foamriders, the Elves of the Sea-marge, whom she had known of old in
Lionesse, sent messengers to his birth.

*Analysis of the metre of the poem*

At the end of the second text (B) of *The Flight of the Noldoli* my
father made an analysis of the metrical forms of the first 20 and
certain subsequent lines. For his analysis and explanation of the Old
English metre see *On Translating Beowulf,* in *The Monsters and the
Critics and Other* *Essays,* 1983, pp. 61 ff. The letters A, + A, B, C,
D, E on the left-hand side of the table refer to the 'types\' of Old
English half-line; the letters beneath the analyses of 'lifts\' and
'dips\' are the alliterations employed in each line, with O used for any
vowel (since all vowels 'alliterate' with each other) and X for a
consonant beginning a lift but not forming part of the alliterative
scheme of the line; the words 'full', 'simple', etc. refer to the nature
of the alliterative pattern in each case.

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 141**

![](images/000054.png){.calibre1}

It may be noticed that the scansion of the first half of line 8 (with
the first lift *-goli-)* shows that the primary stress fell on the
second syllable of *Ungóliant;* and that *sp* can only alliterate with
*sp* (lines 9, 130), as in Old English (the same is of course true of
*sh,* which is a separate consonant).

\(ii\) *Fragment of an alliterative Lay of Earendel*

There exists one other piece of alliterative verse concerned with the
matter of the *Lost Tales,* the opening of a poem that has no title and
does not extend far enough to make clear what its subject was to be. The
fall of Gondolin, the escape of the fugitives down the secret tunnel,
the fight at Cristhorn, and the long wandering in the wilds thereafter,
are passed over rapidly in what were to be the introductory lines, and
the subject seems about to appear at the end of the fragment:

all this have others in ancient stories

and songs unfolded, but say I further . . .

and the concluding lines refer to the sojourn of the fugitives in the
Land of Willows. But at the end of the text my father wrote several
times in different scripts 'Earendel', 'Earendel son of Fengel',
'Earendel Fengelsson'; and I think it extremely likely, even almost
certain, that this poem was to be a Lay of Earendel. (On Fengel see the
next section.) **POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 141**

![](images/000055.png){.calibre1}

v3 - 0141-1.jpg

It may be noticed that the scansion of the first half of line 8 (with
the first lift *-goli-)* shows that the primary stress fell on the
second syllable of *Ungóliant;* and that *sp* can only alliterate with
*sp* (lines 9, 130), as in Old English (the same is of course true of
*sh,* which is a separate consonant).

\(ii\) *Fragment of an alliterative Lay of Earendel*

There exists one other piece of alliterative verse concerned with the
matter of the *Lost Tales,* the opening of a poem that has no title and
does not extend far enough to make clear what its subject was to be. The
fall of Gondolin, the escape of the fugitives down the secret tunnel,
the fight at Cristhorn, and the long wandering in the wilds thereafter,
are passed over rapidly in what were to be the introductory lines, and
the subject seems about to appear at the end of the fragment:

all this have others in ancient stories

and songs unfolded, but say I further . . .

and the concluding lines refer to the sojourn of the fugitives in the
Land of Willows. But at the end of the text my father wrote several
times in different scripts 'Earendel', 'Earendel son of Fengel',
'Earendel Fengelsson'; and I think it extremely likely, even almost
certain, that this poem was to be a Lay of Earendel. (On Fengel see the
next section.) **142 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

The text is in the first stage of composition and is exceedingly rough,
but it contains one line of the utmost interest for the history of
Earendel.

It is written on examination paper from the University of Leeds and
clearly belongs in time with *The Lay of the Children of Húrin* and
*The* *Flight of the Noldoli:* more than that seems impossible to say.

Lo! the flame of fire and fierce hatred

engulfed Gondolin and its glory fell,

its tapering towers and its tall rooftops

were laid all low, and its leaping fountains

made no music more on the mount of Gwareth, 5

and its whitehewn walls were whispering ash.

{But Wade of the Helsings wearyhearted

Tûr the earthborn was tried in battle}

from the wrack and ruin a remnant led

women and children and wailing maidens

and wounded men of the withered folk 10

down the path unproven that pierced the hillside,

neath Tumladin he led them to the leaguer of hills

that rose up rugged as ranged pinnacles

to the north of the vale. There the narrow way

of Cristhorn was cloven, the Cleft of Eagles, 15

through the midmost mountains. And more is told

in lays and in legend and lore of others

of that weary way of the wandering folk;

how the waifs of Gondolin outwitted Melko,

vanished o\'er the vale and vanquished the hills, 20

how Glorfindel the golden in the gap of the Eagles

battled with the Balrog and both were slain:

one like flash of fire from fangéd rock,

one like bolted thunder black was smitten

to the dreadful deep digged by Thornsir. 25

Of the thirst and hunger of the thirty moons

when they sought for Sirion and were sore bestead

by plague and peril; of the Pools of Twilight

and Land of Willows; when their lamentation

was heard in the halls where the high Gods sate 30

veiled in Valinor . . the Vanished Isles;

all this have others in ancient stories

and songs unfolded, but say I further

how their lot was lightened, how they laid them down

in long grasses of the Land of Willows. 35

There sun was softer, . . . the sweet breezes

and whispering winds, there wells of slumber

and the dew enchanted

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 143**

**NOTES**

25 The next lines are

where stony-voiced that stream of Eagles

runs o\'er the rocky

but the second of these is struck out and the first left without
continuation.

31 The second half-line was written *in the Vanished Isles,* but *in*
was struck out and replaced by a word that I cannot interpret.

36 The second half-line was written *and the sweet breezes,* but *and*
was struck out and replaced by some other word, possibly *then.*

Commentary

For the form *Tûr* see II. 148, 260.

In the tale of *The Fall of Gondolin* Cristhorn, the Eagles\' Cleft, was
in the Encircling Mountains south of Gondolin, and the secret tunnel led
southwards from the city (II. 167-8 etc.); but from line 14 of this
fragment it is seen that the change to the north had already entered the
legend.

Lines 26---7 *(the thirty moons 'when they sought for Sirion)* go back
to *the Fall of Gondolin,* where it is said that the fugitives wandered

'a year and more' in the wastes (see II. 195, 214).

The reading of line 7 as first written (it was not struck out, but *Tûr
the* *earthboni was tried in battle* was added in the margins): But Wade
of the Helsings wearyhearted

is remarkable. It is taken directly from the very early Old English poem
*Widsith,* where occurs the line *Wada Hǽlsingum,* sc. *Wada \[weold\]*

*Hǽlsingum,* 'Wada ruled the Hǽlsingas'. One may well wonder why the
mysterious figure of Wade should appear here in Tuor\'s place, and
indeed I cannot explain it: but whatever the reason, the association of
Wade with Tuor is not casual. Of the original story of Wade almost
nothing is known; but he survived in popular recollection through the
Middle Ages and later - he is mentioned by Malory as a mighty being, and
Chaucer refers to 'Wade\'s boat' in *The Merchant\'s Tale;* in *Troilus*
*and Crisyede* Pandare told a 'tale of Wade'. R. W. Chambers *(Widsith,*
Cambridge 1912, p. 95) said that Wade was perhaps 'originally a
sea-giant, dreaded and honoured by the coast tribes of the North Sea and
the Baltic'; and the tribe of the Hǽlsingas over which he is said to
have ruled in *Widsith* is supposed to have left its name in Helsingör
(Elsinore) in Denmark and in Helsingfors in Finland. Chambers summed up
what few generalities he thought might be made from the scattered
references in English and German as follows:

144 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

We find these common characteristics, which we may assume belonged to
their ancient prototype, Wada of the Hǽlsingas: (1) Power over the sea.

\(2\) Extraordinary strength - often typified by superhuman stature.

\(3\) The use of these powers to help those whom Wade favours.

. . . Probably he grew out of the figure, not of a historic chief, but
of a supernatural power, who had no story all his own, and who
interested mortal men only when he interfered in their concerns. Hence
he is essentially a helper in time of need; and we may be fairly
confident that already in the oldest lays he possessed this character.

Most interesting, however, is the fact that in Speght\'s annotations to
Chaucer (1598) he said:

Concerning Wade and his bóte *Guingelot,* as also his strange exploits
in the same, because the matter is long and fabulous, I passe it over.

The likeness of *Guingelot* to *Wingelot* is sufficiently striking; but
when we place together the facts that Wingelot was Eärendel\'s ship,\*
that Earendel was Tuor\'s son, that Tuor was peculiarly associated with
the sea, and that here 'Wade of the Helsings' stands in the place of
Tuor, coincidence is ruled out. *Wingelot* was derived from Wade\'s boat
*Guingelot* as certainly, I think, as was Earendel from the Old English
figure (this latter being a fact expressly stated by my father, II.
309).

Why my father should have intruded 'Wade of the Helsings' into the
verses at this point is another question. It may conceivably have been
unintentional --- the words *Wada Hsdsingum* were running in his mind
(though in that case one might expect that he would have struck the line
out and not merely written another line against it as an alternative):
but at any rate the reason why they were running in his mind is clear,
and this possibility in no way diminishes the demonstrative value of the
line that *Wingelot* was derived from *Guingelot,* and that there was a
connection of greater significance than the mere taking over of a name -
just as in the case of Earendel.

\(iii\) *The Lay of the Fall of Gondolin*

This was the title that late in his life my father wrote on the bundle
of papers constituting the abandoned beginning of this poem; but it
seems that it was not conceived on a large scale, since the narrative
had reached

•In which he undertook 'fabulous exploits\'. It is conceivable that
there was some connection between Earendel\'s great world-girdling
voyage and the travels of Wade as described by the twelfth-century
English writer Walter Map, who tells how *Gado* (sc. Wade) journeyed in
his boat to the furthest Indies.

144 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

We find these common characteristics, which we may assume belonged to
their ancient prototype, Wada of the Hǽlsingas: (1) Power over the sea.

\(2\) Extraordinary strength - often typified by superhuman stature.

\(3\) The use of these powers to help those whom Wade favours.

. . . Probably he grew out of the figure, not of a historic chief, but
of a supernatural power, who had no story all his own, and who
interested mortal men only when he interfered in their concerns. Hence
he is essentially a helper in time of need; and we may be fairly
confident that already in the oldest lays he possessed this character.

Most interesting, however, is the fact that in Speght\'s annotations to
Chaucer (1598) he said:

Concerning Wade and his bóte *Guingelot,* as also his strange exploits
in the same, because the matter is long and fabulous, I passe it over.

The likeness of *Guingelot* to *Wingelot* is sufficiently striking; but
when we place together the facts that Wingelot was Eärendel\'s ship,\*
that Earendel was Tuor\'s son, that Tuor was peculiarly associated with
the sea, and that here 'Wade of the Helsings' stands in the place of
Tuor, coincidence is ruled out. *Wingelot* was derived from Wade\'s boat
*Guingelot* as certainly, I think, as was Earendel from the Old English
figure (this latter being a fact expressly stated by my father, II.
309).

Why my father should have intruded 'Wade of the Helsings' into the
verses at this point is another question. It may conceivably have been
unintentional --- the words *Wada Hsdsingum* were running in his mind
(though in that case one might expect that he would have struck the line
out and not merely written another line against it as an alternative):
but at any rate the reason why they were running in his mind is clear,
and this possibility in no way diminishes the demonstrative value of the
line that *Wingelot* was derived from *Guingelot,* and that there was a
connection of greater significance than the mere taking over of a name -
just as in the case of Earendel.

\(iii\) *The Lay of the Fall of Gondolin*

This was the title that late in his life my father wrote on the bundle
of papers constituting the abandoned beginning of this poem; but it
seems that it was not conceived on a large scale, since the narrative
had reached

•In which he undertook 'fabulous exploits\'. It is conceivable that
there was some connection between Earendel\'s great world-girdling
voyage and the travels of Wade as described by the twelfth-century
English writer Walter Map, who tells how *Gado* (sc. Wade) journeyed in
his boat to the furthest Indies.

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 145**

the dragon-fire arising over the northern heights already within 130
lines.

That he composed it while at the University of Leeds is certain, but I
strongly suspect that it was the first versification of matter from the
*Lost* *Tales* undertaken, before he turned to the alliterative line.
The story, so far as it goes, has undergone virtually no development
from the prose tale of *The Fall of Gondolin,* and the closeness of the
Lay to the Tale can be seen from this comparison (though the passage is
exceptional): (Tale, II. 158)

Rejoice that ye have found it, for behold before you the City of Seven
Names where all who war with Melko may find hope.'

![](images/000056.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000057.png){.calibre1}

Then said Tuor: 'What be those names?' And the chief of the Guard made
answer: "Tis said and \'tis sung: "Gondobar am I called and
Gondothlimbar, City of Stone and City of the Dwellers in Stone, &c.

(Lay) Rejoice that ye have found it and rest from endless war, For the
seven-named city \'tis that stands upon the hill, Where all who strive
with Morgoth find hope and valour still.'

'What be those names,' said Tuor, 'for I come from long afar?'

"Tis said and \'tis sung,' one answered, '"My name is Gondobar And
Gondothlimbar also, the City hewn of Stone,

The fortress of the Gnome-folk who dwell in Halls of Stone, &c.

I do not give this poem *in extenso* here, since it does not, so far as
the main narrative is concerned, add anything to the Tale; and my father
found, as I think, the metrical form unsuitable to the purpose. There
are, however, several passages of interest for the study of the larger
development of the legends.

In the *Tale,* Tuor was the son of Peleg (who was the son of Indor,
11.160), but here he is the son of Fengel; while on a scrap of paper
giving rough workings of the passage cited above\* Tuor himself is
called Fengel

\- cf. 'Earendel son of Fengel' at the end of the fragment of an
Earendel Lay, p. 141. Long afterwards Fengel was the name of the
fifteenth King of Rohan in the Third Age, grandfather of Théoden, and
there it is the Old English *nounfengel* 'king, prince'.

Therearesome puzzling statements made concerning Fingolfin, whose
appearance here, I feel certain, is earlier than those in the
alliterative poems; and the passage in which he appears introduces also
the story of Isfin and Eöl.

**"This is the page referred to in *Unfinished Tales p.*** **4: 'some
lines of verse in which** **appear the Seven Names of Gondolin arc
scribbled on the back of a piece of paper setting** **out "the chain of
responsibility in a battalion".' Not knowing at that time where this**
**isolated**

**scrap came from I took this as an indication of very early date, but
this is certainly** **mistaken:**

**the paper must have survived and been used years later for rough
writing.**

**146 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Lo, that prince of Gondobar

\[Meglin\] dark Eöl\'s son whom Isfin, in a mountain

dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s forest, the white-limbed maiden
bare, the daughter of Fingolfin,

Gelmir\'s mighty heir. 'Twas the bent blades of the

Glamhoth that drank Fingolfin\'s life as he stood

alone by Fëanor; but his maiden and his wife were

wildered as they sought him in the forests of the

night, in the pathless woods of Doriath, so dark that as a light of
palely mirrored moonsheen were their

slender elfin limbs straying among the black holes

where only the dim bat skims from Thû\'s dark-

delved caverns. There Eöl saw that sheen and he

caught the white-limbed Isfin, that she ever since

hath been his mate in Doriath\'s forest, where she

weepeth in the gloam; for the Dark Elves were his

kindred that wander without home. Meglin she sent

to Gondolin, and his honour there was high as the

latest seed of Fingolfin, whose glory shall not die; a lordship he won
of the Gnome-folk who quarry deep

in the earth, seeking their ancient jewels; but little was his mirth,
and dark he was and secret and his

hair as the strands of night that are tangled in Taur Fuin\* the forest
without light.

In the *Lost Tales* Finwë Nólemë, first Lord of the Noldoli, was the
father of Turgon (and so of Isfin, who was Turgon\'s sister), I. 115;
Finwë Nólemë was slain in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and his heart
cut out by Orcs, but Turgon rescued the body and heart of his

father, and the Scarlet Heart became his grim emblem (I.

241, II. 172). Finwë Nólemë is also called Fingolma (I. 238---9, II.
220).

In the alliterative poems Fingolfin is the son of Finwë (Finweg) and the
father of Turgon, and also of Finweg (\> Fingon), as he was to remain
(see p. 137). Thus: *(slain in the*

*Battle of*

*Unnumbered*

*Tears)*

But whereas in the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* Fingolfin has

**\* *Taur Fuin*** **is the form in the *Lost Tales*; it was** **here
emended later to *Taur-na-Fuin*, which is the** **form from the first in
*The Children of Húrin.***

**146 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Lo, that prince of Gondobar

\[Meglin\] dark Eöl\'s son whom Isfin, in a mountain

dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s forest, the white-limbed maiden
bare, the daughter of Fingolfin,

Gelmir\'s mighty heir. 'Twas the bent blades of the

Glamhoth that drank Fingolfin\'s life as he stood

alone by Fëanor; but his maiden and his wife were

wildered as they sought him in the forests of the

night, in the pathless woods of Doriath, so dark that as a light of
palely mirrored moonsheen were their

slender elfin limbs straying among the black holes

where only the dim bat skims from Thû\'s dark-

delved caverns. There Eöl saw that sheen and he

caught the white-limbed Isfin, that she ever since

hath been his mate in Doriath\'s forest, where she

weepeth in the gloam; for the Dark Elves were his

kindred that wander without home. Meglin she sent

to Gondolin, and his honour there was high as the

latest seed of Fingolfin, whose glory shall not die; a lordship he won
of the Gnome-folk who quarry deep

in the earth, seeking their ancient jewels; but little was his mirth,
and dark he was and secret and his

hair as the strands of night that are tangled in Taur Fuin\* the forest
without light.

In the *Lost Tales* Finwë Nólemë, first Lord of the Noldoli, was the
father of Turgon (and so of Isfin, who was Turgon\'s sister), I. 115;
Finwë Nólemë was slain in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and his heart
cut out by Orcs, but Turgon rescued the body and heart of his

father, and the Scarlet Heart became his grim emblem (I.

241, II. 172). Finwë Nólemë is also called Fingolma (I. 238---9, II.
220).

In the alliterative poems Fingolfin is the son of Finwë (Finweg) and the
father of Turgon, and also of Finweg (\> Fingon), as he was to remain
(see p. 137). Thus: *(slain in the*

*Battle of*

*Unnumbered*

*Tears)*

But whereas in the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* Fingolfin has

**\* *Taur Fuin*** **is the form in the *Lost Tales*; it was** **here
emended later to *Taur-na-Fuin*, which is the** **form from the first in
*The Children of Húrin.***

**146 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Lo, that prince of Gondobar

\[Meglin\] dark Eöl\'s son whom Isfin, in a mountain

dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s forest, the white-limbed maiden
bare, the daughter of Fingolfin,

Gelmir\'s mighty heir. 'Twas the bent blades of the

Glamhoth that drank Fingolfin\'s life as he stood

alone by Fëanor; but his maiden and his wife were

wildered as they sought him in the forests of the

night, in the pathless woods of Doriath, so dark that as a light of
palely mirrored moonsheen were their

slender elfin limbs straying among the black holes

where only the dim bat skims from Thû\'s dark-

delved caverns. There Eöl saw that sheen and he

caught the white-limbed Isfin, that she ever since

hath been his mate in Doriath\'s forest, where she

weepeth in the gloam; for the Dark Elves were his

kindred that wander without home. Meglin she sent

![](images/000058.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000061.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000062.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000063.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000064.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000065.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000066.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000067.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000068.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000059.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000060.png){.calibre1}

to Gondolin, and his honour

there was high as the latest seed of Fingolfin, whose glory shall not
die; a lordship he won of the Gnome-folk who quarry deep in the earth,
seeking their

ancient jewels; but little was his mirth, and dark he was and secret and
his hair as the strands of night

that are tangled in Taur Fuin\* the forest without

light.

In the *Lost Tales* Finwë Nólemë, first Lord of the Noldoli, was the
father of Turgon (and so of Isfin, who was Turgon\'s sister), I. 115;
Finwë Nólemë was slain in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and his heart
cut out by Orcs, but Turgon rescued the body and heart of his

father, and the Scarlet Heart became his grim emblem (I.

241, II. 172). Finwë Nólemë is also called Fingolma (I. 238---9, II.
220).

In the alliterative poems Fingolfin is the son of Finwë (Finweg) and the
father of Turgon, and also of Finweg (\> Fingon), as he was to remain
(see p. 137). Thus: *(slain in the*

*Battle of*

*Unnumbered*

*Tears)*

But whereas in the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* Fingolfin has

**\* *Taur Fuin*** **is the form in the *Lost Tales*; it was** **here
emended later to *Taur-na-Fuin*, which is the** **form from the first in
*The Children of Húrin.***

**146 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Lo, that prince of Gondobar

\[Meglin\] dark Eöl\'s son whom Isfin, in a mountain

dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s forest, the white-limbed maiden
bare, the daughter of Fingolfin,

Gelmir\'s mighty heir. 'Twas the bent blades of the

Glamhoth that drank Fingolfin\'s life as he stood

alone by Fëanor; but his maiden and his wife were

wildered as they sought him in the forests of the
:::

::: {#calibre_link-4 .calibre}
night, in the pathless woods of Doriath, so dark that as a light of
palely mirrored moonsheen were their

slender elfin limbs straying among the black holes

where only the dim bat skims from Thû\'s dark-

delved caverns. There Eöl saw that sheen and he

caught the white-limbed Isfin, that she ever since

hath been his mate in Doriath\'s forest, where she

weepeth in the gloam; for the Dark Elves were his

kindred that wander without home. Meglin she sent

to Gondolin, and his honour there was high as the

latest seed of Fingolfin, whose glory shall not die; a lordship he won
of the Gnome-folk who quarry deep

in the earth, seeking their ancient jewels; but little was his mirth,
and dark he was and secret and his

hair as the strands of night that are tangled in Taur Fuin\* the forest
without light.

In the *Lost Tales* Finwë Nólemë, first Lord of the Noldoli, was the
father of Turgon (and so of Isfin, who was Turgon\'s sister), I. 115;
Finwë Nólemë was slain in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and his heart
cut out by Orcs, but Turgon rescued the body and heart of his

father, and the Scarlet Heart became his grim emblem (I.

241, II. 172). Finwë Nólemë is also called Fingolma (I. 238---9, II.
220).

In the alliterative poems Fingolfin is the son of Finwë (Finweg) and the
father of Turgon, and also of Finweg (\> Fingon), as he was to remain
(see p. 137). Thus: *(slain in the*

*Battle of*

*Unnumbered*

*Tears)*

But whereas in the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* Fingolfin has

**\* *Taur Fuin*** **is the form in the *Lost Tales*; it was** **here
emended later to *Taur-na-Fuin*, which is the** **form from the first in
*The Children of Húrin.***

**146 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Lo, that prince of Gondobar

\[Meglin\] dark Eöl\'s son whom Isfin, in a mountain

dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s forest, the white-limbed maiden
bare, the daughter of Fingolfin,

Gelmir\'s mighty heir. 'Twas the bent blades of the

Glamhoth that drank Fingolfin\'s life as he stood

alone by Fëanor; but his maiden and his wife were

wildered as they sought him in the forests of the

night, in the pathless woods of Doriath, so dark that as a light of
palely mirrored moonsheen were their

slender elfin limbs straying among the black holes

where only the dim bat skims from Thû\'s dark-

delved caverns. There Eöl saw that sheen and he

caught the white-limbed Isfin, that she ever since

hath been his mate in Doriath\'s forest, where she

weepeth in the gloam; for the Dark Elves were his

kindred that wander without home. Meglin she sent

to Gondolin, and his honour there was high as the

latest seed of Fingolfin, whose glory shall not die; a lordship he won
of the Gnome-folk who quarry deep

in the earth, seeking their ancient jewels; but little was his mirth,
and dark he was and secret and his

hair as the strands of night that are tangled in Taur Fuin\* the forest
without light.

In the *Lost Tales* Finwë Nólemë, first Lord of the Noldoli, was the
father of Turgon (and so of Isfin, who was Turgon\'s sister), I. 115;
Finwë Nólemë was slain in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and his heart
cut out by Orcs, but Turgon rescued the body and heart of his

father, and the Scarlet Heart became his grim emblem (I.

241, II. 172). Finwë Nólemë is also called Fingolma (I. 238---9, II.
220).

In the alliterative poems Fingolfin is the son of Finwë (Finweg) and the
father of Turgon, and also of Finweg (\> Fingon), as he was to remain
(see p. 137). Thus: *(slain in the*

*Battle of*

*Unnumbered*

*Tears)*

But whereas in the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* Fingolfin has

**\* *Taur Fuin*** **is the form in the *Lost Tales*; it was** **here
emended later to *Taur-na-Fuin*, which is the** **form from the first in
*The Children of Húrin.***

**146 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Lo, that prince of Gondobar

\[Meglin\] dark Eöl\'s son whom Isfin, in a mountain

dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s forest, the white-limbed maiden
bare, the daughter of Fingolfin,

Gelmir\'s mighty heir. 'Twas the bent blades of the

Glamhoth that drank Fingolfin\'s life as he stood

alone by Fëanor; but his maiden and his wife were

wildered as they sought him in the forests of the

night, in the pathless woods of Doriath, so dark that as a light of
palely mirrored moonsheen were their

slender elfin limbs straying among the black holes

where only the dim bat skims from Thû\'s dark-

delved caverns. There Eöl saw that sheen and he

caught the white-limbed Isfin, that she ever since

hath been his mate in Doriath\'s forest, where she

weepeth in the gloam; for the Dark Elves were his

kindred that wander without home. Meglin she sent

to Gondolin, and his honour there was high as the

latest seed of Fingolfin, whose glory shall not die; a lordship he won
of the Gnome-folk who quarry deep

in the earth, seeking their ancient jewels; but little was his mirth,
and dark he was and secret and his

hair as the strands of night that are tangled in Taur Fuin\* the forest
without light.

In the *Lost Tales* Finwë Nólemë, first Lord of the Noldoli, was the
father of Turgon (and so of Isfin, who was Turgon\'s sister), I. 115;
Finwë Nólemë was slain in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and his heart
cut out by Orcs, but Turgon rescued the body and heart of his

father, and the Scarlet Heart became his grim emblem (I.

241, II. 172). Finwë Nólemë is also called Fingolma (I. 238---9, II.
220).

In the alliterative poems Fingolfin is the son of Finwë (Finweg) and the
father of Turgon, and also of Finweg (\> Fingon), as he was to remain
(see p. 137). Thus: *(slain in the*

*Battle of*

*Unnumbered*

*Tears)*

But whereas in the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* Fingolfin has

**\* *Taur Fuin*** **is the form in the *Lost Tales*; it was** **here
emended later to *Taur-na-Fuin*, which is the** **form from the first in
*The Children of Húrin.***

**146 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Lo, that prince of Gondobar

\[Meglin\] dark Eöl\'s son whom Isfin, in a mountain

dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s forest, the white-limbed maiden
bare, the daughter of Fingolfin,

Gelmir\'s mighty heir. 'Twas the bent blades of the

Glamhoth that drank Fingolfin\'s life as he stood

alone by Fëanor; but his maiden and his wife were

wildered as they sought him in the forests of the

night, in the pathless woods of Doriath, so dark that as a light of
palely mirrored moonsheen were their

slender elfin limbs straying among the black holes

where only the dim bat skims from Thû\'s dark-

delved caverns. There Eöl saw that sheen and he

caught the white-limbed Isfin, that she ever since

hath been his mate in Doriath\'s forest, where she

weepeth in the gloam; for the Dark Elves were his

kindred that wander without home. Meglin she sent

to Gondolin, and his honour there was high as the

latest seed of Fingolfin, whose glory shall not die; a lordship he won
of the Gnome-folk who quarry deep

in the earth, seeking their ancient jewels; but little was his mirth,
and dark he was and secret and his

hair as the strands of night that are tangled in Taur Fuin\* the forest
without light.

In the *Lost Tales* Finwë Nólemë, first Lord of the Noldoli, was the
father of Turgon (and so of Isfin, who was Turgon\'s sister), I. 115;
Finwë Nólemë was slain in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and his heart
cut out by Orcs, but Turgon rescued the body and heart of his

father, and the Scarlet Heart became his grim emblem (I.

241, II. 172). Finwë Nólemë is also called Fingolma (I. 238---9, II.
220).

In the alliterative poems Fingolfin is the son of Finwë (Finweg) and the
father of Turgon, and also of Finweg (\> Fingon), as he was to remain
(see p. 137). Thus: *(slain in the*

*Battle of*

*Unnumbered*

*Tears)*

But whereas in the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* Fingolfin has

**\* *Taur Fuin*** **is the form in the *Lost Tales*; it was** **here
emended later to *Taur-na-Fuin*, which is the** **form from the first in
*The Children of Húrin.***

**146 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Lo, that prince of Gondobar

\[Meglin\] dark Eöl\'s son whom Isfin, in a mountain

dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s forest, the white-limbed maiden
bare, the daughter of Fingolfin,

Gelmir\'s mighty heir. 'Twas the bent blades of the

Glamhoth that drank Fingolfin\'s life as he stood

alone by Fëanor; but his maiden and his wife were

wildered as they sought him in the forests of the

night, in the pathless woods of Doriath, so dark that as a light of
palely mirrored moonsheen were their

slender elfin limbs straying among the black holes

where only the dim bat skims from Thû\'s dark-

delved caverns. There Eöl saw that sheen and he

caught the white-limbed Isfin, that she ever since

hath been his mate in Doriath\'s forest, where she

weepeth in the gloam; for the Dark Elves were his

kindred that wander without home. Meglin she sent

to Gondolin, and his honour there was high as the

latest seed of Fingolfin, whose glory shall not die; a lordship he won
of the Gnome-folk who quarry deep

in the earth, seeking their ancient jewels; but little was his mirth,
and dark he was and secret and his

hair as the strands of night that are tangled in Taur Fuin\* the forest
without light.

In the *Lost Tales* Finwë Nólemë, first Lord of the Noldoli, was the
father of Turgon (and so of Isfin, who was Turgon\'s sister), I. 115;
Finwë Nólemë was slain in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and his heart
cut out by Orcs, but Turgon rescued the body and heart of his

father, and the Scarlet Heart became his grim emblem (I.

241, II. 172). Finwë Nólemë is also called Fingolma (I. 238---9, II.
220).

In the alliterative poems Fingolfin is the son of Finwë (Finweg) and the
father of Turgon, and also of Finweg (\> Fingon), as he was to remain
(see p. 137). Thus: *(slain in the*

*Battle of*

*Unnumbered*

*Tears)*

But whereas in the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* Fingolfin has

**\* *Taur Fuin*** **is the form in the *Lost Tales*; it was** **here
emended later to *Taur-na-Fuin*, which is the** **form from the first in
*The Children of Húrin.***

**146 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Lo, that prince of Gondobar

\[Meglin\] dark Eöl\'s son whom Isfin, in a mountain

dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s forest, the white-limbed maiden
bare, the daughter of Fingolfin,

Gelmir\'s mighty heir. 'Twas the bent blades of the

Glamhoth that drank Fingolfin\'s life as he stood

alone by Fëanor; but his maiden and his wife were

wildered as they sought him in the forests of the

night, in the pathless woods of Doriath, so dark that as a light of
palely mirrored moonsheen were their

slender elfin limbs straying among the black holes

where only the dim bat skims from Thû\'s dark-

delved caverns. There Eöl saw that sheen and he

caught the white-limbed Isfin, that she ever since

hath been his mate in Doriath\'s forest, where she

weepeth in the gloam; for the Dark Elves were his

kindred that wander without home. Meglin she sent

to Gondolin, and his honour there was high as the

latest seed of Fingolfin, whose glory shall not die; a lordship he won
of the Gnome-folk who quarry deep

in the earth, seeking their ancient jewels; but little was his mirth,
and dark he was and secret and his

hair as the strands of night that are tangled in Taur Fuin\* the forest
without light.

In the *Lost Tales* Finwë Nólemë, first Lord of the Noldoli, was the
father of Turgon (and so of Isfin, who was Turgon\'s sister), I. 115;
Finwë Nólemë was slain in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and his heart
cut out by Orcs, but Turgon rescued the body and heart of his

father, and the Scarlet Heart became his grim emblem (I.

241, II. 172). Finwë Nólemë is also called Fingolma (I. 238---9, II.
220).

In the alliterative poems Fingolfin is the son of Finwë (Finweg) and the
father of Turgon, and also of Finweg (\> Fingon), as he was to remain
(see p. 137). Thus: *(slain in the*

*Battle of*

*Unnumbered*

*Tears)*

But whereas in the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* Fingolfin has

**\* *Taur Fuin*** **is the form in the *Lost Tales*; it was** **here
emended later to *Taur-na-Fuin*, which is the** **form from the first in
*The Children of Húrin.***

**146 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Lo, that prince of Gondobar

\[Meglin\] dark Eöl\'s son whom Isfin, in a mountain

dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s forest, the white-limbed maiden
bare, the daughter of Fingolfin,

Gelmir\'s mighty heir. 'Twas the bent blades of the

Glamhoth that drank Fingolfin\'s life as he stood

alone by Fëanor; but his maiden and his wife were

wildered as they sought him in the forests of the

night, in the pathless woods of Doriath, so dark that as a light of
palely mirrored moonsheen were their

slender elfin limbs straying among the black holes

where only the dim bat skims from Thû\'s dark-

delved caverns. There Eöl saw that sheen and he

caught the white-limbed Isfin, that she ever since

hath been his mate in Doriath\'s forest, where she

weepeth in the gloam; for the Dark Elves were his

kindred that wander without home. Meglin she sent

to Gondolin, and his honour there was high as the

latest seed of Fingolfin, whose glory shall not die; a lordship he won
of the Gnome-folk who quarry deep

in the earth, seeking their ancient jewels; but little was his mirth,
and dark he was and secret and his

hair as the strands of night that are tangled in Taur Fuin\* the forest
without light.

In the *Lost Tales* Finwë Nólemë, first Lord of the Noldoli, was the
father of Turgon (and so of Isfin, who was Turgon\'s sister), I. 115;
Finwë Nólemë was slain in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and his heart
cut out by Orcs, but Turgon rescued the body and heart of his

father, and the Scarlet Heart became his grim emblem (I.

241, II. 172). Finwë Nólemë is also called Fingolma (I. 238---9, II.
220).

In the alliterative poems Fingolfin is the son of Finwë (Finweg) and the
father of Turgon, and also of Finweg (\> Fingon), as he was to remain
(see p. 137). Thus: *(slain in the*

*Battle of*

*Unnumbered*

*Tears)*

But whereas in the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* Fingolfin has

**\* *Taur Fuin*** **is the form in the *Lost Tales*; it was** **here
emended later to *Taur-na-Fuin*, which is the** **form from the first in
*The Children of Húrin.***

**146 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Lo, that prince of Gondobar

\[Meglin\] dark Eöl\'s son whom Isfin, in a mountain

dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s forest, the white-limbed maiden
bare, the daughter of Fingolfin,

Gelmir\'s mighty heir. 'Twas the bent blades of the

Glamhoth that drank Fingolfin\'s life as he stood

alone by Fëanor; but his maiden and his wife were

wildered as they sought him in the forests of the

night, in the pathless woods of Doriath, so dark that as a light of
palely mirrored moonsheen were their

slender elfin limbs straying among the black holes

where only the dim bat skims from Thû\'s dark-

delved caverns. There Eöl saw that sheen and he

caught the white-limbed Isfin, that she ever since

hath been his mate in Doriath\'s forest, where she

weepeth in the gloam; for the Dark Elves were his

kindred that wander without home. Meglin she sent

to Gondolin, and his honour there was high as the

latest seed of Fingolfin, whose glory shall not die; a lordship he won
of the Gnome-folk who quarry deep

in the earth, seeking their ancient jewels; but little was his mirth,
and dark he was and secret and his

hair as the strands of night that are tangled in Taur Fuin\* the forest
without light.

In the *Lost Tales* Finwë Nólemë, first Lord of the Noldoli, was the
father of Turgon (and so of Isfin, who was Turgon\'s sister), I. 115;
Finwë Nólemë was slain in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and his heart
cut out by Orcs, but Turgon rescued the body and heart of his

father, and the Scarlet Heart became his grim emblem (I.

241, II. 172). Finwë Nólemë is also called Fingolma (I. 238---9, II.
220).

In the alliterative poems Fingolfin is the son of Finwë (Finweg) and the
father of Turgon, and also of Finweg (\> Fingon), as he was to remain
(see p. 137). Thus: *(slain in the*

*Battle of*

*Unnumbered*

*Tears)*

But whereas in the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* Fingolfin has

**\* *Taur Fuin*** **is the form in the *Lost Tales*; it was** **here
emended later to *Taur-na-Fuin*, which is the** **form from the first in
*The Children of Húrin.***

**146 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Lo, that prince of Gondobar

\[Meglin\] dark Eöl\'s son whom Isfin, in a mountain

dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s forest, the white-limbed maiden
bare, the daughter of Fingolfin,

Gelmir\'s mighty heir. 'Twas the bent blades of the

Glamhoth that drank Fingolfin\'s life as he stood

alone by Fëanor; but his maiden and his wife were

wildered as they sought him in the forests of the

night, in the pathless woods of Doriath, so dark that as a light of
palely mirrored moonsheen were their

slender elfin limbs straying among the black holes

where only the dim bat skims from Thû\'s dark-

delved caverns. There Eöl saw that sheen and he

caught the white-limbed Isfin, that she ever since

hath been his mate in Doriath\'s forest, where she

weepeth in the gloam; for the Dark Elves were his

kindred that wander without home. Meglin she sent

to Gondolin, and his honour there was high as the

latest seed of Fingolfin, whose glory shall not die; a lordship he won
of the Gnome-folk who quarry deep

in the earth, seeking their ancient jewels; but little was his mirth,
and dark he was and secret and his

hair as the strands of night that are tangled in Taur Fuin\* the forest
without light.

In the *Lost Tales* Finwë Nólemë, first Lord of the Noldoli, was the
father of Turgon (and so of Isfin, who was Turgon\'s sister), I. 115;
Finwë Nólemë was slain in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and his heart
cut out by Orcs, but Turgon rescued the body and heart of his

father, and the Scarlet Heart became his grim emblem (I.

241, II. 172). Finwë Nólemë is also called Fingolma (I. 238---9, II.
220).

In the alliterative poems Fingolfin is the son of Finwë (Finweg) and the
father of Turgon, and also of Finweg (\> Fingon), as he was to remain
(see p. 137). Thus: *(slain in the*

*Battle of*

*Unnumbered*

*Tears)*

But whereas in the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* Fingolfin has

**\* *Taur Fuin*** **is the form in the *Lost Tales*; it was** **here
emended later to *Taur-na-Fuin*, which is the** **form from the first in
*The Children of Húrin.***

**146 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Lo, that prince of Gondobar

\[Meglin\] dark Eöl\'s son whom Isfin, in a mountain

dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s forest, the white-limbed maiden
bare, the daughter of Fingolfin,

Gelmir\'s mighty heir. 'Twas the bent blades of the

Glamhoth that drank Fingolfin\'s life as he stood

alone by Fëanor; but his maiden and his wife were

wildered as they sought him in the forests of the

night, in the pathless woods of Doriath, so dark that as a light of
palely mirrored moonsheen were their

slender elfin limbs straying among the black holes

where only the dim bat skims from Thû\'s dark-

delved caverns. There Eöl saw that sheen and he

caught the white-limbed Isfin, that she ever since

hath been his mate in Doriath\'s forest, where she

weepeth in the gloam; for the Dark Elves were his

kindred that wander without home. Meglin she sent

to Gondolin, and his honour there was high as the

latest seed of Fingolfin, whose glory shall not die; a lordship he won
of the Gnome-folk who quarry deep

in the earth, seeking their ancient jewels; but little was his mirth,
and dark he was and secret and his

hair as the strands of night that are tangled in Taur Fuin\* the forest
without light.

In the *Lost Tales* Finwë Nólemë, first Lord of the Noldoli, was the
father of Turgon (and so of Isfin, who was Turgon\'s sister), I. 115;
Finwë Nólemë was slain in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and his heart
cut out by Orcs, but Turgon rescued the body and heart of his

father, and the Scarlet Heart became his grim emblem (I.

241, II. 172). Finwë Nólemë is also called Fingolma (I. 238---9, II.
220).

In the alliterative poems Fingolfin is the son of Finwë (Finweg) and the
father of Turgon, and also of Finweg (\> Fingon), as he was to remain
(see p. 137). Thus: *(slain in the*

*Battle of*

*Unnumbered*

*Tears)*

But whereas in the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* Fingolfin has

**\* *Taur Fuin*** **is the form in the *Lost Tales*; it was** **here
emended later to *Taur-na-Fuin*, which is the** **form from the first in
*The Children of Húrin.***

**146 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Lo, that prince of Gondobar

\[Meglin\] dark Eöl\'s son whom Isfin, in a mountain

![](images/000069.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000072.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000073.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000074.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000075.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000076.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000077.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000078.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000079.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000070.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000071.png){.calibre1}

dale afar in the gloom of

Doriath\'s forest, the white-limbed maiden bare, the

daughter of Fingolfin, Gelmir\'s mighty heir. 'Twas

the bent blades of the Glamhoth that drank

Fingolfin\'s life as he stood alone by Fëanor; but his maiden and his
wife were wildered as they sought

him in the forests of the night, in the pathless woods of Doriath, so
dark that as a light of palely mirrored moonsheen were their slender
elfin limbs straying

among the black holes where only the dim bat skims

from Thû\'s dark-delved caverns. There Eöl saw that

sheen and he caught the white-limbed Isfin, that she

ever since hath been his mate in Doriath\'s forest,

where she weepeth in the gloam; for the Dark Elves

were his kindred that wander without home. Meglin

she sent to Gondolin, and his honour there was high

as the latest seed of Fingolfin, whose glory shall not die; a lordship
he won of the Gnome-folk who

quarry deep in the earth, seeking their ancient

jewels; but little was his mirth, and dark he was and secret and his
hair as the strands of night that are

tangled in Taur Fuin\* the forest without light.

In the *Lost Tales* Finwë Nólemë, first Lord of the Noldoli, was the
father of Turgon (and so of Isfin, who was Turgon\'s sister), I. 115;
Finwë Nólemë was slain in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and his heart
cut out by Orcs, but Turgon rescued the body and heart of his

father, and the Scarlet Heart became his grim emblem (I.

241, II. 172). Finwë Nólemë is also called Fingolma (I. 238---9, II.
220).

In the alliterative poems Fingolfin is the son of Finwë (Finweg) and the
father of Turgon, and also of Finweg (\> Fingon), as he was to remain
(see p. 137). Thus: *(slain in the*

*Battle of*

*Unnumbered*

*Tears)*

But whereas in the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* Fingolfin has

**\* *Taur Fuin*** **is the form in the *Lost Tales*; it was** **here
emended later to *Taur-na-Fuin*, which is the** **form from the first in
*The Children of Húrin.***

**146 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Lo, that prince of Gondobar

\[Meglin\] dark Eöl\'s son whom Isfin, in a mountain

dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s forest, the white-limbed maiden
bare, the daughter of Fingolfin,

Gelmir\'s mighty heir. 'Twas the bent blades of the

Glamhoth that drank Fingolfin\'s life as he stood

alone by Fëanor; but his maiden and his wife were

wildered as they sought him in the forests of the

night, in the pathless woods of Doriath, so dark that as a light of
palely mirrored moonsheen were their

slender elfin limbs straying among the black holes

where only the dim bat skims from Thû\'s dark-

delved caverns. There Eöl saw that sheen and he

caught the white-limbed Isfin, that she ever since

hath been his mate in Doriath\'s forest, where she

weepeth in the gloam; for the Dark Elves were his

kindred that wander without home. Meglin she sent

to Gondolin, and his honour there was high as the

latest seed of Fingolfin, whose glory shall not die; a lordship he won
of the Gnome-folk who quarry deep

in the earth, seeking their ancient jewels; but little was his mirth,
and dark he was and secret and his

hair as the strands of night that are tangled in Taur Fuin\* the forest
without light.

In the *Lost Tales* Finwë Nólemë, first Lord of the Noldoli, was the
father of Turgon (and so of Isfin, who was Turgon\'s sister), I. 115;
Finwë Nólemë was slain in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and his heart
cut out by Orcs, but Turgon rescued the body and heart of his

father, and the Scarlet Heart became his grim emblem (I.

241, II. 172). Finwë Nólemë is also called Fingolma (I. 238---9, II.
220).

In the alliterative poems Fingolfin is the son of Finwë (Finweg) and the
father of Turgon, and also of Finweg (\> Fingon), as he was to remain
(see p. 137). Thus: *(slain in the*

*Battle of*

*Unnumbered*

*Tears)*

But whereas in the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* Fingolfin has

**\* *Taur Fuin*** **is the form in the *Lost Tales*; it was** **here
emended later to *Taur-na-Fuin*, which is the** **form from the first in
*The Children of Húrin.***

**146 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Lo, that prince of Gondobar

\[Meglin\] dark Eöl\'s son whom Isfin, in a mountain

dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s forest, the white-limbed maiden
bare, the daughter of Fingolfin,

Gelmir\'s mighty heir. 'Twas the bent blades of the

Glamhoth that drank Fingolfin\'s life as he stood

alone by Fëanor; but his maiden and his wife were

wildered as they sought him in the forests of the

night, in the pathless woods of Doriath, so dark that as a light of
palely mirrored moonsheen were their

slender elfin limbs straying among the black holes

where only the dim bat skims from Thû\'s dark-

delved caverns. There Eöl saw that sheen and he

caught the white-limbed Isfin, that she ever since

hath been his mate in Doriath\'s forest, where she

weepeth in the gloam; for the Dark Elves were his

kindred that wander without home. Meglin she sent

to Gondolin, and his honour there was high as the

latest seed of Fingolfin, whose glory shall not die; a lordship he won
of the Gnome-folk who quarry deep

in the earth, seeking their ancient jewels; but little was his mirth,
and dark he was and secret and his

hair as the strands of night that are tangled in Taur Fuin\* the forest
without light.

In the *Lost Tales* Finwë Nólemë, first Lord of the Noldoli, was the
father of Turgon (and so of Isfin, who was Turgon\'s sister), I. 115;
Finwë Nólemë was slain in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and his heart
cut out by Orcs, but Turgon rescued the body and heart of his

father, and the Scarlet Heart became his grim emblem (I.

241, II. 172). Finwë Nólemë is also called Fingolma (I. 238---9, II.
220).

In the alliterative poems Fingolfin is the son of Finwë (Finweg) and the
father of Turgon, and also of Finweg (\> Fingon), as he was to remain
(see p. 137). Thus: *(slain in the*

*Battle of*

*Unnumbered*

*Tears)*

But whereas in the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* Fingolfin has

**\* *Taur Fuin*** **is the form in the *Lost Tales*; it was** **here
emended later to *Taur-na-Fuin*, which is the** **form from the first in
*The Children of Húrin.***

**146 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Lo, that prince of Gondobar

\[Meglin\] dark Eöl\'s son whom Isfin, in a mountain

dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s forest, the white-limbed maiden
bare, the daughter of Fingolfin,

Gelmir\'s mighty heir. 'Twas the bent blades of the

Glamhoth that drank Fingolfin\'s life as he stood

alone by Fëanor; but his maiden and his wife were

wildered as they sought him in the forests of the

night, in the pathless woods of Doriath, so dark that as a light of
palely mirrored moonsheen were their

slender elfin limbs straying among the black holes

where only the dim bat skims from Thû\'s dark-

delved caverns. There Eöl saw that sheen and he

caught the white-limbed Isfin, that she ever since

hath been his mate in Doriath\'s forest, where she

weepeth in the gloam; for the Dark Elves were his

kindred that wander without home. Meglin she sent

to Gondolin, and his honour there was high as the

latest seed of Fingolfin, whose glory shall not die; a lordship he won
of the Gnome-folk who quarry deep

in the earth, seeking their ancient jewels; but little was his mirth,
and dark he was and secret and his

hair as the strands of night that are tangled in Taur Fuin\* the forest
without light.

In the *Lost Tales* Finwë Nólemë, first Lord of the Noldoli, was the
father of Turgon (and so of Isfin, who was Turgon\'s sister), I. 115;
Finwë Nólemë was slain in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and his heart
cut out by Orcs, but Turgon rescued the body and heart of his

father, and the Scarlet Heart became his grim emblem (I.

241, II. 172). Finwë Nólemë is also called Fingolma (I. 238---9, II.
220).

In the alliterative poems Fingolfin is the son of Finwë (Finweg) and the
father of Turgon, and also of Finweg (\> Fingon), as he was to remain
(see p. 137). Thus: *(slain in the*

*Battle of*

*Unnumbered*

*Tears)*

But whereas in the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* Fingolfin has

**\* *Taur Fuin*** **is the form in the *Lost Tales*; it was** **here
emended later to *Taur-na-Fuin*, which is the** **form from the first in
*The Children of Húrin.***

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 147**

emerged and stepped into Finwë\'s place as the father of Turgon
andIsfin,

he is not here the son of Finwë but of one *Gelmir:* In an early prose
text - one of the very few scraps (to be given in the next volume) that
bridge the gap in the prose history between the *Lost Tales* and the
'Sketch of the Mythology' - Gelmir appears as the King of the

Noldoli at the time of the flight from Valinor, and one of his sons is
there named *Golfin.*

There is too little evidence extant (if there ever was any more written
down) to penetrate with certainty the earliest evolution of the Noldorin
kings. The simplest explanation is that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/

Fingolfin = Fingolma/Finwë Nólemë, father of Fingolfin.

But it is also said in this passage that Fingolfin was slain by the
Glamhoth 'as he stood alone by Fëanor', and

whatever story lies behind this is now vanished (for the earliest, very
obscure, references to the death of Fëanor see

1.238-9).

This passage from the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* contains the first
account of the story of Eöl the Dark Elf, Isfin sister of Turgon, and
their son Meglin (for a very primitive form of the legend see II. 220).
In the prose tale of *The* *Fall of Gondolin* the story is dismissed in
the words 'that tale of Isfin and Eöl may not here be told', II. 165. In
the Lay, Fingolfin\'s wife and daughter (Isfin) *were seeking* *for him*
when Isfin was taken by Eöl. Since in the

'Sketch' Isfin was lost in Taur-na-Fuin after the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears and there trapped by Eöl, it is

possible that at this stage Fingolfin was the Elvish king who died
(beside Fëanor?) in the great battle. It is also possible that we see
here the genesis of the idea of Isfin\'s wandering in the wilds,
although of course with

subsequent shifts, whereby Fingolfin died in duel with Morgoth after the
Battle of Sudden Flame and Fingon

(Isfin\'s brother) was the Noldorin king slain in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears, the story that she was seeking her father was
abandoned. What this passage does certainly show is that the story of
Isfin\'s sending her son to

Gondolin is original, but that originally Isfin remained with her captor
Eöl and never escaped from him.

Eöl here dwells 'in a mountain dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s
forest', 'in the forests of the night', 'where only the dim bat skims
from Thû\'s dark-delved caverns\'.

This must be the earliest reference to Thû, and at any rate in connected
writing the earliest to Doriath (Artanor of the *Lost Tales).* I have
suggested (11.63) tnat m tne *Tale of* *Tinúviel*

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 147**

emerged and stepped into Finwë\'s place as the father of Turgon
andIsfin,

he is not here the son of Finwë but of one *Gelmir:* In an early prose
text - one of the very few scraps (to be given in the next volume) that
bridge the gap in the prose history between the *Lost Tales* and the
'Sketch of the Mythology' - Gelmir appears as the King of the

Noldoli at the time of the flight from Valinor, and one of his sons is
there named *Golfin.*

There is too little evidence extant (if there ever was any more written
down) to penetrate with certainty the earliest evolution of the Noldorin
kings. The simplest explanation is that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/

Fingolfin = Fingolma/Finwë Nólemë, father of Fingolfin.

But it is also said in this passage that Fingolfin was slain by the
Glamhoth 'as he stood alone by Fëanor', and

whatever story lies behind this is now vanished (for the earliest, very
obscure, references to the death of Fëanor see

1.238-9).

This passage from the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* contains the first
account of the story of Eöl the Dark Elf, Isfin sister of Turgon, and
their son Meglin (for a very primitive form of the legend see II. 220).
In the prose tale of *The* *Fall of Gondolin* the story is dismissed in
the words 'that tale of Isfin and Eöl may not here be told', II. 165. In
the Lay, Fingolfin\'s wife and daughter (Isfin) *were seeking* *for him*
when Isfin was taken by Eöl. Since in the

'Sketch' Isfin was lost in Taur-na-Fuin after the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears and there trapped by Eöl, it is

possible that at this stage Fingolfin was the Elvish king who died
(beside Fëanor?) in the great battle. It is also possible that we see
here the genesis of the idea of Isfin\'s wandering in the wilds,
although of course with

subsequent shifts, whereby Fingolfin died in duel with Morgoth after the
Battle of Sudden Flame and Fingon

(Isfin\'s brother) was the Noldorin king slain in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears, the story that she was seeking her father was
abandoned. What this passage does certainly show is that the story of
Isfin\'s sending her son to

Gondolin is original, but that originally Isfin remained with her captor
Eöl and never escaped from him.

Eöl here dwells 'in a mountain dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s
forest', 'in the forests of the night', 'where only the dim bat skims
from Thû\'s dark-delved caverns\'.

This must be the earliest reference to Thû, and at any rate in connected
writing the earliest to Doriath (Artanor of the *Lost Tales).* I have
suggested (11.63) tnat m tne *Tale of* *Tinúviel*

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 147**

emerged and stepped into Finwë\'s place as the father of Turgon
andIsfin,

he is not here the son of Finwë but of one *Gelmir:* In an early prose
text - one of the very few scraps (to be given in the next volume) that
bridge the gap in the prose history between the *Lost Tales* and the
'Sketch of the Mythology' - Gelmir appears as the King of the

Noldoli at the time of the flight from Valinor, and one of his sons is
there named *Golfin.*

There is too little evidence extant (if there ever was any more written
down) to penetrate with certainty the earliest evolution of the Noldorin
kings. The simplest explanation is that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/

Fingolfin = Fingolma/Finwë Nólemë, father of Fingolfin.

But it is also said in this passage that Fingolfin was slain by the
Glamhoth 'as he stood alone by Fëanor', and

whatever story lies behind this is now vanished (for the earliest, very
obscure, references to the death of Fëanor see

1.238-9).

This passage from the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* contains the first
account of the story of Eöl the Dark Elf, Isfin sister of Turgon, and
their son Meglin (for a very primitive form of the legend see II. 220).
In the prose tale of *The* *Fall of Gondolin* the story is dismissed in
the words 'that tale of Isfin and Eöl may not here be told', II. 165. In
the Lay, Fingolfin\'s wife and daughter (Isfin) *were seeking* *for him*
when Isfin was taken by Eöl. Since in the

'Sketch' Isfin was lost in Taur-na-Fuin after the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears and there trapped by Eöl, it is

possible that at this stage Fingolfin was the Elvish king who died
(beside Fëanor?) in the great battle. It is also possible that we see
here the genesis of the idea of Isfin\'s wandering in the wilds,
although of course with

subsequent shifts, whereby Fingolfin died in duel with Morgoth after the
Battle of Sudden Flame and Fingon

(Isfin\'s brother) was the Noldorin king slain in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears, the story that she was seeking her father was
abandoned. What this passage does certainly show is that the story of
Isfin\'s sending her son to

Gondolin is original, but that originally Isfin remained with her captor
Eöl and never escaped from him.

Eöl here dwells 'in a mountain dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s
forest', 'in the forests of the night', 'where only the dim bat skims
from Thû\'s dark-delved caverns\'.

This must be the earliest reference to Thû, and at any rate in connected
writing the earliest to Doriath (Artanor of the *Lost Tales).* I have
suggested (11.63) tnat m tne *Tale of* *Tinúviel*

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 147**

emerged and stepped into Finwë\'s place as the father of Turgon
andIsfin,

he is not here the son of Finwë but of one *Gelmir:* In an early prose
text - one of the very few scraps (to be given in the next volume) that
bridge the gap in the prose history between the *Lost Tales* and the
'Sketch of the Mythology' - Gelmir appears as the King of the

Noldoli at the time of the flight from Valinor, and one of his sons is
there named *Golfin.*

There is too little evidence extant (if there ever was any more written
down) to penetrate with certainty the earliest evolution of the Noldorin
kings. The simplest explanation is that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/

Fingolfin = Fingolma/Finwë Nólemë, father of Fingolfin.

But it is also said in this passage that Fingolfin was slain by the
Glamhoth 'as he stood alone by Fëanor', and

whatever story lies behind this is now vanished (for the earliest, very
obscure, references to the death of Fëanor see

1.238-9).

This passage from the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* contains the first
account of the story of Eöl the Dark Elf, Isfin sister of Turgon, and
their son Meglin (for a very primitive form of the legend see II. 220).
In the prose tale of *The* *Fall of Gondolin* the story is dismissed in
the words 'that tale of Isfin and Eöl may not here be told', II. 165. In
the Lay, Fingolfin\'s wife and daughter (Isfin) *were seeking* *for him*
when Isfin was taken by Eöl. Since in the

'Sketch' Isfin was lost in Taur-na-Fuin after the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears and there trapped by Eöl, it is

possible that at this stage Fingolfin was the Elvish king who died
(beside Fëanor?) in the great battle. It is also possible that we see
here the genesis of the idea of Isfin\'s wandering in the wilds,
although of course with

subsequent shifts, whereby Fingolfin died in duel with Morgoth after the
Battle of Sudden Flame and Fingon

(Isfin\'s brother) was the Noldorin king slain in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears, the story that she was seeking her father was
abandoned. What this passage does certainly show is that the story of
Isfin\'s sending her son to

Gondolin is original, but that originally Isfin remained with her captor
Eöl and never escaped from him.

Eöl here dwells 'in a mountain dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s
forest', 'in the forests of the night', 'where only the dim bat skims
from Thû\'s dark-delved caverns\'.

This must be the earliest reference to Thû, and at any rate in connected
writing the earliest to Doriath (Artanor of the *Lost Tales).* I have
suggested (11.63) tnat m tne *Tale of* *Tinúviel*

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 147**

emerged and stepped into Finwë\'s place as the father of Turgon
andIsfin,

he is not here the son of Finwë but of one *Gelmir:* In an early prose
text - one of the very few scraps (to be given in the next volume) that
bridge the gap in the prose history between the *Lost Tales* and the
'Sketch of the Mythology' - Gelmir appears as the King of the

Noldoli at the time of the flight from Valinor, and one of his sons is
there named *Golfin.*

There is too little evidence extant (if there ever was any more written
down) to penetrate with certainty the earliest evolution of the Noldorin
kings. The simplest explanation is that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/

Fingolfin = Fingolma/Finwë Nólemë, father of Fingolfin.

But it is also said in this passage that Fingolfin was slain by the
Glamhoth 'as he stood alone by Fëanor', and

whatever story lies behind this is now vanished (for the earliest, very
obscure, references to the death of Fëanor see

1.238-9).

This passage from the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* contains the first
account of the story of Eöl the Dark Elf, Isfin sister of Turgon, and
their son Meglin (for a very primitive form of the legend see II. 220).
In the prose tale of *The* *Fall of Gondolin* the story is dismissed in
the words 'that tale of Isfin and Eöl may not here be told', II. 165. In
the Lay, Fingolfin\'s wife and daughter (Isfin) *were seeking* *for him*
when Isfin was taken by Eöl. Since in the

'Sketch' Isfin was lost in Taur-na-Fuin after the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears and there trapped by Eöl, it is

possible that at this stage Fingolfin was the Elvish king who died
(beside Fëanor?) in the great battle. It is also possible that we see
here the genesis of the idea of Isfin\'s wandering in the wilds,
although of course with

subsequent shifts, whereby Fingolfin died in duel with Morgoth after the
Battle of Sudden Flame and Fingon

(Isfin\'s brother) was the Noldorin king slain in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears, the story that she was seeking her father was
abandoned. What this passage does certainly show is that the story of
Isfin\'s sending her son to

Gondolin is original, but that originally Isfin remained with her captor
Eöl and never escaped from him.

Eöl here dwells 'in a mountain dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s
forest', 'in the forests of the night', 'where only the dim bat skims
from Thû\'s dark-delved caverns\'.

This must be the earliest reference to Thû, and at any rate in connected
writing the earliest to Doriath (Artanor of the *Lost Tales).* I have
suggested (11.63) tnat m tne *Tale of* *Tinúviel*

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 147**

emerged and stepped into Finwë\'s place as the father of Turgon
andIsfin,

he is not here the son of Finwë but of one *Gelmir:* In an early prose
text - one of the very few scraps (to be given in the next volume) that
bridge the gap in the prose history between the *Lost Tales* and the
'Sketch of the Mythology' - Gelmir appears as the King of the

Noldoli at the time of the flight from Valinor, and one of his sons is
there named *Golfin.*

There is too little evidence extant (if there ever was any more written
down) to penetrate with certainty the earliest evolution of the Noldorin
kings. The simplest explanation is that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/

Fingolfin = Fingolma/Finwë Nólemë, father of Fingolfin.

But it is also said in this passage that Fingolfin was slain by the
Glamhoth 'as he stood alone by Fëanor', and

whatever story lies behind this is now vanished (for the earliest, very
obscure, references to the death of Fëanor see

1.238-9).

This passage from the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* contains the first
account of the story of Eöl the Dark Elf, Isfin sister of Turgon, and
their son Meglin (for a very primitive form of the legend see II. 220).
In the prose tale of *The* *Fall of Gondolin* the story is dismissed in
the words 'that tale of Isfin and Eöl may not here be told', II. 165. In
the Lay, Fingolfin\'s wife and daughter (Isfin) *were seeking* *for him*
when Isfin was taken by Eöl. Since in the

'Sketch' Isfin was lost in Taur-na-Fuin after the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears and there trapped by Eöl, it is

possible that at this stage Fingolfin was the Elvish king who died
(beside Fëanor?) in the great battle. It is also possible that we see
here the genesis of the idea of Isfin\'s wandering in the wilds,
although of course with

subsequent shifts, whereby Fingolfin died in duel with Morgoth after the
Battle of Sudden Flame and Fingon

(Isfin\'s brother) was the Noldorin king slain in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears, the story that she was seeking her father was
abandoned. What this passage does certainly show is that the story of
Isfin\'s sending her son to

Gondolin is original, but that originally Isfin remained with her captor
Eöl and never escaped from him.

Eöl here dwells 'in a mountain dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s
forest', 'in the forests of the night', 'where only the dim bat skims
from Thû\'s dark-delved caverns\'.

This must be the earliest reference to Thû, and at any rate in connected
writing the earliest to Doriath (Artanor of the *Lost Tales).* I have
suggested (11.63) tnat m tne *Tale of* *Tinúviel*

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 147**

emerged and stepped into Finwë\'s place as the father of Turgon
andIsfin,

he is not here the son of Finwë but of one *Gelmir:* In an early prose
text - one of the very few scraps (to be given in the next volume) that
bridge the gap in the prose history between the *Lost Tales* and the
'Sketch of the Mythology' - Gelmir appears as the King of the

Noldoli at the time of the flight from Valinor, and one of his sons is
there named *Golfin.*

There is too little evidence extant (if there ever was any more written
down) to penetrate with certainty the earliest evolution of the Noldorin
kings. The simplest explanation is that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/

Fingolfin = Fingolma/Finwë Nólemë, father of Fingolfin.

But it is also said in this passage that Fingolfin was slain by the
Glamhoth 'as he stood alone by Fëanor', and

whatever story lies behind this is now vanished (for the earliest, very
obscure, references to the death of Fëanor see

1.238-9).

This passage from the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* contains the first
account of the story of Eöl the Dark Elf, Isfin sister of Turgon, and
their son Meglin (for a very primitive form of the legend see II. 220).
In the prose tale of *The* *Fall of Gondolin* the story is dismissed in
the words 'that tale of Isfin and Eöl may not here be told', II. 165. In
the Lay, Fingolfin\'s wife and daughter (Isfin) *were seeking* *for him*
when Isfin was taken by Eöl. Since in the

'Sketch' Isfin was lost in Taur-na-Fuin after the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears and there trapped by Eöl, it is

possible that at this stage Fingolfin was the Elvish king who died
(beside Fëanor?) in the great battle. It is also possible that we see
here the genesis of the idea of Isfin\'s wandering in the wilds,
although of course with

subsequent shifts, whereby Fingolfin died in duel with Morgoth after the
Battle of Sudden Flame and Fingon

(Isfin\'s brother) was the Noldorin king slain in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears, the story that she was seeking her father was
abandoned. What this passage does certainly show is that the story of
Isfin\'s sending her son to

Gondolin is original, but that originally Isfin remained with her captor
Eöl and never escaped from him.

Eöl here dwells 'in a mountain dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s
forest', 'in the forests of the night', 'where only the dim bat skims
from Thû\'s dark-delved caverns\'.

This must be the earliest reference to Thû, and at any rate in connected
writing the earliest to Doriath (Artanor of the *Lost Tales).* I have
suggested (11.63) tnat m tne *Tale of* *Tinúviel*

![](images/000080.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000082.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000083.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000084.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000085.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000086.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000087.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000088.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000089.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000081.png){.calibre1}

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 147**

emerged and stepped into Finwë\'s place as the father of Turgon
andIsfin,

he is not here the son of Finwë but of one *Gelmir:* In an early prose
text - one of the very few scraps (to be given in the next volume) that
bridge the gap in the prose history between the *Lost Tales* and the
'Sketch of the Mythology' - Gelmir appears as the King of the

Noldoli at the time of the flight from Valinor, and one of his sons is
there named *Golfin.*

There is too little evidence extant (if there ever was any more written
down) to penetrate with certainty the earliest evolution of the Noldorin
kings. The simplest explanation is that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/

Fingolfin = Fingolma/Finwë Nólemë, father of Fingolfin.

But it is also said in this passage that Fingolfin was slain by the
Glamhoth 'as he stood alone by Fëanor', and

whatever story lies behind this is now vanished (for the earliest, very
obscure, references to the death of Fëanor see

1.238-9).

This passage from the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* contains the first
account of the story of Eöl the Dark Elf, Isfin sister of Turgon, and
their son Meglin (for a very primitive form of the legend see II. 220).
In the prose tale of *The* *Fall of Gondolin* the story is dismissed in
the words 'that tale of Isfin and Eöl may not here be told', II. 165. In
the Lay, Fingolfin\'s wife and daughter (Isfin) *were seeking* *for him*
when Isfin was taken by Eöl. Since in the

'Sketch' Isfin was lost in Taur-na-Fuin after the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears and there trapped by Eöl, it is

possible that at this stage Fingolfin was the Elvish king who died
(beside Fëanor?) in the great battle. It is also possible that we see
here the genesis of the idea of Isfin\'s wandering in the wilds,
although of course with

subsequent shifts, whereby Fingolfin died in duel with Morgoth after the
Battle of Sudden Flame and Fingon

(Isfin\'s brother) was the Noldorin king slain in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears, the story that she was seeking her father was
abandoned. What this passage does certainly show is that the story of
Isfin\'s sending her son to

Gondolin is original, but that originally Isfin remained with her captor
Eöl and never escaped from him.

Eöl here dwells 'in a mountain dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s
forest', 'in the forests of the night', 'where only the dim bat skims
from Thû\'s dark-delved caverns\'.

This must be the earliest reference to Thû, and at any rate in connected
writing the earliest to Doriath (Artanor of the *Lost Tales).* I have
suggested (11.63) tnat m tne *Tale of* *Tinúviel*

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 147**

emerged and stepped into Finwë\'s place as the father of Turgon
andIsfin,

he is not here the son of Finwë but of one *Gelmir:* In an early prose
text - one of the very few scraps (to be given in the next volume) that
bridge the gap in the prose history between the *Lost Tales* and the
'Sketch of the Mythology' - Gelmir appears as the King of the

Noldoli at the time of the flight from Valinor, and one of his sons is
there named *Golfin.*

There is too little evidence extant (if there ever was any more written
down) to penetrate with certainty the earliest evolution of the Noldorin
kings. The simplest explanation is that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/

Fingolfin = Fingolma/Finwë Nólemë, father of Fingolfin.

But it is also said in this passage that Fingolfin was slain by the
Glamhoth 'as he stood alone by Fëanor', and

whatever story lies behind this is now vanished (for the earliest, very
obscure, references to the death of Fëanor see

1.238-9).

This passage from the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* contains the first
account of the story of Eöl the Dark Elf, Isfin sister of Turgon, and
their son Meglin (for a very primitive form of the legend see II. 220).
In the prose tale of *The* *Fall of Gondolin* the story is dismissed in
the words 'that tale of Isfin and Eöl may not here be told', II. 165. In
the Lay, Fingolfin\'s wife and daughter (Isfin) *were seeking* *for him*
when Isfin was taken by Eöl. Since in the

'Sketch' Isfin was lost in Taur-na-Fuin after the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears and there trapped by Eöl, it is

possible that at this stage Fingolfin was the Elvish king who died
(beside Fëanor?) in the great battle. It is also possible that we see
here the genesis of the idea of Isfin\'s wandering in the wilds,
although of course with

subsequent shifts, whereby Fingolfin died in duel with Morgoth after the
Battle of Sudden Flame and Fingon

(Isfin\'s brother) was the Noldorin king slain in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears, the story that she was seeking her father was
abandoned. What this passage does certainly show is that the story of
Isfin\'s sending her son to

Gondolin is original, but that originally Isfin remained with her captor
Eöl and never escaped from him.

Eöl here dwells 'in a mountain dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s
forest', 'in the forests of the night', 'where only the dim bat skims
from Thû\'s dark-delved caverns\'.

This must be the earliest reference to Thû, and at any rate in connected
writing the earliest to Doriath (Artanor of the *Lost Tales).* I have
suggested (11.63) tnat m tne *Tale of* *Tinúviel*

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 147**

emerged and stepped into Finwë\'s place as the father of Turgon
andIsfin,

he is not here the son of Finwë but of one *Gelmir:* In an early prose
text - one of the very few scraps (to be given in the next volume) that
bridge the gap in the prose history between the *Lost Tales* and the
'Sketch of the Mythology' - Gelmir appears as the King of the

Noldoli at the time of the flight from Valinor, and one of his sons is
there named *Golfin.*

There is too little evidence extant (if there ever was any more written
down) to penetrate with certainty the earliest evolution of the Noldorin
kings. The simplest explanation is that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/

Fingolfin = Fingolma/Finwë Nólemë, father of Fingolfin.

But it is also said in this passage that Fingolfin was slain by the
Glamhoth 'as he stood alone by Fëanor', and

whatever story lies behind this is now vanished (for the earliest, very
obscure, references to the death of Fëanor see

1.238-9).

This passage from the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* contains the first
account of the story of Eöl the Dark Elf, Isfin sister of Turgon, and
their son Meglin (for a very primitive form of the legend see II. 220).
In the prose tale of *The* *Fall of Gondolin* the story is dismissed in
the words 'that tale of Isfin and Eöl may not here be told', II. 165. In
the Lay, Fingolfin\'s wife and daughter (Isfin) *were seeking* *for him*
when Isfin was taken by Eöl. Since in the

'Sketch' Isfin was lost in Taur-na-Fuin after the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears and there trapped by Eöl, it is

possible that at this stage Fingolfin was the Elvish king who died
(beside Fëanor?) in the great battle. It is also possible that we see
here the genesis of the idea of Isfin\'s wandering in the wilds,
although of course with

subsequent shifts, whereby Fingolfin died in duel with Morgoth after the
Battle of Sudden Flame and Fingon

(Isfin\'s brother) was the Noldorin king slain in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears, the story that she was seeking her father was
abandoned. What this passage does certainly show is that the story of
Isfin\'s sending her son to

Gondolin is original, but that originally Isfin remained with her captor
Eöl and never escaped from him.

Eöl here dwells 'in a mountain dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s
forest', 'in the forests of the night', 'where only the dim bat skims
from Thû\'s dark-delved caverns\'.

This must be the earliest reference to Thû, and at any rate in connected
writing the earliest to Doriath (Artanor of the *Lost Tales).* I have
suggested (11.63) tnat m tne *Tale of* *Tinúviel*

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 147**

emerged and stepped into Finwë\'s place as the father of Turgon
andIsfin,

he is not here the son of Finwë but of one *Gelmir:* In an early prose
text - one of the very few scraps (to be given in the next volume) that
bridge the gap in the prose history between the *Lost Tales* and the
'Sketch of the Mythology' - Gelmir appears as the King of the

Noldoli at the time of the flight from Valinor, and one of his sons is
there named *Golfin.*

There is too little evidence extant (if there ever was any more written
down) to penetrate with certainty the earliest evolution of the Noldorin
kings. The simplest explanation is that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/

Fingolfin = Fingolma/Finwë Nólemë, father of Fingolfin.

But it is also said in this passage that Fingolfin was slain by the
Glamhoth 'as he stood alone by Fëanor', and

whatever story lies behind this is now vanished (for the earliest, very
obscure, references to the death of Fëanor see

1.238-9).

This passage from the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* contains the first
account of the story of Eöl the Dark Elf, Isfin sister of Turgon, and
their son Meglin (for a very primitive form of the legend see II. 220).
In the prose tale of *The* *Fall of Gondolin* the story is dismissed in
the words 'that tale of Isfin and Eöl may not here be told', II. 165. In
the Lay, Fingolfin\'s wife and daughter (Isfin) *were seeking* *for him*
when Isfin was taken by Eöl. Since in the

'Sketch' Isfin was lost in Taur-na-Fuin after the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears and there trapped by Eöl, it is

possible that at this stage Fingolfin was the Elvish king who died
(beside Fëanor?) in the great battle. It is also possible that we see
here the genesis of the idea of Isfin\'s wandering in the wilds,
although of course with

subsequent shifts, whereby Fingolfin died in duel with Morgoth after the
Battle of Sudden Flame and Fingon

(Isfin\'s brother) was the Noldorin king slain in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears, the story that she was seeking her father was
abandoned. What this passage does certainly show is that the story of
Isfin\'s sending her son to

Gondolin is original, but that originally Isfin remained with her captor
Eöl and never escaped from him.

Eöl here dwells 'in a mountain dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s
forest', 'in the forests of the night', 'where only the dim bat skims
from Thû\'s dark-delved caverns\'.

This must be the earliest reference to Thû, and at any rate in connected
writing the earliest to Doriath (Artanor of the *Lost Tales).* I have
suggested (11.63) tnat m tne *Tale of* *Tinúviel*

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 147**

emerged and stepped into Finwë\'s place as the father of Turgon
andIsfin,

he is not here the son of Finwë but of one *Gelmir:* In an early prose
text - one of the very few scraps (to be given in the next volume) that
bridge the gap in the prose history between the *Lost Tales* and the
'Sketch of the Mythology' - Gelmir appears as the King of the

Noldoli at the time of the flight from Valinor, and one of his sons is
there named *Golfin.*

There is too little evidence extant (if there ever was any more written
down) to penetrate with certainty the earliest evolution of the Noldorin
kings. The simplest explanation is that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/

Fingolfin = Fingolma/Finwë Nólemë, father of Fingolfin.

But it is also said in this passage that Fingolfin was slain by the
Glamhoth 'as he stood alone by Fëanor', and

whatever story lies behind this is now vanished (for the earliest, very
obscure, references to the death of Fëanor see

1.238-9).

This passage from the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* contains the first
account of the story of Eöl the Dark Elf, Isfin sister of Turgon, and
their son Meglin (for a very primitive form of the legend see II. 220).
In the prose tale of *The* *Fall of Gondolin* the story is dismissed in
the words 'that tale of Isfin and Eöl may not here be told', II. 165. In
the Lay, Fingolfin\'s wife and daughter (Isfin) *were seeking* *for him*
when Isfin was taken by Eöl. Since in the

'Sketch' Isfin was lost in Taur-na-Fuin after the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears and there trapped by Eöl, it is

possible that at this stage Fingolfin was the Elvish king who died
(beside Fëanor?) in the great battle. It is also possible that we see
here the genesis of the idea of Isfin\'s wandering in the wilds,
although of course with

subsequent shifts, whereby Fingolfin died in duel with Morgoth after the
Battle of Sudden Flame and Fingon

(Isfin\'s brother) was the Noldorin king slain in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears, the story that she was seeking her father was
abandoned. What this passage does certainly show is that the story of
Isfin\'s sending her son to

Gondolin is original, but that originally Isfin remained with her captor
Eöl and never escaped from him.

Eöl here dwells 'in a mountain dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s
forest', 'in the forests of the night', 'where only the dim bat skims
from Thû\'s dark-delved caverns\'.

This must be the earliest reference to Thû, and at any rate in connected
writing the earliest to Doriath (Artanor of the *Lost Tales).* I have
suggested (11.63) tnat m tne *Tale of* *Tinúviel*

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 147**

emerged and stepped into Finwë\'s place as the father of Turgon
andIsfin,

he is not here the son of Finwë but of one *Gelmir:* In an early prose
text - one of the very few scraps (to be given in the next volume) that
bridge the gap in the prose history between the *Lost Tales* and the
'Sketch of the Mythology' - Gelmir appears as the King of the

Noldoli at the time of the flight from Valinor, and one of his sons is
there named *Golfin.*

There is too little evidence extant (if there ever was any more written
down) to penetrate with certainty the earliest evolution of the Noldorin
kings. The simplest explanation is that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/

Fingolfin = Fingolma/Finwë Nólemë, father of Fingolfin.

But it is also said in this passage that Fingolfin was slain by the
Glamhoth 'as he stood alone by Fëanor', and

whatever story lies behind this is now vanished (for the earliest, very
obscure, references to the death of Fëanor see

1.238-9).

This passage from the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* contains the first
account of the story of Eöl the Dark Elf, Isfin sister of Turgon, and
their son Meglin (for a very primitive form of the legend see II. 220).
In the prose tale of *The* *Fall of Gondolin* the story is dismissed in
the words 'that tale of Isfin and Eöl may not here be told', II. 165. In
the Lay, Fingolfin\'s wife and daughter (Isfin) *were seeking* *for him*
when Isfin was taken by Eöl. Since in the

'Sketch' Isfin was lost in Taur-na-Fuin after the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears and there trapped by Eöl, it is

possible that at this stage Fingolfin was the Elvish king who died
(beside Fëanor?) in the great battle. It is also possible that we see
here the genesis of the idea of Isfin\'s wandering in the wilds,
although of course with

subsequent shifts, whereby Fingolfin died in duel with Morgoth after the
Battle of Sudden Flame and Fingon

(Isfin\'s brother) was the Noldorin king slain in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears, the story that she was seeking her father was
abandoned. What this passage does certainly show is that the story of
Isfin\'s sending her son to

Gondolin is original, but that originally Isfin remained with her captor
Eöl and never escaped from him.

Eöl here dwells 'in a mountain dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s
forest', 'in the forests of the night', 'where only the dim bat skims
from Thû\'s dark-delved caverns\'.

This must be the earliest reference to Thû, and at any rate in connected
writing the earliest to Doriath (Artanor of the *Lost Tales).* I have
suggested (11.63) tnat m tne *Tale of* *Tinúviel*

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 147**

emerged and stepped into Finwë\'s place as the father of Turgon
andIsfin,

he is not here the son of Finwë but of one *Gelmir:* In an early prose
text - one of the very few scraps (to be given in the next volume) that
bridge the gap in the prose history between the *Lost Tales* and the
'Sketch of the Mythology' - Gelmir appears as the King of the

Noldoli at the time of the flight from Valinor, and one of his sons is
there named *Golfin.*

There is too little evidence extant (if there ever was any more written
down) to penetrate with certainty the earliest evolution of the Noldorin
kings. The simplest explanation is that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/

Fingolfin = Fingolma/Finwë Nólemë, father of Fingolfin.

But it is also said in this passage that Fingolfin was slain by the
Glamhoth 'as he stood alone by Fëanor', and

whatever story lies behind this is now vanished (for the earliest, very
obscure, references to the death of Fëanor see

1.238-9).

This passage from the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* contains the first
account of the story of Eöl the Dark Elf, Isfin sister of Turgon, and
their son Meglin (for a very primitive form of the legend see II. 220).
In the prose tale of *The* *Fall of Gondolin* the story is dismissed in
the words 'that tale of Isfin and Eöl may not here be told', II. 165. In
the Lay, Fingolfin\'s wife and daughter (Isfin) *were seeking* *for him*
when Isfin was taken by Eöl. Since in the

'Sketch' Isfin was lost in Taur-na-Fuin after the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears and there trapped by Eöl, it is

possible that at this stage Fingolfin was the Elvish king who died
(beside Fëanor?) in the great battle. It is also possible that we see
here the genesis of the idea of Isfin\'s wandering in the wilds,
although of course with

subsequent shifts, whereby Fingolfin died in duel with Morgoth after the
Battle of Sudden Flame and Fingon

(Isfin\'s brother) was the Noldorin king slain in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears, the story that she was seeking her father was
abandoned. What this passage does certainly show is that the story of
Isfin\'s sending her son to

Gondolin is original, but that originally Isfin remained with her captor
Eöl and never escaped from him.

Eöl here dwells 'in a mountain dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s
forest', 'in the forests of the night', 'where only the dim bat skims
from Thû\'s dark-delved caverns\'.

This must be the earliest reference to Thû, and at any rate in connected
writing the earliest to Doriath (Artanor of the *Lost Tales).* I have
suggested (11.63) tnat m tne *Tale of* *Tinúviel*

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 147**

emerged and stepped into Finwë\'s place as the father of Turgon
andIsfin,

he is not here the son of Finwë but of one *Gelmir:* In an early prose
text - one of the very few scraps (to be given in the next volume) that
bridge the gap in the prose history between the *Lost Tales* and the
'Sketch of the Mythology' - Gelmir appears as the King of the

Noldoli at the time of the flight from Valinor, and one of his sons is
there named *Golfin.*

There is too little evidence extant (if there ever was any more written
down) to penetrate with certainty the earliest evolution of the Noldorin
kings. The simplest explanation is that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/

Fingolfin = Fingolma/Finwë Nólemë, father of Fingolfin.

But it is also said in this passage that Fingolfin was slain by the
Glamhoth 'as he stood alone by Fëanor', and

whatever story lies behind this is now vanished (for the earliest, very
obscure, references to the death of Fëanor see

1.238-9).

This passage from the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* contains the first
account of the story of Eöl the Dark Elf, Isfin sister of Turgon, and
their son Meglin (for a very primitive form of the legend see II. 220).
In the prose tale of *The* *Fall of Gondolin* the story is dismissed in
the words 'that tale of Isfin and Eöl may not here be told', II. 165. In
the Lay, Fingolfin\'s wife and daughter (Isfin) *were seeking* *for him*
when Isfin was taken by Eöl. Since in the

'Sketch' Isfin was lost in Taur-na-Fuin after the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears and there trapped by Eöl, it is

possible that at this stage Fingolfin was the Elvish king who died
(beside Fëanor?) in the great battle. It is also possible that we see
here the genesis of the idea of Isfin\'s wandering in the wilds,
although of course with

subsequent shifts, whereby Fingolfin died in duel with Morgoth after the
Battle of Sudden Flame and Fingon

(Isfin\'s brother) was the Noldorin king slain in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears, the story that she was seeking her father was
abandoned. What this passage does certainly show is that the story of
Isfin\'s sending her son to

Gondolin is original, but that originally Isfin remained with her captor
Eöl and never escaped from him.

Eöl here dwells 'in a mountain dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s
forest', 'in the forests of the night', 'where only the dim bat skims
from Thû\'s dark-delved caverns\'.

This must be the earliest reference to Thû, and at any rate in connected
writing the earliest to Doriath (Artanor of the *Lost Tales).* I have
suggested (11.63) tnat m tne *Tale of* *Tinúviel*

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 147**

emerged and stepped into Finwë\'s place as the father of Turgon
andIsfin,

he is not here the son of Finwë but of one *Gelmir:* In an early prose
text - one of the very few scraps (to be given in the next volume) that
bridge the gap in the prose history between the *Lost Tales* and the
'Sketch of the Mythology' - Gelmir appears as the King of the

Noldoli at the time of the flight from Valinor, and one of his sons is
there named *Golfin.*

There is too little evidence extant (if there ever was any more written
down) to penetrate with certainty the earliest evolution of the Noldorin
kings. The simplest explanation is that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/

Fingolfin = Fingolma/Finwë Nólemë, father of Fingolfin.

But it is also said in this passage that Fingolfin was slain by the
Glamhoth 'as he stood alone by Fëanor', and

whatever story lies behind this is now vanished (for the earliest, very
obscure, references to the death of Fëanor see

1.238-9).

This passage from the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* contains the first
account of the story of Eöl the Dark Elf, Isfin sister of Turgon, and
their son Meglin (for a very primitive form of the legend see II. 220).
In the prose tale of *The* *Fall of Gondolin* the story is dismissed in
the words 'that tale of Isfin and Eöl may not here be told', II. 165. In
the Lay, Fingolfin\'s wife and daughter (Isfin) *were seeking* *for him*
when Isfin was taken by Eöl. Since in the

'Sketch' Isfin was lost in Taur-na-Fuin after the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears and there trapped by Eöl, it is

possible that at this stage Fingolfin was the Elvish king who died
(beside Fëanor?) in the great battle. It is also possible that we see
here the genesis of the idea of Isfin\'s wandering in the wilds,
although of course with

subsequent shifts, whereby Fingolfin died in duel with Morgoth after the
Battle of Sudden Flame and Fingon

(Isfin\'s brother) was the Noldorin king slain in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears, the story that she was seeking her father was
abandoned. What this passage does certainly show is that the story of
Isfin\'s sending her son to

Gondolin is original, but that originally Isfin remained with her captor
Eöl and never escaped from him.

Eöl here dwells 'in a mountain dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s
forest', 'in the forests of the night', 'where only the dim bat skims
from Thû\'s dark-delved caverns\'.

This must be the earliest reference to Thû, and at any rate in connected
writing the earliest to Doriath (Artanor of the *Lost Tales).* I have
suggested (11.63) tnat m tne *Tale of* *Tinúviel*

**POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 147**

emerged and stepped into Finwë\'s place as the father of Turgon
andIsfin,

he is not here the son of Finwë but of one *Gelmir:* In an early prose
text - one of the very few scraps (to be given in the next volume) that
bridge the gap in the prose history between the *Lost Tales* and the
'Sketch of the Mythology' - Gelmir appears as the King of the

Noldoli at the time of the flight from Valinor, and one of his sons is
there named *Golfin.*

There is too little evidence extant (if there ever was any more written
down) to penetrate with certainty the earliest evolution of the Noldorin
kings. The simplest explanation is that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/

Fingolfin = Fingolma/Finwë Nólemë, father of Fingolfin.

But it is also said in this passage that Fingolfin was slain by the
Glamhoth 'as he stood alone by Fëanor', and

whatever story lies behind this is now vanished (for the earliest, very
obscure, references to the death of Fëanor see

1.238-9).

This passage from the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin* contains the first
account of the story of Eöl the Dark Elf, Isfin sister of Turgon, and
their son Meglin (for a very primitive form of the legend see II. 220).
In the prose tale of *The* *Fall of Gondolin* the story is dismissed in
the words 'that tale of Isfin and Eöl may not here be told', II. 165. In
the Lay, Fingolfin\'s wife and daughter (Isfin) *were seeking* *for him*
when Isfin was taken by Eöl. Since in the

'Sketch' Isfin was lost in Taur-na-Fuin after the Battle of Unnumbered
Tears and there trapped by Eöl, it is

possible that at this stage Fingolfin was the Elvish king who died
(beside Fëanor?) in the great battle. It is also possible that we see
here the genesis of the idea of Isfin\'s wandering in the wilds,
although of course with

subsequent shifts, whereby Fingolfin died in duel with Morgoth after the
Battle of Sudden Flame and Fingon

(Isfin\'s brother) was the Noldorin king slain in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears, the story that she was seeking her father was
abandoned. What this passage does certainly show is that the story of
Isfin\'s sending her son to

Gondolin is original, but that originally Isfin remained with her captor
Eöl and never escaped from him.

Eöl here dwells 'in a mountain dale afar in the gloom of Doriath\'s
forest', 'in the forests of the night', 'where only the dim bat skims
from Thû\'s dark-delved caverns\'.

This must be the earliest reference to Thû, and at any rate in connected
writing the earliest to Doriath (Artanor of the *Lost Tales).* I have
suggested (11.63) tnat m tne *Tale of* *Tinúviel*

**148 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

'Artanor was conceived as a great region of forest in the heart of which
was Tinwelint\'s cavern', and that the zone of the Queen\'s protection
'was originally less distinctly bordered, and less extensive, than "the
Girdle of Melian" afterwards became'. Here the description of Eöl\'s
habitation in a forest without light (where Thû lives in caverns)
suggests rather the forest of Taur-na-Fuin, where

Never-dawning night was netted clinging

in the black branches of the beetling trees

and where

goblins even

(whose deep eyes drill the darkest shadows)

bewildered wandered

*(We Children of Húrin,* p. 34, lines 753ff.)

The passage also contains an interesting reference to the purpose of the
miners of Gondolin: 'seeking their ancient jewels.'

Earlier in this Lay some lines are given to the coming of Tuor to the
hidden door beneath the Encircling Mountains:

Thither Tuor son of Fengel came out of the dim land

that the Gnomes have called Dor-Lómin, with Bronweg at his hand, who
fled from the Iron Mountains and had broken Melko\'s chain and cast his
yoke of evil, of torment and bitter pain; who alone most
faithful-hearted led Tuor by long ways through empty hills and valleys
by dark nights and perilous days, till his blue lamp magic-kindled,
where flow the shadowy rills beneath enchanted alders, found that Gate
beneath the hills, the door in dark Dungorthin that only the Gnome-folk
knew.

In a draft for this passage the name here is *Nan Orwen,* emended to
*Dungorthin.* In *The Children of Húrin* (lines 1457ff.) Turin and
Flinding came to this 'grey valley' after they had passed west over
Sirion, and reached the roots of the Shadowy Mountains 'that Hithlum
girdle'.

For earlier references to Nan Dungorthin and different placings of it
see p. 87; the present passage seems to indicate yet another, with the
hidden door of Gondolin opening into it.

A few other passages may be noticed. At the beginning there is a
reference to old songs telling

how the Gods in council gathered on the outmost rocky bars of the Lonely
Island westward, and devised a land of ease beyond the great sea-shadows
and the shadowy seas;

how they made the deep gulf of Faerie with long and lonely shore . . .

That the Gods were ferried on an island by Ossë and the Oarni at the
time of the fall of the Lamps is told in the tale of *The Coming of the
Valar* **POEMS EARLY ABANDONED 149**

(I. 70), and that this isle was afterwards that of the Elves\' ferrying
(becoming Tol Eressëa) is told in *The Coming of the Elves* (1.118).

When Gondolin was built the people cried 'Cor is built anew! ' and the
guard who told Tuor the seven names said:

Loth, the Flower, they name me, saying 'Cor is born again, even in
Loth-a-ladwen,\* the Lily of the Plain.'

I have noticed earlier (II. 208) that whereas it is explicit in *The
Silmarillion* that Turgon devised the city to be 'a memorial of Tirion
upon Túna', and it became 'as beautiful as a memory of Elven Tirion',
this is not said in *The Fall of Gondolin:* Turgon was born in the Great
Lands after the return of the Noldoli from Valinor, and had never known
Kôr.

'One may feel nonetheless that the tower of the King, the fountains and
stairs, the white marbles of Gondolin embody a recollection of Kôr as it
is described in *The Coming of the Elves and the Making of Kôr* **(I.
122-3).'**

There is also a reference to Earendel

who passed the Gates of Dread,

half-mortal and half-elfin, undying and long dead.

The Gates of Dread are probably the gates of the Door of Night, through
which Earendel passed (II. 255).

•This is the only point in which the Seven Names differ from their forms
in the *Tale* (II. 158). In the *Tale* the name of the city as 'Lily of
the Valley' is *Lothengriol.* For *ladvien* 'plain\* see II. 344. In a
draft of the passage in the lay the name was Loth B *arodrin.*

III

THE LAY OF LEITHIAN

My father wrote in his diary that he began 'the poem of Tinúviel' during
the period of the summer examinations of 1925 (see p. 3), and he
abandoned it in September 1931 (see below), when he was 39. The rough
workings for the whole poem are extant (and 'rough' means very rough
indeed); from them he wrote a fair copy, which I shall call 'A'.\*

On this manuscript A my father most uncharacteristically inserted dates,
the first of these being at line 557 (August 23, 1925); and he composed
the last hundred-odd lines of the third Canto (ending at line 757) while
on holiday at Filey on the Yorkshire coast in September 1925.

The next date is two and a half years and 400 lines later, 27-28 March
1928 written against line 1161; and thereafter each day for a further
nine days, till 6 April 1928, is marked, during which time he wrote out
no less than 1768 lines, to 2929.

Since the dates refer to the copying of verses out fair in the
manuscript, not to their actual composition, it might be thought that
they prove little; but the rough workings of lines 2497---2504 are
written on an abandoned letter dated i April 1928, and these lines were
written in the fair copy A on 4 April --- showing that lines 2505---2929
were actually composed between i and 6 April. I think therefore that the
dates on A can be taken as effectively indicating the time of
composition.

The date November 1929 (at line 3031) is followed by a substantial
amount of composition in the last week of September 1930, and again in
the middle of September 1931; the last date is 17 September of that year
against line 4085 very near the point where the Lay was abandoned.

Details of the dates are given in the Notes.

There is also a typescript text (\'B\') made by my father, of which the
last few hundred lines are in manuscript, and this text ends at
precisely the same point as does A. This typescript was begun quite
early, since my father mentioned in his diary for 16 August 1926 having
done 'a little typing of part of *Tinúviel'',* and before the end of
1929 he gave it to C. *S.* Lewis to read. On 7 December of that year
Lewis wrote to him about it, saying:

I sat up late last night and have read the *Geste* as far as to where
Beren and his gnomish allies defeat the patrol of ores above the sources
of the

\*This was written on the backs of examination-scripts, tied together
and prepared as a blank manuscript: it was large enough to last through
the six years, and a few scripts at the end of the bundle remained
unused.

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 151**

Narog and disguise themselves in the *rēaf* \[Old English: 'garments,
weapons, taken from the slain'\]. I can quite honestly say that it is
ages since I have had an evening of such delight: and the personal
interest of reading a friend\'s work had very little to do with it. I
should have enjoyed it just as well as if I\'d picked it up in a
bookshop, by an unknown author. The two things that come out clearly are
the sense of reality in the background and the mythical value: the
essence of a myth being that it should have no taint of allegory to the
maker and yet should suggest incipient allegories to the reader,

Lewis had thus reached in his reading about line 2017. He had evidently
received more; it may be that the typescript by this time extended to
the attack on Lúthien and Beren by Celegorm and Curufin fleeing from
Nargothrond, against which (at line 3031) is the date November 1929 in
the manuscript. Some time after this, probably early in 1930, Lewis sent
my father 14 pages of detailed criticism, as far as line 1161 (if there
was any more it has not survived). This criticism he contrived as a
heavily academic commentary on the text, pretending to treat the Lay as
an ancient and anonymous work extant in many more or less corrupt
manuscripts, overlaid by scribal perversions in antiquity and the
learned argumentation of nineteenth-century scholars; and thus
entertainingly took the sting from some sharply expressed judgements,
while at the same time in this disguise expressing strong praise for
particular passages. Almost all the verses which Lewis found wanting for
one reason or another are marked for revision in the typescript B if not
actually rewritten, and in many cases his proposed emendations, or
modifications of them, are incorporated into the text. The greater part
of Lewis\'s commentary is given on pp. 315 ff., with the verses he
criticised and the alterations made as a result.

My father abandoned the Lay at the point where the jaws of Carcharoth
*crashed together like a trap* on Beren\'s hand and the Silmaril was
engulfed, but though he never advanced beyond that place in the
narrative, he did not abandon it for good. When *The Lord of the Rings*
was finished he returned to the Lay again and recast the first two
Cantos and a good part of the third, and small portions of some others.

To summarise the elements of this history:

\(1\) Rough workings of the whole poem, composed 1925-31.

\(2\) Manuscript A of the whole poem, written out progressively during
1925-31.

\(3\) Typescript B of the whole poem (ending in manuscript), already in
progress in 1926.

This typescript given to C. S. Lewis towards the end of 1929, when it
extended probably to about line 3031.

**152 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

\(4\) Recasting of the opening Cantos and parts of some others (after
the completion of *The Lard of the Kings).*

The manuscript A was emended, both by changes and insertions, at
different times, the majority of these alterations being incorporated in
the typescript B; while in B, as typed, there are further changes not
found in A.

The amount of emendation made to B varies very greatly. My father used
it as a basis for the later rewritings, and in these parts the old
typescript is entirely covered with new verses; but for long stretches-
by far the greater part of the poem --- the text is untouched save for
very minor and as it were casual modifications to individual lines here
and there.

After much experimentation I have concluded that to make a single text,
an amalgam derived from the latest writing throughout the poem, would be
wholly mistaken. Quite apart from the practical difficulty of changed
names in the rewritten parts that do not scan in the old lines, the
later verse in its range and technical accomplishment is too distinct;
too much time had passed, and in the small amount that my father rewrote
of the *Lay of Leithian* after *The Lard of the Rings* we have fragments
of a new poem: from which we can gain an idea of what might have been. I
have therefore excised these parts, and give them subsequently and
separately (Chapter IV).

A further reason for doing so lies in the purpose of this book, which
includes the consideration of the Lays as important stages in the
evolution of the legends. Some of the revisions to the *Lay of Leithian*
are at least 30 years later than the commencement of the poem. From the
point of view of the 'history', therefore, the abandonment of the poem
in or soon after September 1931 constitutes a terminal point, and I have
excluded emendations to names that are (as I believe) certainly later
than that, but included those which are earlier.\* In a case like that
of *Beleriand,* for instance, which was *Broseliand* for much of the
poem in B and always later emended to *Beleriand,* but had become
*Beleriand* as first written by line 3957, I give *Beleriand*
throughout. On the other hand I retain *Gnomes* since my father still
used this in *The Hobbit.*

The many small changes made for metrical/stylistic reasons, however,
constitute a problem in the attempt to produce a '1931 text', since it
is often impossible to be sure to which 'phase' they belong. Some are

•This leads to inconsistent treatment of certain names as between the
two long Lays, e.g.

*Finweg* son of Fingolfin in *The Children of Húrin* but *Fingon* in the
*Lay of Leithian.*

*Fimceg* survived into the 1930 version of 'The Silmarillion' but was
early emended to *Fingon.*

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 153**

demonstrably very early - e.g. *candle flowers* emended to *flowering*
*candles* (line 516), since C. S. Lewis commented on the latter ---
while others are demonstrably from many years later, and strictly
speaking belong with the late rewritings; but many cannot be certainly
determined.

In any case, such changes --- very often made to get rid of certain
artifices employed as metrical aids, most notably among these the use of
emphatic tenses with *doth* and *did* simply in order to obtain a
syllable - such changes have no repercussions beyond the improvement of
the individual line; and in such cases it seems a pity, through rigid
adherence to the textual basis, to lose such small enhancements, or at
any rate to hide them in a trail of tedious textual notes, while letting
their less happy predecessors stand in the text. I have thought it
justifiable therefore to be frankly inconsistent in these details, and
while for example retaining *Gnomes* (for *Elves* or other substitution)
or *Thû* (for *Gorthû* or *Sauron),* to introduce small changes of
wording that are certainly later than these.

As in the *Lay of the Children of Húrin* there are no numbered notes to
the text; the annotation, related to the line-numbers of the poem, is
very largely restricted to earlier readings, and these earlier readings
are restricted to cases where there is some significant difference, as
of name or motive. Citations from the manuscript A are always citations
from that text *as first written* (in very many cases it was emended to
the reading found in B).

It is to be noticed that while the *Lay of Leithian* was in process of
composition the 'Sketch of the Mythology' was written (first in 1926)
and rewritten, leading directly into the version of 'The Silmarillion'
that I ascribe to 1930, in which many of the essentials, both in
narrative and language, of the published work were already present. In
my commentaries on each Canto I attempt to take stock of the development
in the legends *pari passu* with the text of the poem, and only refer
exceptionally to the contemporary prose works.

The A-text has no title, but on the covering page of the bundle of rough
workings is written *Tinúviel,* and in his early references to the poem
my father called it thus, as he called the alliterative poem *Turin.*

The B-text bears this title:

The

GEST

of

BEREN son of BARAHIR

and

LÚTHIEN the FAY

called

TINÚVIEL the NIGHTINGALE

or the

LAY OF LEITHIAN

Release from Bondage

**154 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

The 'Gest of Beren and Lúthien' means a narrative in verse, telling of
the deeds of Beren and Lúthien. The word *gest* is pronounced as Modern
*English jest,* being indeed the 'same word' in phonetic form, though
now totally changed in meaning.

My father never explained the name *Leithian* 'Release from Bondage',
and we are left to choose, if we will, among various applications that
can be seen in the poem. Nor did he leave any comment on the
significance-if there is a significance --- of the likeness of
*Leithian* to *Leithien* 'England'.

In the tale of *Ǽlfwine of England* the Elvish name of England is
*Lúthien* (which was earlier the name of Ǽlfwine himself, England being
*Luthany),* but at the first occurrence (only) of this name the word
*Leithian* was pencilled above it (II.330, note 20). In the 'Sketch of
the Mythology' England was still *Lúthien* (and at that time Thingol\'s
daughter was also *Lúthien),* but this was emended to *Leithien,* and
this is the form in the 1930 version of 'The Silmarillion'. I cannot say
(i) what connection if any there was between the two significances of
*Lúthien,* nor (ii) whether *Leithien* (once *Leithian)* 'England' is or
was related to *Leithian* 'Release from Bondage\*. The only evidence of
an etymological nature that I have found is a hasty note, impossible to
date, which refers to a stem *leth-* 'set free', with *leithia*
'release', and compares *Lay of* *Leithian.*

The GEST of BEREN and LÚTHIEN

I

A king there was in days of old:

ere Men yet walked upon the mould

his power was reared in cavern\'s shade,

his hand was over glen and glade.

His shields were shining as the moon, 5

his lances keen of steel were hewn,

of silver grey his crown was wrought,

the starlight in his banners caught;

and silver thrilled his trumpets long

beneath the stars in challenge strong; 10

enchantment did his realm enfold,

where might and glory, wealth untold,

he wielded from his ivory throne

in many-pillared halls of stone.

**154 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

The 'Gest of Beren and Lúthien' means a narrative in verse, telling of
the deeds of Beren and Lúthien. The word *gest* is pronounced as Modern
*English jest,* being indeed the 'same word' in phonetic form, though
now totally changed in meaning.

My father never explained the name *Leithian* 'Release from Bondage',
and we are left to choose, if we will, among various applications that
can be seen in the poem. Nor did he leave any comment on the
significance-if there is a significance --- of the likeness of
*Leithian* to *Leithien* 'England'.

In the tale of *Ǽlfwine of England* the Elvish name of England is
*Lúthien* (which was earlier the name of Ǽlfwine himself, England being
*Luthany),* but at the first occurrence (only) of this name the word
*Leithian* was pencilled above it (II.330, note 20). In the 'Sketch of
the Mythology' England was still *Lúthien* (and at that time Thingol\'s
daughter was also *Lúthien),* but this was emended to *Leithien,* and
this is the form in the 1930 version of 'The Silmarillion'. I cannot say
(i) what connection if any there was between the two significances of
*Lúthien,* nor (ii) whether *Leithien* (once *Leithian)* 'England' is or
was related to *Leithian* 'Release from Bondage\*. The only evidence of
an etymological nature that I have found is a hasty note, impossible to
date, which refers to a stem *leth-* 'set free', with *leithia*
'release', and compares *Lay of* *Leithian.*

The GEST of BEREN and LÚTHIEN

I

A king there was in days of old:

ere Men yet walked upon the mould

his power was reared in cavern\'s shade,

his hand was over glen and glade.

His shields were shining as the moon, 5

his lances keen of steel were hewn,

of silver grey his crown was wrought,

the starlight in his banners caught;

and silver thrilled his trumpets long

beneath the stars in challenge strong; 10

enchantment did his realm enfold,

where might and glory, wealth untold,

he wielded from his ivory throne

in many-pillared halls of stone.

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 155**

There beryl, pearl, and opal pale, 15

and metal wrought like fishes\' mail,

buckler and corslet, axe and sword,

and gleaming spears were laid in hoard ---

all these he had and loved them less

than a maiden once in Elfinesse; 20

for fairer than are born to Men

a daughter had he, Lúthien.

Such lissom limbs no more shall run

on the green earth beneath the sun;

so fair a maid no more shall be 25

from dawn to dusk, from sun to sea.

Her robe was blue as summer skies,

but grey as evening were her eyes;

\'twas sewn with golden lilies fair,

but dark as shadow was her hair. 30

Her feet were light as bird on wing,

her laughter lighter than the spring;

the slender willow, the bowing reed,

the fragrance of a flowering mead,

the light upon the leaves of trees, 35

the voice of water, more than these

her beauty was and blissfulness,

her glory and her loveliness;

and her the king more dear did prize

than hand or heart or light of eyes. 40

They dwelt amid Beleriand,

while Elfin power yet held the land,

in the woven woods of Doriath:

few ever thither found the path;

few ever dared the forest-eaves 45

to pass, or stir the listening leaves

with tongue of hounds a-hunting fleet,

with horse, or horn, or mortal feet.

To North there lay the Land of Dread,

whence only evil pathways led 50

o\'er hills of shadow bleak and cold

or Taur-na-Fuin\'s haunted hold,

where Deadly Nightshade lurked and lay

and never came or moon or day;

to South the wide earth unexplored; 55

**156 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

to West the ancient Ocean roared,

unsailed and shoreless, wide and wild;

to East in peaks of blue were piled

in silence folded, mist-enfurled,

the mountains of the Outer World, 60

beyond the tangled woodland shade,

thorn and thicket, grove and glade,

whose brooding boughs with magic hung

were ancient when the world was young.

There Thingol in the Thousand Caves, 65

whose portals pale that river laves

Esgalduin that fairies call,

in many a tall and torchlit hall

a dark and hidden king did dwell,

lord of the forest and the fell; 70

and sharp his sword and high his helm,

the king of beech and oak and elm.

There Lúthien the lissom maid

would dance in dell and grassy glade,

and music merrily, thin and clear, 75

went down the ways, more fair than ear

of mortal Men at feast hath heard,

and fairer than the song of bird.

When leaves were long and grass was green

then Dairon with his fingers lean, 80

as daylight melted into shade,

a wandering music sweetly made,

enchanted fluting, warbling wild,

for love of Thingol\'s elfin child.

There bow was bent and shaft was sped, 85

the fallow deer as phantoms fled,

and horses proud with braided mane,

with shining bit and silver rein,

went fleeting by on moonlit night,

as swallows arrow-swift in flight; 90

a blowing and a sound of bells,

a hidden hunt in hollow dells.

There songs were made and things of gold,

and silver cups and jewels untold,

and the endless years of Faery land 95

THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 157

rolled over far Beleriand,

until a day beneath the sun,

when many marvels were begun.

NOTES

The opening of the poem in B is complicated by the fact that my father
partly rewrote, and retyped, the first Canto - a rewriting entirely
distinct from the later fundamental recasting that the early part of the
poem underwent. This first rewriting of the opening Canto was done while
the original composition of the poem was still proceeding, but was
fairly far advanced. The second version was typed in exactly the same
form as that it replaced, whereas the last part of the B-text is not
typed; but the name *Beleriand* appears in it, as typed, and not as an
emendation, whereas elsewhere in B the form is *Broseliand,* always
emended in ink to *Beleriand\** Moreover it was the first version of
Canto I in the B-text that C. S. Lewis read on the night of 6 December
1929, and I think it very probable that it was Lewis\'s criticism that
led my father to rewrite the opening (see pp. 315-16). In the following
notes the first version of B is called B(I), the rewritten text given
above being 8(2).

1-30 A: A king was in the dawn of days:

his golden crown did brightly blaze

with ruby red and crystal clear;

his meats were sweet, his dishes dear;

red robes of silk, an ivory throne, 5

and ancient halls of arched stone,

and wine and music lavished free,

and thirty champions and three,

all these he had and heeded not.

His daughter dear was Melilot: 10

from dawn to dusk, fron sun to sea,

no fairer maiden found could be.

Her robe was blue as summer skies,

but not so blue as were her eyes;

\'twas sewn with golden lilies fair, 15

but none so golden as her hair.

An earlier draft, after line 12 *found could be,* has the couplet: from
England unto Eglamar

o\'er folk and field and lands afar.

\* Once near the very end (line 3957), in the manuscript conclusion of
the B-text, the form as written is *Belenand,* not B *roseliand.*

**158 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

B (I): A king there was in olden days:

&c. as A to line 6

and hoarded gold in gleaming grot,

all these he had and heeded not.

But fairer than are born to Men

a daughter had he, Lúthien:

&c. as B(2)

14-18 These lines were used afterwards in Gimli\'s song in Moria *(The
Fellowship of the Ring* II. 4); see the Commentary by C. S. Lewis, p.
316.

41-4 A: They dwelt in dark Broceliand

while loneliness yet held the land.

B (I): They dwelt beyond Broseliand

while loneliness yet held the land,

in the forest dark of Doriath.

Few ever thither found the path;

In B(I) *Ossiriande* is pencilled above *Broseliand.* As noted above,
B(2) has *Beleriand* as typed.

48 After this line A and B (I) have:

Yet came at whiles afar and dim

beneath the roots of mountains grim

a blowing and a sound of bells,

a hidden hunt in hollow dells.

The second couplet reappears at a later point in B(2), lines 91-2.

49-61 A and B(I):

To North there lay the Land of Dread,

whence only evil pathways led

o\'er hills of shadow bleak and cold;

to West and South the oceans rolled

unsailed and shoreless, wild and wide;

to East and East the hills did hide

beneath the tangled woodland shade,

65-6 A: There Celegorm his ageless days

doth wear amid the woven ways,

the glimmering aisles and endless naves

whose pillared feet that river laves

67 *Esgalduin* A, but *Esgaduin* in the rough workings, which is the
form in *The Children of Húrin* (p. 76, line 2164) before correction.

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 159**

73 A: There Melilot the lissom maid

79-84 Not in A.

85---93 A and B(I) (with one slight difference):

There bow was bent and shaft was sped

and deer as fallow phantoms fled,

and horses pale with harness bright

went jingling by on moonlit night;

there songs were made and things of gold

See note to line 48.

96 A: rolled over dark Broceliand,

B(I): rolled over far Broseliand,

*ln B(I)Ossiriande* is pencilled against *Broseliand,* as at line 41.

Commentary on Canto I

An extraordinary feature of the A-version is the name *Celegorm* given
to the King of the woodland Elves (Thingol); moreover in the next Canto
the role of Beren is in A played by *Maglor,* son of Egnor. The only
possible conclusion, strange as it is, is that my father was prepared to
abandon *Thingol* for *Celegorm* and (even more astonishing) *Beren* for
*Maglor.* Both *Celegorm* and *Maglor* as sons of Fëanor have appeared
in the *Tale of the Nauglafring* and in the *Lay of the Children of
Húrin.*

The name of the king\'s daughter in A, *Melilot,* is also puzzling (and
is it the English plant-name, as in Melilot Brandybuck, a guest at Bilbo
Baggins' farewell party?). Already in the second version of *The
Children* *of Húrin* Lúthien has appeared as the 'true' name of Tinúviel
(see p. 119, note to 358---66). It is perhaps possible that my father in
fact began the *Lay of Leithian* before he stopped work on *The Children
of Húrin,* in which case *Melilot* might be the first 'true' name of
Tinúviel, displaced *by Lúthien;* but I think that this is extremely
unlikely.\* In view *of Beren*

\> *Maglor,* I think *Lúthien* \> *Melilot* far more probable. In any
event, *Beren* and *Lúthien* soon appear in the original drafts of the
*Lay of* *Leithian.*

It is strange also that in A the king\'s daughter was blue-eyed and
golden-haired, for this would not accord with the robe of darkness that

\*My father expressly stated in his diary that he began *Tinúriel* in
the summer of 1925; and it is to be noted that a reference to the *Lav
of Leithian* appears in the alliterative head-piece to one of the
typescripts of *Light as Leaf on Lindentree -* which was actually
published in June 1925 (sec pp. 120-1). Thus the reference in the second
version of *The* *Children of Húrin* to the *Lay of Leithian* (p. 107
line 356) is not evidence that he had in fact begun it.

**160 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

she spun from her hair: in the *Tale of Tinúviel* her hair was 'dark'

**(11.20).**

The name *Broceliand* that appears in A *(Broseliand* B) is remarkable,
but I can cast no light on my father\'s choice of this name (the famous
Forest of Broceliande in Brittany of the Arthurian legends).\* It would
be interesting to know how *Broseliand* led to *Beleriand,* and a clue
may perhaps be found on a page of rough working for the opening of the'
Lay, where he jotted down various names that must be possibilities that
he was pondering for the name of the land. The fact that *Ossiriand*
occurs among them, while it is also pencilled against *Broseliand* at
lines 41 and 96 in B(I), may suggest that these names arose during the
search for a replacement of *Broseliand.* The names are: *Golodhinand,
Noldórinan, Geleriand, Bladorinand, Belaurien,* *Arsiriand, Lassiriand,
Ossiriand.*

*Golodhinand* is incidentally interesting as showing *Golodh,* the later
Sindarin equivalent of Quenya *Noldo* (in the old Gnomish dictionary
*Golda* was the Gnomish equivalent of 'Elvish' *Noldo,* 1.262).
*Geleriand* I can cast no light on; but *Belaurien* is obviously
connected with *Belaurin,* the Gnomish form of *Palúrien* (1.264), and
*Bladorinand* with Palurien\'s name *Bladoruien* 'the wide earth, Mother
Earth' *(ibid.).*

It seems at least possible that *Belaurien* lies behind *Beleriand*
(which was afterwards explained quite differently).

Another curious feature is the word *beyond* in *They dwelt beyond*
*Broseliand,* the reading of B(I) at line 41, where A has *in* and 8(2)
has *amid.*

*Esga(l)duin, Taur-na-Fuin* (for *Taur Fuin* of the *Lost Tales),* and
*the Thousand Caves* have all appeared in *The Children of Húrin;* but
in the mountains that

to East in peaks of blue were piled

in silence folded, mist-enfurled

--- lines that are absent from A and B (I) - we have the first
appearance of the Blue Mountains *(EredLuin)* of the later legends:
fencing Beleriand, as it seems, from *the Outer World.*

In all the texts of the first Canto the King of the woodland Elves is
presented as possessing great wealth. This conception appears already in
*The Children of Húrin* (see p. 26), in the most marked contrast to all
that is told in the *Lost Tales:* cf. the *Tale of Turambar* (II. 95)
'the folk of Tinwelint were of the woodlands and had scant wealth', 'his
riches were small', and the *Tale of the Nauglafring* (II. 227) 'A
golden crown

\* On the earliest 'Silmarillion' map it is said that 'all the lands
watered by Sirion south of Gondolin are called *in English* "Broseliand"
'.

THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 101

they \[the Dwarves\] made for Tinwelint, who yet had worn nought but a
wreath of scarlet leaves.'

**II**

Far in the North neath hills of stone

in caverns black there was a throne 100

by fires illumined underground,

that winds of ice with moaning sound

made flare and flicker in dark smoke;

the wavering bitter coils did choke

the sunless airs of dungeons deep 105

where evil things did crouch and creep.

There sat a king: no Elfin race

nor mortal blood, nor kindly grace

of earth or heaven might he own,

far older, stronger than the stone no

the world is built of, than the fire

that burns within more fierce and dire;

and thoughts profound were in his heart:

a gloomy power that dwelt apart.

Unconquerable spears of steel 115

were at his nod. No ruth did feel

the legions of his marshalled hate,

on whom did wolf and raven wait;

and black the ravens sat and cried

upon their banners black, and wide 120

was heard their hideous chanting dread

above the reek and trampled dead.

With fire and sword his ruin red

on all that would not bow the head

like lightning fell. The Northern land 125

lay groaning neath his ghastly hand.

But still there lived in hiding cold

undaunted, Barahir the bold,

of land bereaved, of lordship shorn,

who once a prince of Men was born 130

and now an outlaw lurked and lay

in the hard heath and woodland grey,

THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 101

they \[the Dwarves\] made for Tinwelint, who yet had worn nought but a
wreath of scarlet leaves.'

**II**

Far in the North neath hills of stone

in caverns black there was a throne 100

by fires illumined underground,

that winds of ice with moaning sound

made flare and flicker in dark smoke;

the wavering bitter coils did choke

the sunless airs of dungeons deep 105

where evil things did crouch and creep.

There sat a king: no Elfin race

nor mortal blood, nor kindly grace

of earth or heaven might he own,

far older, stronger than the stone no

the world is built of, than the fire

that burns within more fierce and dire;

and thoughts profound were in his heart:

a gloomy power that dwelt apart.

Unconquerable spears of steel 115

were at his nod. No ruth did feel

the legions of his marshalled hate,

on whom did wolf and raven wait;

and black the ravens sat and cried

upon their banners black, and wide 120

was heard their hideous chanting dread

above the reek and trampled dead.

With fire and sword his ruin red

on all that would not bow the head

like lightning fell. The Northern land 125

lay groaning neath his ghastly hand.

But still there lived in hiding cold

undaunted, Barahir the bold,

of land bereaved, of lordship shorn,

who once a prince of Men was born 130

and now an outlaw lurked and lay

in the hard heath and woodland grey,

**162 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

and with him clung of faithful men

but Beren his son and other ten.

Yet small as was their hunted band 135

still fell and fearless was each hand,

and strong deeds they wrought yet oft,

and loved the woods, whose ways more soft

them seemed than thralls of that black throne

to live and languish in halls of stone. 140

King Morgoth still pursued them sore

with men and dogs, and wolf and boar

with spells of madness filled he sent

to slay them as in the woods they went;

yet nought hurt them for many years, 145

until, in brief to tell what tears

have oft bewailed in ages gone,

nor ever tears enough, was done

a deed unhappy; unaware

their feet were caught in Morgoth\'s snare. 150

Gorlim it was, who wearying

of toil and flight and harrying,

one night by chance did turn his feet

o\'er the dark fields by stealth to meet

with hidden friend within a dale, 155

and found a homestead looming pale

against the misty stars, all dark

save one small window, whence a spark

of fitful candle strayed without.

Therein he peeped, and filled with doubt 160

he saw, as in a dreaming deep

when longing cheats the heart in sleep,

his wife beside a dying fire

lament him lost; her thin attire

and greying hair and paling cheek 165

of tears and loneliness did speak.

'A! fair and gentle Eilinel,

whom I had thought in darkling hell

long since emprisoned! Ere I fled

I deemed I saw thee slain and dead 170

upon that night of sudden fear

when all I lost that I held dear':

thus thought his heavy heart amazed

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 163**

outside in darkness as he gazed.

But ere he dared to call her name, 175

or ask how she escaped and came

to this far vale beneath the hills,

he heard a cry beneath the hills!

There hooted near a hunting owl

with boding voice. He heard the howl 180

of the wild wolves that followed him

and dogged his feet through shadows dim.

Him unrelenting, well he knew,

the hunt of Morgoth did pursue.

Lest Eilinel with him they slay 185

without a word he turned away,

and like a wild thing winding led

his devious ways o\'er stony bed

of stream, and over quaking fen,

until far from the homes of men 190

he lay beside his fellows few

in a secret place; and darkness grew,

and waned, and still he watched unsleeping,

and saw the dismal dawn come creeping

in dank heavens above gloomy trees. 195

A sickness held his soul for ease,

and hope, and even thraldom\'s chain

if he might find his wife again.

But all he thought twixt love of lord

and hatred of the king abhorred 200

and anguish for fair Eilinel

who drooped alone, what tale shall tell?

Yet at the last, when many days

of brooding did his mind amaze,

he found the servants of the king, 205

and bade them to their master bring

a rebel who forgiveness sought,

if haply forgiveness might be bought

with tidings of Barahir the bold,

and where his hidings and his hold 210

might best be found by night or day.

And thus sad Gorlim, led away

unto those dark deep-dolven halls,

before the knees of Morgoth falls,

164 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

and puts his trust in that cruel heart 215

wherein no truth had ever part.

Quoth Morgoth: 'Eilinel the fair

thou shalt most surely find, and there

where she doth dwell and wait for thee

together shall ye ever be, 220

and sundered shall ye sigh no more.

This guerdon shall he have that bore

these tidings sweet, () traitor dear!

For Eilinel she dwells not here,

but in the shades of death doth roam 225

widowed of husband and of home -

a wraith of that which might have been,

methinks, it is that thou hast seen!

Now shalt thou through the gates of pain

the land thou askest grimly gain; 230

thou shalt to the moonless mists of hell

descend and seek thy Eilinel.'

Thus Gorlim died a bitter death

and cursed himself with dying breath,

and Barahir was caught and slain, 235

and all good deeds were made in vain.

But Morgoth\'s guile for ever failed,

nor wholly o\'er his foes prevailed,

and some were ever that still fought

unmaking that which malice wrought. 240

Thus men believed that Morgoth made

the fiendish phantom that betrayed

the soul of Gorlim, and so brought

the lingering hope forlorn to nought

that lived amid the lonely wood; 245

yet Beren had by fortune good

long hunted far afield that day,

and benighted in strange places lay

far from his fellows. In his sleep

he felt a dreadful darkness creep 250

upon his heart, and thought the trees

were bare and bent in mournful breeze;

no leaves they had, but ravens dark

sat thick as leaves on bough and bark,

and croaked, and as they croaked each neb 255

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 165**

let fall a gout of blood; a web

unseen entwined him hand and limb,

until worn out, upon the rim

of stagnant pool he lay and shivered.

There saw he that a shadow quivered 260

far out upon the water wan,

and grew to a faint form thereon

that glided o\'er the silent lake,

and coming slowly, softly spake

and sadly said: 'Lo! Gorlim here, 265

traitor betrayed, now stands! Nor fear,

but haste! For Morgoth\'s fingers close

upon thy father\'s throat. He knows

your secret tryst, your hidden lair',

and all the evil he laid bare 270

that he had done and Morgoth wrought.

Then Beren waking swiftly sought

his sword and bow, and sped like wind

that cuts with knives the branches thinned

of autumn trees. At last he came, 275

his heart afire with burning flame,

where Barahir his father lay;

he came too late. At dawn of day

he found the homes of hunted men,

a wooded island in the fen, 280

and birds rose up in sudden cloud -

no fen-fowl were they crying loud.

The raven and the carrion-crow

sat in the alders all a-row;

one croaked: 'Ha! Beren comes too late', 285

and answered all: 'Too late! Too late!'

There Beren buried his father\'s bones,

and piled a heap of boulder-stones,

and cursed the name of Morgoth thrice,

but wept not, for his heart was ice. 290

Then over fen and field and mountain

he followed, till beside a fountain

upgushing hot from fires below

he found the slayers and his foe,

the murderous soldiers of the king. 295

And one there laughed, and showed a ring

106 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

he took from Barahir\'s dead hand.

'This ring in far Beleriand,

now mark ye, mates,' he said, 'was wrought.

Its like with gold could not be bought, 300

for this same Barahir I slew,

this robber fool, they say, did do

a deed of service long ago

for Felagund. It may be so;

for Morgoth bade me bring it back, 305

and yet, methinks, he has no lack

of weightier treasure in his hoard.

Such greed befits not such a lord,

and I am minded to declare

the hand of Barahir was bare!' 310

Yet as he spake an arrow sped;

with riven heart he crumpled dead.

Thus Morgoth loved that his own foe

should in his service deal the blow

that punished the breaking of his word. 315

But Morgoth laughed not when he heard

that Beren like a wolf alone

sprang madly from behind a stone

amid that camp beside the well,

and seized the ring, and ere the yell 320

of wrath and rage had left their throat

had fled his foes. His gleaming coat

was made of rings of steel no shaft

could pierce, a web of dwarvish craft;

and he was lost in rock and thorn, 325

for in charmed hour was Beren born;

their hungry hunting never learned

the way his fearless feet had turned.

As fearless Beren was renowned,

as man most hardy upon ground, 330

while Barahir yet lived and fought;

but sorrow now his soul had wrought

to dark despair, and robbed his life

of sweetness, that he longed for knife,

or shaft, or sword, to end his pain, 335

and dreaded only thraldom\'s chain.

Danger he sought and death pursued,

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 167**

and thus escaped the fate he wooed,

and deeds of breathless wonder dared

whose whispered glory widely fared, 340

and softly songs were sung at eve

of marvels he did once achieve

alone, beleaguered, lost at night

by mist or moon, or neath the light

of the broad eye of day. The woods 345

that northward looked with bitter feuds

he filled and death for Morgoth\'s folk;

his comrades were the beech and oak,

who failed him not, and many things

with fur and fell and feathered wings; 350

and many spirits, that in stone

in mountains old and wastes alone,

do dwell and wander, were his friends.

Yet seldom well an outlaw ends,

and Morgoth was a king more strong 355

than all the world has since in song

recorded, and his wisdom wide

slow and surely who him defied

did hem and hedge. Thus at the last

must Beren flee the forest fast 360

and lands he loved where lay his sire

by reeds bewailed beneath the mire.

Beneath a heap of mossy stones

now crumble those once mighty bones,

but Beren flees the friendless North 365

one autumn night, and creeps him forth;

the leaguer of his watchful foes

he passes --- silently he goes.

No more his hidden bowstring sings,

no more his shaven arrow wings, 370

no more his hunted head doth lie

upon the heath beneath the sky.

The moon that looked amid the mist

upon the pines, the wind that hissed

among the heather and the fern 375

found him no more. The stars that burn

about the North with silver fire

in frosty airs, the Burning Briar

that Men did name in days long gone,

168

**THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

were set behind his back, and shone 380

o\'er land and lake and darkened hill,

forsaken fen and mountain rill.

His face was South from the Land of Dread,

whence only evil pathways led,

and only the feet of men most bold 385

might cross the Shadowy Mountains cold.

Their northern slopes were filled with woe,

with evil and with mortal foe;

their southern faces mounted sheer

in rocky pinnacle and pier, 390

whose roots were woven with deceit

and washed with waters bitter-sweet.

There magic lurked in gulf and glen,

for far away beyond the ken

of searching eyes, unless it were 395

from dizzy tower that pricked the air

where only eagles lived and cried,

might grey and gleaming be descried

Beleriand, Beleriand,

the borders of the faery land. 400

NOTES

128 A: a lord of Men undaunted, bold

134 A: Maglor his son and other ten.

141 A: But the king Bauglir did hunt them sore

177---9 Earlier reading:

to this far vale among the hills

a haggard hungry people tills,

there hooted nigh a hunting owl

205 *found:* earlier reading *sought*

209-10 A: with tidings of Lord Egnor\'s band,

and where their hidings in the land

235 A: and Egnor was betrayed and slain

246 A: yet Maglor it was by fortune good

who hunting &c.

272 A: till Maglor waking swiftly sought

277 A: to where his father Egnor lay;

297 A: he took from Egnor\'s slaughtered hand:

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN I69**

298 *Broceliand* A, *Broseliand* B emended to *Beleriand* 301 A: for
this same Egnor that I slew

304 *Celegorm* A, emended to *Felagoth* and then to *Felagund* 310 A:
Ifoundthehandof Egnor bare! '

313-16 These four lines were bracketed, and *that* at line 317 changed
to *Then,* before the B-text went to C. S. Lewis (my father\'s numbering
of the lines excludes these four, and Lewis\'s line-references agree).
Lewis did not concur with the exclusion of 313---14, and I have let all
four lines stand. See pp. 318-19.

317, 329 *Maglor* A, *Beren* B

326 A: and deep ghylls in the mountains torn.

331-3 A: ere Egnor in the wilderness

was slain; but now his loneliness,

grief and despair, did rob his life

360 A: proud Maglor fled the forest fast

*(fast* is used in the sense 'secure against attack'; cf. *fastness).*

365 *Maglor* A, *Beren* B

377-81 A: about the North with silver flame

in frosty airs, that men did name

Timbridhil in the days long gone,

he set behind his back, and shone

that sickle of the heavenly field

that Bridhil Queen of stars did wield

o\'er land and lake and darkened hill,

The fifth and sixth lines are bracketed, with *and shone* in the fourth
changed to *It shone.*

383-4 Cf. lines 49-50.

399 *Broceliand* A, *Broseliand* B emended to *Beleriand.*

Commentary on Canto II

In this second Canto the story of the betrayal of the outlaw band is
already in A close to its final form in essentials; but there is no
trace of the story in any form earlier than the first drafts of the *Lay
of Leithian,* composed in the summer of 1925 (see p. 150). In commenting
on the *Tale of Tinúviel* I noted (II. 52):

It seems clear that at this time the history of Beren and his father
(Egnor) was only very sketchily devised; there is in any case no hint of
the story of the outlaw band led by his father and its betrayal by
Gorlim the Unhappy before the first form of the *Lay of Leithian.*

There are indeed differences in the plot of the Lay from the story told
in *The Silmarillion* (pp. 162 ff.): thus the house where Gorlim saw the
phantom of Eilinel was not in the Lay his own; his treachery was far
deeper and more deliberate, in that he sought out the servants of
Morgoth **170 THE LAVS OF BELERIAND**

with the intention of revealing the hiding-place of the outlaws; and he
came before Morgoth himself (not Thû-Sauron). But these differences are
much outnumbered by the similarities, such as the absence of
Maglor-Beren on the fatal day, the apparition of Gorlim coming to him in
dream across the water of the lake, the carrion-birds in the
alder-trees, the cairn, the seizing of the ring, his friendship with
birds and beasts.

As regards the names in the A-text: *Gorlim* and *Eilinel* were to
remain. Maglor-Beren has already been discussed (p. 159). *Egnor* was
still his father, as in the *Last Tales* (the emendation to *Barahir* in
the second version of the *Tale of Tinúviel,* 11-43, was a change made
casually years later). *Bauglir* (which entered during the composition
of *The Children of Húrin,* see p. 52) is changed throughout to
*Morgoth,* but this seems not to have been a rejection of the name,
since it appears later in the B-text of the Lay, and survives in *The
Silmarillion.*

In A Varda is called *Bridhil* (note to lines 377-81), as she is also in
alliterative poem *The Flight of the Noldoli* (pp. 135, 139); but it is
puzzling that the constellation of the Great Bear is in the same passage
called *Timbridhil,* for that according to the old Gnomish dictionary is
the title of Varda herself (as one would expect: cf. *Timoetári,* I.
269). The

'Sickle of the Gods\' *(Valacirca)* is here the 'sickle of the heavenly
field'

wielded by Bridhil Queen of Stars. I can cast no light at all on the
name *Burning Briar* that appears in B (line 378); it reappears in the
1930

version of 'The Silmarillion':

Many names have these \[the Seven Stars\] been called, but in the old
days of the North both Elves and Men called them the Burning Briar, and
some the Sickle of the Gods.

For the earliest myth of the Great Bear see I. 114, 133.

Indications of geography are sparse, and not increased in the B-text.

Taur-na-Fuin has been named earlier in B (line 52), but it is not
actually said in the present Canto to be the region where the outlaws
lurked, though there is no reason to doubt that this is where my father
placed it. Coming southwards Maglor-Beren crossed 'the Shadowy Mountains
cold' (386). The Shadowy Mountains were named several times in *The
Children of Húrin,* where they are the mountains fencing Hithlum,
mirrored in the pools of Ivrin, as they are in *The Silmarillion.*

But it would obviously be impossible for Beren to cross the Shadowy
Mountains in this application of the name if he were coming out of
Taur-na-Fuin and moving south towards Doriath. In the 'Sketch of the
Mythology' Beren likewise 'crosses the Shadowy Mountains and after
grievous hardships comes to Doriath', and similarly in the 1930 version;
in this latter, however, 'Mountains of Shadow' was emended to 'Mountains
of Terror'. It is then clear that in the *Lay of Leithian* my father was
using 'Shadowy Mountains\' in a different sense from that in *The*
*Children of Húrin,* and that the Shadowy Mountains of the present **THE
LAY OF LEITHIAN 171**

Canto are the first mention of Ered Gorgoroth, the Mountains of Terror,

'the precipices in which Dorthonion \[Taur-nu-Fuin\] fell southward'

*(The Silmarillion* p. 95); but the other meaning reappears (p. 234).

The lake where Egnor-Barahir and his band dwelt in hiding, in *The*
*Silmarillion* (p. 162) *Tarn Aeluin,* is not named in the Lay, where
the hiding-place was 'a wooded island in the fen' (280). That the
Ore-camp was beside a spring (also unnamed) appears in the Lay, and it
is here a hot spring (292-3); in *The Silmarillion* (p. 163) it *was
RivH\'s Well* above the Fen of Serech.

Most notable of the features of this Canto so far as the development of
the legends is concerned, the rescue of Felagund by Barahir in the
Battle of Sudden Flame *(The Silmarillion* p. 152) makes its first
appearance in the 'service' done to Celegorm by Egnor in A (lines 301-4,
where B has Felagund and Barahir). 'Celegorm' has already ceased its
brief life as a replacement of Thingol (see p. 159), and is now again
that of one of the sons of Fëanor, as it was in *The Children of Húrin.*
When these lines in A were written the story was that Celegorm (and
Curufin) founded Nargothrond after the breaking of the Leaguer of
Angband - a story that seems to have arisen in the writing of *The
Children of Húrin,* see pp. 83-5; and it was Celegorm who was rescued by
Egnor-Barahir in that battle, and who gave Egnor-Barahir his ring. In
the B-text the story has moved forward again, with the emergence of
(Felagoth \>) Felagund as the one saved by Barahir and the founder of
Nargothrond, thrusting Celegorm and Curufin into a very different role.

In A EgnorandhissonMaglor (Beren) are Men (e.g. Egnor was 'a lord of
Men', note to line 128). In the first version of *The Children of Húnn*
Beren was still an Elf, while in the second version my father seems to
have changed back and forth on this matter (see pp. 124-5). He had not
even now, as will appear later, finally settled the question.

**III**

There once, and long and long ago,

before the sun and moon we know

were lit to sail above the world,

when first the shaggy woods unfurled,

and shadowy shapes did stare and roam 405

beneath the dark and starry dome

that hung above the dawn of Earth,

the silences with silver mirth

were shaken; the rocks were ringing,

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 171**

Canto are the first mention of Ered Gorgoroth, the Mountains of Terror,

'the precipices in which Dorthonion \[Taur-nu-Fuin\] fell southward'

*(The Silmarillion* p. 95); but the other meaning reappears (p. 234).

The lake where Egnor-Barahir and his band dwelt in hiding, in *The*
*Silmarillion* (p. 162) *Tarn Aeluin,* is not named in the Lay, where
the hiding-place was 'a wooded island in the fen' (280). That the
Ore-camp was beside a spring (also unnamed) appears in the Lay, and it
is here a hot spring (292-3); in *The Silmarillion* (p. 163) it *was
RivH\'s Well* above the Fen of Serech.

Most notable of the features of this Canto so far as the development of
the legends is concerned, the rescue of Felagund by Barahir in the
Battle of Sudden Flame *(The Silmarillion* p. 152) makes its first
appearance in the 'service' done to Celegorm by Egnor in A (lines 301-4,
where B has Felagund and Barahir). 'Celegorm' has already ceased its
brief life as a replacement of Thingol (see p. 159), and is now again
that of one of the sons of Fëanor, as it was in *The Children of Húrin.*
When these lines in A were written the story was that Celegorm (and
Curufin) founded Nargothrond after the breaking of the Leaguer of
Angband - a story that seems to have arisen in the writing of *The
Children of Húrin,* see pp. 83-5; and it was Celegorm who was rescued by
Egnor-Barahir in that battle, and who gave Egnor-Barahir his ring. In
the B-text the story has moved forward again, with the emergence of
(Felagoth \>) Felagund as the one saved by Barahir and the founder of
Nargothrond, thrusting Celegorm and Curufin into a very different role.

In A EgnorandhissonMaglor (Beren) are Men (e.g. Egnor was 'a lord of
Men', note to line 128). In the first version of *The Children of Húnn*
Beren was still an Elf, while in the second version my father seems to
have changed back and forth on this matter (see pp. 124-5). He had not
even now, as will appear later, finally settled the question.

**III**

There once, and long and long ago,

before the sun and moon we know

were lit to sail above the world,

when first the shaggy woods unfurled,

and shadowy shapes did stare and roam 405

beneath the dark and starry dome

that hung above the dawn of Earth,

the silences with silver mirth

were shaken; the rocks were ringing,

**172 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

the birds of Melian were singing, 410

the first to sing in mortal lands,

the nightingales with her own hands

she fed, that fay of garments grey;

and dark and long her tresses lay

beneath her silver girdle\'s seat 415

and down unto her silver feet.

She had wayward wandered oh a time

from gardens of the Gods, to climb

the everlasting mountains free

that look upon the outmost sea, 420

and never wandered back, but stayed

and softly sang from glade to glade.

Her voice it was that Thingol heard,

and sudden singing of a bird,

in that old time when new-come Elves 425

had all the wide world to themselves.

Yet all his kin now marched away,

as old tales tell, to seek the bay

on the last shore of mortal lands,

where mighty ships with magic hands 430

they made, and sailed beyond the seas.

The Gods them bade to lands of ease

and gardens fair, where earth and sky

together flow, and none shall die.

But Thingol stayed, enchanted, still, 435

one moment to hearken to the thrill

of that sweet singing in the trees.

Enchanted moments such as these

from gardens of the Lord of Sleep,

where fountains play and shadows creep, 440

do come, and count as many years

in mortal lands. With many tears

his people seek him ere they sail,

while Thingol listens in the dale.

There after but an hour, him seems, 445

he finds her where she lies and dreams,

pale Melian with her dark hair

upon a bed of leaves. Beware!

There slumber and a sleep is twined!

He touched her tresses and his mind 450

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 173**

was drowned in the forgetful deep,

and dark the years rolled o\'er his sleep.

Thus Thingol sailed not on the seas

but dwelt amid the land of trees,

and Melian he loved, divine, 455

whose voice was potent as the wine

the Valar drink in golden halls

where flower blooms and fountain falls;

but when she sang it was a spell,

and no flower stirred nor fountain fell. 460

A king and queen thus lived they long,

and Doriath was filled with song,

and all the Elves that missed their way

and never found the western bay,

the gleaming walls of their long home 465

by the grey seas and the white foam,

who never trod the golden land

where the towers of the Valar stand,

all these were gathered in their realm

beneath the beech and oak and elm. 470

In later days when Morgoth first,

fleeing the Gods, their bondage burst,

and on the mortal lands set feet,

and in the North his mighty seat

founded and fortified, and all 475

the newborn race of Men were thrall

unto his power, and Elf and Gnome

his slaves, or wandered without home,

or scattered fastnesses walled with fear

upraised upon his borders drear, 480

and each one fell, yet reigned there still

in Doriath beyond his will

Thingol and deathless Melian,

whose magic yet no evil can

that cometh from without surpass. 485

Here still was laughter and green grass,

and leaves were lit with the white sun,

and many marvels were begun.

In sunshine and in sheen of moon,

with silken robe and silver shoon, 490

**174 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

the daughter of the deathless queen

now danced on the undying green,

half elven-fair and half divine;

and when the stars began to shine

unseen but near a piping woke, 495

and in the branches of an oak,

or seated on the beech-leaves brown,

Dairon the dark with ferny crown

played with bewildering wizard\'s art

music for breaking of the heart. 500

Such players have there only been

thrice in all Elfinesse, I ween:

Tinfang Gelion who still the moon

enchants on summer nights of June

and kindles the pale firstling star; 505

and he who harps upon the far

forgotten beaches and dark shores

where western foam for ever roars,

Maglor whose voice is like the sea;

and Dairon, mightiest of the three. 510

Now it befell on summer night,

upon a lawn where lingering light

yet lay and faded faint and grey,

that Lúthien danced while he did play.

The chestnuts on the turf had shed 515

their flowering candles, white and red;

there darkling stood a silent elm

and pale beneath its shadow-helm

there glimmered faint the umbels thick

of hemlocks like a mist, and quick 520

the moths on pallid wings of white

with tiny eyes of fiery light

were fluttering softly, and the voles

crept out to listen from their holes;

the little owls were hushed and still; 525

the moon was yet behind the hill.

Her arms like ivory were gleaming,

her long hair like a cloud was streaming,

her feet atwinkle wandered roaming

in misty mazes in the gloaming; 530

and glowworms shimmered round her feet,

**THE LAY** OF LEITHIAN 175

and moths in moving garland fleet

above her head went wavering wan -

and this the moon now looked upon,

uprisen slow, and round, and white, 535

above the branches of the night.

Then clearly thrilled her voice and rang;

with sudden ecstasy she sang

a song of nightingales she learned

and with her elvish magic turned 540

to such bewildering delight

the moon hung moveless in the night.

And this it was that Beren heard,

and this he saw, without a word,

enchanted dumb, yet filled with fire 545

of such a wonder and desire

that all his mortal mind was dim;

her magic bound and fettered him,

and faint he leaned against a tree.

Forwandered, wayworn, gaunt was he, 550

his body sick and heart gone cold,

grey in his hair, his youth turned old;

for those that tread that lonely way

a price of woe and anguish pay.

And now his heart was healed and slain 555

with a new life and with new pain.

He *gazed,* and as he gazed her hair

within its cloudy web did snare

the silver moonbeams sifting white

between the leaves, and glinting bright 560

the tremulous starlight of the skies

was caught and mirrored in her eyes.

Then all his journey\'s lonely fare,

the hunger and the haggard care,

the awful mountains\' stones he stained 565

with blood of weary feet, and gained

only a land of ghosts, and fear

in dark ravines imprisoned sheer ---

there mighty spiders wove their webs,

old creatures foul with birdlike nebs 570

that span their traps in dizzy air,

and filled it with clinging black despair,

**176** THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

and there they lived, and the sucked bones

lay white beneath on the dank stones -

now all these horrors like a cloud 575

faded from mind. The waters loud

falling from pineclad heights no more

he heard, those waters grey and frore

that bittersweet he drank and filled

his mind with madness --- all was stilled. 580

He recked not now the burning road,

the paths demented where he strode

endlessly\... and ever new

horizons stretched before his view,

as each blue ridge with bleeding feet 585

was climbed, and down he went to meet

battle with creatures old and strong

and monsters in the dark, and long,

long watches in the haunted night

while evil shapes with baleful light 590

in clustered eyes did crawl and snuff

beneath his tree --- not half enough

the price he deemed to come at last

to that pale moon when day had passed,

to those clear stars of Elfinesse, 595

the hearts-ease and the loveliness.

Lo! all forgetting he was drawn

unheeding toward the glimmering lawn

by love and wonder that compelled

his feet from hiding; music welled 600

within his heart, and songs unmade

on themes unthought-of moved and swayed

his soul with sweetness; out he came,

a shadow in the moon\'s pale flame ---

and Dairon\'s flute as sudden stops 605

as lark before it steeply drops,

as grasshopper within the grass

listening for heavy feet to pass.

'Flee, Lúthien!', and 'Lúthien!'

from hiding Dairon called again; 61 o

'A stranger walks the woods! Away!'

But Lúthien would wondering stay;

fear had she never felt or known,

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 177**

till fear then seized her, all alone,

seeing that shape with shagged hair 615

and shadow long that halted there.

Then sudden she vanished like a dream

in dark oblivion, a gleam

in hurrying clouds, for she had leapt

among the hemlocks tall, and crept 620

under a mighty plant with leaves

all long and dark, whose stem in sheaves

upheld an hundred umbels fair;

and her white arms and shoulders bare

her raiment pale, and in her hair 625

the wild white roses glimmering there,

all lay like spattered moonlight hoar

in gleaming pools upon the floor.

Then stared he wild in dumbness bound

at silent trees, deserted ground; 630

he blindly groped across the glade

to the dark trees\' encircling shade,

and, while she watched with veiled eyes,

touched her soft arm in sweet surprise.

Like startled moth from deathlike sleep 635

in sunless nook or bushes deep

she darted swift, and to and fro

with cunning that elvish dancers know

about the trunks of trees she twined

a path fantastic. Far behind 640

enchanted, wildered and forlorn

Beren came blundering, bruised and torn:

Esgalduin the elven-stream,

in which amid tree-shadows gleam

the stars, flowed strong before his feet. 645

Some secret way she found, and fleet

passed over and was seen no more,

and left him forsaken on the shore.

'Darkly the sundering flood rolls past!

To this my long way comes at last - 650

a hunger and a loneliness,

enchanted waters pitiless.'

A summer waned, an autumn glowed,

and Beren in the woods abode,

**178 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

as wild and wary as a faun 655

that sudden wakes at rustling dawn,

and flits from shade to shade, and flees

the brightness of the sun, yet sees

all stealthy movements in the wood.

The murmurous warmth in weathers good, 660

the hum of many wings, the call

of many a bird, the pattering fall

of sudden rain upon the trees,

the windy tide in leafy seas,

the creaking of the boughs, he heard; 665

but not the song of sweetest bird

brought joy or comfort to his heart,

a wanderer dumb who dwelt apart;

who sought unceasing and in vain

to hear and see those things again: 670

a song more fair than nightingale,

a wonder in the moonlight pale.

An autumn waned, a winter laid

the withered leaves in grove and glade;

the beeches bare were gaunt and grey, 675

and red their leaves beneath them lay.

From cavern pale the moist moon eyes

the white mists that from earth arise

to hide the morrow\'s sun and drip

all the grey day from each twig\'s tip. 680

By dawn and dusk he seeks her still;

by noon and night in valleys chill,

nor hears a sound but the slow beat

on sodden leaves of his own feet.

The wind of winter winds his horn; 685

the misty veil is rent and torn.

The wind dies; the starry choirs

leap in the silent sky to fires,

whose light comes bitter-cold and sheer

through domes of frozen crystal clear. 690

A sparkle through the darkling trees,

a piercing glint of light he sees,

and there she dances all alone

upon a treeless knoll of stone!

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 179**

Her mantle blue with jewels white 695

caught all the rays of frosted light.

She shone with cold and wintry flame,

as dancing down the hill she came,

and passed his watchful silent gaze,

a glimmer as of stars ablaze. 700

And snowdrops sprang beneath her feet,

and one bird, sudden, late and sweet,

shrilled as she wayward passed along.

A frozen brook to bubbling song

awoke and laughed; but Beren stood 705

still bound enchanted in the wood.

Her starlight faded and the night

closed o\'er the snowdrops glimmering white.

Thereafter on a hillock green

he saw far off the elven-sheen 710

of shining limb and jewel bright

often and oft on moonlit night;

and Dairon\'s pipe awoke once more,

and soft she sang as once before.

Then nigh he stole beneath the trees, 715

and heartache mingled with hearts-ease.

A night there was when winter died;

then all alone she sang and cried

and danced until the dawn of spring,

and chanted some wild magic thing 720

that stirred him, till it sudden broke

the bonds that held him, and he woke

to madness sweet and brave despair.

He flung his arms to the night air,

and out he danced unheeding, fleet, 725

enchanted, with enchanted feet.

He sped towards the hillock green,

the lissom limbs, the dancing sheen;

he leapt upon the grassy hill

his arms with loveliness to fill: 730

his arms were empty, and she fled;

away, away her white feet sped.

But as she went he swiftly came

and called her with the tender name

of nightingales in elvish tongue, 735

18o THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

that all the woods now sudden rung:

'Tinúviel! Tinúviel!'

And clear his voice was as a bell;

its echoes wove a binding spell:

'Tinúviel! Tinúviel! ' 740

His voice such love and longing filled

one moment stood she, fear was stilled;

one moment only; like a flame

he leaped towards her as she stayed

and caught and kissed that elfin maid. 745

As love there woke in sweet surprise

the starlight trembled in her eyes.

A! Lúthien! A! Lúthien!

more fair than any child of Men;

O! loveliest maid of Elfinesse, 750

what madness does thee now possess!

A! lissom limbs and shadowy hair

and chaplet of white snowdrops there;

O! starry diadem and white

pale hands beneath the pale moonlight! 755

She left his arms and slipped-away

just at the breaking of the day.

NOTES

439 Original reading of B:

from gardens of the God of Sleep,

457 Original reading of B:

the Gods drink in their golden halls

467-8 Original reading of B:

who never passed the golden gate

where doorwards of the Gods do wait,

These three changes are late, and their purpose is to remove the word
*Gods.* The change in line 468 also gets rid of the purely metrical *do*
in *do wait;* similarly *did build and fortify*

*\> founded and fortified* 475 and *did raise \> upraised* 480

look as if they belong to the same time. On the other hand *did* **THE
LAY OF LEITHIAN 181**

*flutter \> were fluttering* 523 and *did waver \> went* *wavering* 533
seem to belong with the early emendations (see C. S. Lewis\'s
commentary, pp. 320-1), I mention these changes here to illustrate my
remarks on this subject, PP- 152-3.

493 *elfin-* B, emended to *elven-.* Here and subsequently this belongs
with the early changes, as does *elfin* to *elvish* at 540, etc.

503 *Tinfang Warble A,* and B as typed; *Gelion* an early change in B.

508 After this line A has a couplet omitted in B:

from England unto Eglamar

on rock and dune and sandy bar,

The first of these lines occurs also in an early draft for the opening
of the poem, see p. 157, note to lines 1-30.

509 *Maglor* A, B; in the rough draft of this passage *Ivárë* (with
*Maglor* written beside it).

527-30 Marked in B with an X (i.e. in need of revision), but with no
other verses substituted.

557 This line begins a new page in the A manuscript; at the top of the
page is written the date '23/8/25'.

558 *golden* A, and B as typed (no doubt an oversight), early emended to
*cloudy.* See note to lines 1-30, and pp. 159-60.

648 After this line the bundle of examination-scripts on which the A
manuscript is written (p. 150) is interleaved with other pages, which
carry the poem to the end of Canto III. At the bottom of the first of
these pages is written *Filey 1925,* where my father was on holiday in
September of that year.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-5 .calibre}
743 The couplet lacks its second line. The passage 741-5 is a hasty
revision, based on a criticism of Lewis\'s; see his commentary, P. 325.

Commentary on Canto III

In this Canto there are many things that derive from the *Tale of
Tinúviel* (II. 10ff.): the chestnut trees, the white moths, the moon
rising, the sudden ceasing of Dairon\'s piping, Tinúviel\'s
unwillingness to flee, her hiding under the hemlocks *like spattered
moonlight* (cf. II. 11 'like a spatter of moonlight shimmering'),
Beren\'s touching her arm, her darting between the tree-trunks, and
afterwards the 'treeless knoll' where she danced in the winter. But the
Canto is also related to the poem *Light as* *Leaf on Lindentree* (see
pp. 108-10, 120-2), which had been published in June 1925, while this
part of the *Lay of Leithian* was written a little later in the same
year. Echoes of the one poem are heard in the other, and **182 THE LAYS
OF BELERIAND**

more than an echo in the line *and out he danced unheeding, fleet,*
which is found in both (p. 109, line 447; p. 179, line 725).

The aberrant names in the first two Cantos of A have now disappeared
from the text. In the second Canto my father had already given back the
name *Celegorm* to the son of Fëanor (note to line 304), and now
*Thingol* appears in A; *Lúthien* replaces *Melilot;* and *Beren*
replaces *Maglor.*

*Morgoth* now replaces *Bauglir* in A (see p. 170).

In both texts *Tinúviel* is now explicitly the Elvish word for
'nightin-gale' (line 735; see p. 124); and *Maglor,* again in both
texts, is the name of one of the three greatest singers of Elfinesse:

he who harps upon the far

forgotten beaches and dark shores

where western foam for ever roars,

Maglor whose voice is like the sea (506-9)

In the rough draft of this passage the name of this minstrel is however
*Ivárë* (though *Maglor* is written beside it), and Ivárë was named in
the *Tale of Tinúviel* (II. 10), with Tinfang and Dairon, as one of 'the
three most magic players of the Elves\', who 'plays beside the sea'.
This is the first hint of the after-history of Maglor son of Fëanor, who
in the *Tale of* *the Nauglafring* (II. 241) was slain, as also was
Celegorm, in the attack on Dior. The lines in A, omitted in B (note to
line 508), are interesting: from England unto Eglamar

on rock and dune and sandy bar

The form *Eglamar* (Gnomish, = *Eldamar)* occurs in the very early poem
*The Shores of Faery* and its prose preface (II. 262, 272); and the same
line *from England unto Eglamar* is found in the rough workings of the
beginning of the Lay (note to lines 1-30). The mention of *England* is a
reminder that at this time the association of the legends with
Eriol/Ǽlfwine was still very much alive, though there is no other
indication of it in the *Lay of Leithian.*

*Tinfang Warble* reappears from the *Lost Tales* at line 503, changed to
*Tinfang Gelion;* the meaning of *Gelion* is not explained.

In one respect only does the narrative content of the Canto depart in
any significant way from the common 'tradition' of the texts, but this
is sufficiently remarkable: the Elves departed over the sea to Valinor
at the end of the Great Journey in a fleet of ships!

Yet all his kin now marched away,

as old tales tell, to seek the bay

on the last shore of mortal lands,

where mighty ships with magic hands

they made, and sailed beyond the seas. (427-31)

This is very strange (and I am at a loss to account for it, except by
the **THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 183**

obvious explanation of a passing shift), in that the story of the
'island-car'

(Tol Eressëa), which goes back to the *Lost Tales* (I. 118-zo), is
present in all the versions of 'The Silmarillion'. The Elves are here
presented, on the other hand, as great shipbuilders in the beginning of
their days. -

With the reference in the passage just cited to the *bay* whence the
Elves set sail cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 57, where it is told that Ulmo
anchored the

'island-car' in the Bay of Balar (and that the eastern horn of the
island, breaking off, was the Isle of Balar).

In the description of Beren\'s journey to Doriath in lines 563 ff. is
the first account of the Ered Gorgoroth, the Mountains of Terror (called
'the Shadowy Mountains\' in Canto II, see pp. 170-1), with their spiders
and their waters that drove mad those who drank from them (cf. *The
Silmarillion* p. 121; and with lines 590-1 *evil shapes with baleful
light / in* *clustered eyes* cf. *ibid.* p. 164: 'monsters . . . hunting
silently with many eyes\').

IV

He lay upon the leafy mould,

his face upon earth\'s bosom cold,

aswoon in overwhelming bliss, 760

enchanted of an elvish kiss,

seeing within his darkened eyes

the light that for no darkness dies,

the loveliness that doth not fade,

though all in ashes cold be laid. 765

Then folded in the mists of sleep

he sank into abysses deep,

drowned in an overwhelming grief

for parting after meeting brief;

a shadow and a fragrance fair 770

lingered, and waned, and was not there.

Forsaken, barren, bare as stone,

the daylight found him cold, alone.

'Where art thou gone? The day is bare,

the sunlight dark, and cold the air! 775

Tinúviel, where went thy feet?

O wayward star! O maiden sweet!

O flower of Elfland all too fair

for mortal heart! The woods are bare!

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 183**

obvious explanation of a passing shift), in that the story of the
'island-car'

(Tol Eressëa), which goes back to the *Lost Tales* (I. 118-zo), is
present in all the versions of 'The Silmarillion'. The Elves are here
presented, on the other hand, as great shipbuilders in the beginning of
their days. -

With the reference in the passage just cited to the *bay* whence the
Elves set sail cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 57, where it is told that Ulmo
anchored the

'island-car' in the Bay of Balar (and that the eastern horn of the
island, breaking off, was the Isle of Balar).

In the description of Beren\'s journey to Doriath in lines 563 ff. is
the first account of the Ered Gorgoroth, the Mountains of Terror (called
'the Shadowy Mountains\' in Canto II, see pp. 170-1), with their spiders
and their waters that drove mad those who drank from them (cf. *The
Silmarillion* p. 121; and with lines 590-1 *evil shapes with baleful
light / in* *clustered eyes* cf. *ibid.* p. 164: 'monsters . . . hunting
silently with many eyes\').

IV

He lay upon the leafy mould,

his face upon earth\'s bosom cold,

aswoon in overwhelming bliss, 760

enchanted of an elvish kiss,

seeing within his darkened eyes

the light that for no darkness dies,

the loveliness that doth not fade,

though all in ashes cold be laid. 765

Then folded in the mists of sleep

he sank into abysses deep,

drowned in an overwhelming grief

for parting after meeting brief;

a shadow and a fragrance fair 770

lingered, and waned, and was not there.

Forsaken, barren, bare as stone,

the daylight found him cold, alone.

'Where art thou gone? The day is bare,

the sunlight dark, and cold the air! 775

Tinúviel, where went thy feet?

O wayward star! O maiden sweet!

O flower of Elfland all too fair

for mortal heart! The woods are bare!

**184 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

The woods are bare! ' he rose andcried. 780

'Ere spring was born, the spring hath died!'

And wandering in path and mind

he groped as one gone sudden blind,

who seeks to grasp the hidden light

with faltering hands in more than night. 785

And thus in anguish Beren paid

for that great doom upon him laid,

the deathless love of Lúthien,

too fair for love of mortal Men;

and in his doom was Lúthien snared, 790

the deathless in his dying shared;

and Fate them forged a binding chain

of living love and mortal pain.

Beyond all hope her feet returned

at eve, when in the sky there burned 795

the flame of stars; and in her eyes

there trembled the starlight of the skies,

and from her hair the fragrance fell

of elvenflowers in elven-dell.

Thus Lúthien, whom no pursuit, 800

no snare, no dart that hunters shoot,

might hope to win or hold, she came

at the sweet calling of her name;

and thus in his her slender hand

was linked in far Beleriand; 805

in hour enchanted long ago

her arms about his neck did go,

and gently down she drew to rest

his weary head upon her breast.

A! Lúthien, Tinúviel, 810

why wentest thou to darkling dell

with shining eyes and dancing pace,

the twilight glimmering in thy face?

Each day before the end of eve

she sought her love, nor would him leave, 815

until the stars were dimmed, and day

came glimmering eastward silver-grey.

Then trembling-veiled she would appear

and dance before him, half in fear;

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 185**

there flitting just before his feet 820

she gently chid with laughter sweet:

'Come! dance now, Beren, dance with me!

For fain thy dancing I would see.

Come! thou must woo with nimbler feet,

than those who walk where mountains meet 825

the bitter skies beyond this realm

of marvellous moonlit beech and elm.'

In Doriath Beren long ago

new art and lore he learned to know;

his limbs were freed; his eyes alight, 830

kindled with a new enchanted sight;

and to her dancing feet his feet

attuned went dancing free and fleet;

his laughter welled as from a spring

of music, and his voice would sing 835

as voices of those in Doriath

where paved with flowers are floor and path.

The year thus on to summer rolled,

from spring to a summertime of gold.

Thus fleeting fast their short hour flies, 840

while Dairon watches with fiery eyes,

haunting the gloom of tangled trees

all day, until at night he sees

in the fickle moon their moving feet,

two lovers linked in dancing sweet, 845

two shadows shimmering on the green

where lonely-dancing maid had been.

'Hateful art thou, O Land of Trees!

May fear and silence on thee seize!

My flute shall fall from idle hand 850

and mirth shall leave Beleriand;

music shall perish and voices fail

and trees stand dumb in dell and dale!'

It seemed a hush had fallen there

upon the waiting woodland air; 855

and often murmured Thingol\'s folk

in wonder, and to their king they spoke:

'This spell of silence who hath wrought?

What web hath Dairon\'s music caught?

l86 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

It seems the very birds sing low; 860

murmurless Esgalduin doth flow;

the leaves scarce whisper on the trees,

and soundless beat the wings of bees! '

This Lúthien heard, and there the queen

her sudden glances saw unseen. 865

But Thingol marvelled, and he sent

for Dairon the piper, ere he went

and sat upon his mounded seat ---

his grassy throne by the grey feet

of the Queen of Beeches, Hirilorn, 870

upon whose triple piers were borne

the mightiest vault of leaf and bough

from world\'s beginning until now.

She stood above Esgalduin\'s shore,

where long slopes fell beside the door, 875

the guarded gates, the portals stark

of the Thousand echoing Caverns dark.

There Thingol sat and heard no sound

save far off footsteps on the ground;

no flute, no voice, no song of bird, 880

no choirs of windy leaves there stirred;

and Dairon coming no word spoke,

silent amid the woodland folk.

Then Thingol said: \'O Dairon fair,

thou master of all musics rare, 885

O magic heart and wisdom wild,

whose ear nor eye may be beguiled,

what omen doth this silence bear?

What horn afar upon the air,

what summons do the woods await ? 890

Mayhap the Lord Tavros from his gate

and tree-propped halls, the forest-god,

rides his wild stallion golden-shod

amid the trumpets\' tempest loud,

amid his green-clad hunters proud, 895

leaving his deer and friths divine

and emerald forests? Some faint sign

of his great onset may have come

upon the Western winds, and dumb

the woods now listen for a chase 900

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 187**

that here once more shall thundering race

beneath the shade of mortal trees.

Would it were so! The Lands of Ease

hath Tavros left not many an age,

since Morgoth evil wars did wage, 905

since ruin fell upon the North

and the Gnomes unhappy wandered forth.

But if not he, who comes or what?'

And Dairon answered: 'He cometh not!

No feet divine shall leave that shore, 910

where the Shadowy Seas\' last surges roar,

till many things be come to pass,

and many evils wrought. Alas!

the guest is here. The woods are still,

but wait not; for a marvel chill 915

them holds at the strange deeds they see,

but kings see not --- though queens, maybe,

may guess, and maidens, maybe, know.

Where one went lonely two now go! '

'Whither thy riddle points is plain' 920

the king in anger said, 'but deign

to make it plainer! Who is he

that earns my wrath? How walks he free

within my woods amid my folk,

a stranger to both beech and oak ? ' 925

But Dairon looked on Lúthien

and would he had not spoken then,

and no more would he speak that day,

though Thingol\'s face with wrath was grey.

Then Lúthien stepped lightly forth: 930

'Far in the mountain-leaguered North,

my father,' said she, 'lies the land

that groans beneath King Morgoth\'s hand.

Thence came one hither; bent and worn

in wars and travail, who had sworn 935

undying hatred of that king;

the last of Bëor\'s sons, they sing,

and even hither far and deep

within thy woods the echoes creep

through the wild mountain-passes cold, 940

the last of Bëor\'s house to hold

**188 THE LAYS OF BELER1AND**

a sword unconquered, neck unbowed,

a heart by evil power uncowed.

No evil needst thou think or fear

of Beren son of Barahir! 945

If aught thou hast to say to him,

then swear to hurt not flesh nor limb,

and I will lead him to thy hall,

a son of kings, no mortal thrall.'

Then long King Thingol looked on her 950

while hand nor foot nor tongue did stir,

and Melian, silent, unamazed,

on Lúthien and Thingol gazed.

'No blade nor chain his limbs shall mar'

the king then swore. 'He wanders far, 955

and news, mayhap, he hath for me,

and words I have for him, maybe!'

Now Thingol bade them all depart

save Dairon, whom he called: 'What art,

what wizardry of Northern mist 960

hath this illcomer brought us? List!

Tonight go thou by secret path,

who knowest all wide Doriath,

and watch that Lúthien --- daughter mine,

what madness doth thy heart entwine, 965

what web from Morgoth\'s dreadful halls

hath caught thy feet and thee enthralls! ---

that she bid not this Beren flee

back whence he came. I would him see!

Take with thee woodland archers wise. 970

Let naught beguile your hearts or eyes!'

Thus Dairon heavyhearted did,

and the woods were filled with watchers hid;

yet needless, for Lúthien that night

led Beren by the golden light 975

of mounting moon unto the shore

and bridge before her father\'s door;

and the white light silent looked within

the waiting portals yawning dim.

Downward with gentle hand she led 980

through corridors of carven dread

whose turns were lit by lanterns hung

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 189**

or flames from torches that were flung

on dragons hewn in the cold stone

with jewelled eyes and teeth of bone. 985

Then sudden, deep beneath the earth

the silences with silver mirth

were shaken and the rocks were ringing,

the birds of Melian were singing;

and wide the ways of shadow spread 990

as into arched halls she led

Beren in wonder. There a light

like day immortal and like night

of stars unclouded, shone and gleamed.

A vault of topless trees it seemed, 995

whose trunks of carven stone there stood

like towers of an enchanted wood

in magic fast for ever bound,

bearing a roof whose branches wound

in endless tracery of green 1000

lit by some leaf-emprisoned sheen

of moon and sun, and wrought of gems,

and each leaf hung on golden stems.

Lo! there amid immortal flowers

the nightingales in shining bowers 1005

sang o\'er the head of Melian,

while water for ever dripped and ran

from fountains in the rocky floor.

There Thingol sat. His crown he wore

of green and silver, and round his chair 1010

a host in gleaming armour fair.

Then Beren looked upon the king

and stood amazed; and swift a ring

of elvish weapons hemmed him round.

Then Beren looked upon the ground, 1015

for Melian\'s gaze had sought his face,

and dazed there drooped he in that place,

and when the king spake deep and slow:

'Who art thou stumblest hither? Know

that none unbidden seek this throne 1020

and ever leave these halls of stone!'

no word he answered, filled with dread.

But Lúthien answered in his stead:

'Behold, my father, one who came

**THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

pursued by hatred likeaflame! 1025

Lo! Beren son of Barahir!

What need hath he thy wrath to fear,

foe of our foes, without a friend,

whose knees to Morgoth do not bend?'

'Let Beren answer!' Thingol said. 1030

'What wouldst thou here? What hither led

thy wandering feet, O mortal wild?

How hast thou Lúthien beguiled

or darest thus to walk this wood

unasked, in secret ? Reason good 103 5

\'twere best declare now if thou may,

or never again see light of day! '

Then Beren looked in Lúthien\'s eyes

and saw a light of starry skies,

and thence was slowly drawn his gaze 1040

to Melian\'s face. As from a maze

of wonder dumb he woke; his heart

the bonds of awe there burst apart

and filled with the fearless pride of old;

in his glance now gleamed an anger cold. IO45

'My feet hath fate, O king,' he said,

'here over the mountains bleeding led,

and what I sought not I have found,

and love it is hath here me bound.

Thy dearest treasure I desire; 1050

nor rocks nor steel nor Morgoth\'s fire

nor all the power of Elfinesse

shall keep that gem I would possess.

For fairer than are born to Men

A daughter hast thou, Lúthien.' IO55

Silence then fell upon the hall;

like graven stone there stood they all,

save one who cast her eyes aground,

and one who laughed with bitter sound.

Dairon the piper leant there pale 1060

against a pillar. His fingers frail

there touched a flute that whispered not;

his eyes were dark; his heart was hot.

'Death is the guerdon thou hast earned,

O baseborn mortal, who hast learned 1065

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 191**

in Morgoth\'s realm to spy and lurk

like Orcs that do his evil work! '

'Death!' echoed Dairon fierce and low,

but Lúthien trembling gasped in woe.

'And death,' said Thingol, 'thou shouldst taste, 1070

had I not sworn an oath in haste

that blade nor chain thy flesh should mar.

Yet captive bound by never a bar,

unchained, unfettered, shalt thou be

in lightless labyrinth endlessly 1075

that coils about my halls profound

by magic bewildered and enwound;

there wandering in hopelessness

thou shalt learn the power of Elfinesse!'

'That may not be!' Lo! Beren spake, 1080

and through the king\'s words coldly brake.

'What are thy mazes but a chain

wherein the captive blind is slain?

Twist not thy oaths, O elvish king,

like faithless Morgoth! By this ring --- 1085

the token of a lasting bond

that Felagund of Nargothrond

once swore in love to Barahir,

who sheltered him with shield and spear

and saved him from pursuing foe 1090

on Northern battlefields long ago ---

death thou canst give unearned to me,

but names I will not take from thee

of baseborn, spy, or Morgoth\'s thrall!

Are these the ways of Thingol\'s hall ?' 1095

Proud are the words, and all there turned

to see the jewels green that burned

in Beren\'s ring. These Gnomes had set

as eyes of serpents twined that met

beneath a golden crown of flowers, 11 oo

that one upholds and one devours:

the badge that Finrod made of yore

and Felagund his son now bore.

His anger was chilled, but little less,

and dark thoughts Thingol did possess, 1105

though Melian the pale leant to his side

and whispered: \'O king, forgo thy pride!

**192 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Such is my counsel. Not by thee

shall Beren be slain, for far and free

from these deep halls his fate doth lead, 111 o

yet wound with thine. O king, take heed!'

But Thingol looked on Lúthien.

'Fairest of Elves! Unhappy Men,

children of little lords and kings

mortal and frail, these fading things, 111 *5*

shall they then look with love on thee?'

his heart within him thought. 'I see

thy ring,' he said, \'O mighty man!

But to win the child of Melian

a father\'s deeds shall not avail, 1120

nor thy proud words at which I quail.

A treasure dear I too desire,

but rocks and steel and Morgoth\'s fire

from all the powers of Elfinesse

do keep the jewel I would possess. 1125

Yet bonds like these I hear thee say

affright thee not. Now go thy way!

Bring me one shining Silmaril

from Morgoth\'s crown, then if she will,

may Lúthien set her hand in thine; 1130

then shalt thou have this jewel of mine.'

Then Thingol\'s warriors loud and long

they laughed; for wide renown in song

had Fëanor\'s gems o\'er land and sea,

the peerless Silmarils; and three 1135

alone he made and kindled slow

in the land of the Valar long ago,

and there in Tun of their own light

they shone like marvellous stars at night,

in the greatGnomish hoards of Tun, 1140

while Glingal flowered and Belthil\'s bloom

yet lit the land beyond the shore

where the Shadowy Seas\' last surges roar,

ere Morgoth stole them and the Gnomes

seeking their glory left their homes, 1145

ere sorrows fell on Elves and Men,

ere Beren was or Lúthien,

ere Fëanor\'s sons in madness swore

**THE LAV OF LEITHIAN 193**

their dreadful oath. But now no more

their beauty was seen, save shining clear 1150

in Morgoth s dungeons vast and drear.

His iron crown they must adorn,

and gleam above Orcs and slaves forlorn,

treasured in Hell above all wealth,

more than his eyes; and might nor stealth 11 *55*

could touch them, or even gaze too long

upon their magic. Throng on throng

of Orcs with reddened scimitars

encircled him, and mighty bars

and everlasting gates and walls, 1160

who wore them now amidst his thralls.

Then Beren laughed more loud than they

in bitterness, and thus did say:

'For little price do elven-kings

their daughters sell --- for gems and rings 1165

and things of gold! If such thy will,

thy bidding I will now fulfill.

On Beren son of Barahir

thou hast not looked the last, I fear.

Farewell, Tinúviel, starlit maiden! 1170

Ere the pale winter pass snowladen,

I will return, not thee to buy

with any jewel in Elfinesse,

but to find my love in loveliness,

a flower that grows beneath the sky. ' 1175

Bowing before Melian and the king

he turned, and thrust aside the ring

of guards about him, and was gone,

and his footsteps faded one by one

in the dark corridors. 'A guileful oath 1180

thou sworest, father! Thou hast both

to blade and chain his flesh now doomed

in Morgoth\'s dungeons deep entombed,'

said Lúthien, and welling tears

sprang in her eyes, and hideous fears 1185

clutched at her heart. All looked away,

and later remembered the sad day

whereafter Lúthien no more sang.

Then clear in the silence the cold words rang

of Melian: 'Counsel cunning-wise, 1190

194 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

O king!' she said. 'Yet if mine eyes

lose not their power, \'twere well for thee

that Beren failed his errantry.

Well for thee, but for thy child

a dark doom and a wandering wild. ' 1195

'I sell not to Men those whom I love'

said Thingol, 'whom all things above

I cherish; and if hope there were

that Beren should ever living fare

to the Thousand Caves once more, I swear 1200

he should not ever have seen the air

or light of heaven\'s stars again.'

But Melian smiled, and there was pain

as of far knowledge in her eyes;

for such is the sorrow of the wise. 1205

NOTES

The opening of this Canto is extant in two typescripts (to line 863),
the second version being substantially expanded; it was the first of
them that C. S. Lewis received - indeed, it is clear that the rewriting
was in part due to his criticism.

758-863 The rough drafts for this portion of the Lay (much briefer than
the later text here printed) were written on the backs of
booksellers\'invoices dated 31 December 1925 and 2 February 1926.

761 In this Canto *elvish* rather than *elfin* is found already in A,
but still *elfin* in both texts at 1164 (emended in B to *elven-),*
*elven-* 799 occurs in a line found only in the later rewriting,
**B(2).**

762---73 These lines are not in A; the B (I) version, severely
criticised by C. S. Lewis, is given with his commentary, p. 326.

781-841 A: and the bare woods nor moved nor sighed.

Yet ever after when star or moon

shone clear or misty then came she soon

just after day before the eve

and found him, nor his side did leave 5

until night waned and starlight ceased

and day came pale o\'er the pathless east.

And there in far Broseliand

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN I95**

he learned the touches of her hand;

his feet grew swift as unseen airs, 1 o

his laughter soft, and far his cares,

his voice like those in Doriath

that wander where there runs no path.

Thus days of golden spring did rise

while Dairon watched with fiery eyes 15

The spelling *Broseliand* with s has now entered the A-text.

B(1) is as A, except that between lines 7 and 8 above were inserted ten
lines that my father retained in the much longer 8(2) text, 818-27
*(Then trembling-veiled,* &c.) 805 *Broseliand* B (2), emended to
*Beleriand.*

849---51 These verses are an emendation to 6(2), with *Beleriand* thus
written. For the B(1) version criticised by C. S. Lewis and the 6(2)
version before emendation see Lewis\'s commentary, p. 327.

891, 904 *Tavros* was emended in B to *Tauros,* but this seems to have
been a much later change. The rough workings here had first the name
*(Ormain* \>) *Ormaid,* then *Tavros.*

937 Original reading of B: the last of Men, as songs now sing (with
*like echoes* 939)

941 Original reading of B: the last of Men alone to hold 983---5 These
lines are marked with an X on the B-text, and the words *on dragons*
underlined and marked with an X -

presumably because the creatures of Morgoth were not

carved on the walls of the Thousand Caves.

987-9 These lines are repeated from Canto III, lines 408-10.

1010 *silver:* original reading of B *gold.*

1059---63 These lines are marked with an X on the B-text, as also are
lines 1068-9. It may be that my father wished to represent Dairon as
less unequivocally hostile to Beren, and also as ashamed of his words to
Thingol (909-19).

1087 A: that Celegorm of Nargothrond

with *Celegorm* emended first to *Felagoth* and then to *Felagund* (as
at line 304).

1098 *Gnomes:* in the margin of B is written *Elves/smiths.* This is
clearly a late change intended simply to get rid of the word *Gnomes*
(see 1.43-4).

1102-3 A: the badge that Fëanor made of yore

and Celegorm his sen now bore.

*Celegorm* is not emended here as it is at line 1087, but the couplet is
enclosed within brackets in the manuscript.

1141 *Glingal, Belthil:* original readings of B *Glingol, Bansil.*

The same changes were made in *The Children of Húrin* (pp. 80-1, notes
to lines 2027---8), where I retain the earlier forms.

**196 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

1144-5 These lines are marked with an X on the B-text, perhaps simply
because of the word *Gnomes* which here occurs in rhyme and cannot be
easily replaced (see note to 1098); but C. S. Lewis criticised the word
*their* in line 1145 as obscure in its reference (see his commentary, p.
329).

1151 A: in Morgoth Bauglir\'s dungeons drear. See p. 182.

1161 Here is written in the margin of the A manuscript: 'Mar. 27, 28
1928'.

1175 This line was not originally in A but was pencilled in with queried
indications to place it either after 1172 or (with irregular rhyming)
after 1174, as it is in B.

Commentary on Canto IV

Comparison of this Canto with the *Tale of Tinúviel* shows that the
narrative has undergone a deepening of significance, and this is largely
brought about by the cardinal change of Beren\'s being no longer an Elf
but a mortal Man (see p. 171). The story told in the poem is that of
*The Silmarillion* (pp. 165---8); for the prose version, close to the
Lay in every feature large and small, and indeed in many actual phrases,
was based directly on the verses, and in this Canto the verses underwent
no significant later revision. There are some elements in the poem that
were not taken up into the prose version, such as the description of the
Thousand Caves (980 ff.), whose splendour and beauty now first appear
(cf. my remarks on Thingol\'s wealth, pp. 160-1) --- but a description
of Thingol\'s dwelling is given earlier in *The Silmarillion,* p. 93. In
the original text of the *Silmarillion* version Daeron\'s part was in
fact entirely excluded, though obviously only for the sake of
compression (it was reintroduced into the published work\*). The loud
laughter of Thingol\'s warriors at Thingol\'s demand that Beren fetch
him a Silmaril is not in the prose account, and was perhaps deliberately
excluded. This feature harks back rather to the scene in the *Tale of
Tinúviel* (II. 13), where Thingol 'burst into laughter' at the aspect of
Beren as suitor for his daughter, and where the courtiers smiled when
Thingol requested a Silmaril as the bride-price, seeing that he 'treated
the matter as an uncouth jest'. Cf. my commentary on the Tale, II. 53:
The tone is altogether lighter and less grave than it afterwards became;
in the jeering laughter of Thingol, who treats the matter as a jest and
Beren as a benighted fool, there is no hint of what is quite explicit in
the later story: 'Thus he wrought the doom of Doriath, and was ensnared
within the curse of Mandos.'

Canto III was in being by the autumn of 1925; while against Canto IV

\*On pp. 166, 172; but the passage concerning Daeron on p. 183 is
original. My father apparently intended to insert references to
Daeron\'s betrayals of Lúthien, but did not do so.

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 197**

line 1161 in A there stands the date 27-8 March, 1928. The rough drafts
for the opening of IV (lines 758-863) are written on the backs of
invoices dated December 1925 and February 1926, but this does not show
very much. In any case it seems to me most improbable that my father was
writing lines 758-1161 over a period of two and a half years (September
1925 to March 1928): it is far more likely that there was a long gap,
and that this fourth Canto was written pretty much at one time. Other
evidence in fact suggests that he paused. There exist three pages of
notes written on the backs of booksellers\' invoices dated February,
March, and May 1926, and these pages are of great interest for the
development of the legend, for they contain a rapidly-composed
plot-outline in which my father is seen working out the narrative of the
next Cantos of the Lay.

This outline I will refer to as 'Synopsis I'. I give here its content as
far as the end of Canto IV. Contractions used for names are expanded,
and passages struck out (done at the time of writing) are included.

Beren and Tinuviel dance in the woods.

Dairon reports to the king.

Beren taken captive to the king.

Dairon will have him slain.

The king will shut him in his dungeons.

Tinuviel pleads.

Melian *\[struck out:* says that he must not be slain, and that\]
refuses to advise but warns Thingol darkly that Beren must not be slain
by him, and his coming was not without fate.

Thingol sends him for the Silmaril.

Beren\'s speech.

Melian says *\[struck out:* this was better than his death, but\] it
were better for Thingol if Beren succeeded not.

Thingol said he would not send him if \[he\] were going to succeed.

Melian smiles.

Flight of Beren.

In the *Tale of Tinuviel* Beren was led by Tinuviel into Thingol\'s
caves (II. 13), and as I noted (II. 52-3):

The betrayal of Beren to Thingol by Daeron \... has no place in the old
story - there is nothing to betray; and indeed it is not shown in the
tale that Dairon knew anything whatsoever of Beren before Tinuviel led
him into the cave, beyond having once seen his face in the moonlight.

Moreover, in the Tafe Dairon was Tinúviel\'s brother (II. 10;seep. 124).

In the Lay (lines 909 ff.) Dairon utters strong hints concerning the
strange quietness of the forest, which lead directly to a declaration by
Lúthien of Beren\'s presence, and a demand that her father shall not
harm him; Thingol swears that he will not, but sends Dairon with archers
to prevent Beren\'s escape - needlessly, for Lúthien brings him that
same **198 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

night to Thingol\'s hall. This first part of Synopsis I suggests ideas
that were never given form. Thus Dairon speaks to Thingol of Beren, as
in the Lay, but Beren is actually apprehended and taken to the king as a
prisoner; moreover (while it is of course impossible to be certain of
the precise articulation of the plot from such an extremely compressed
outline) Dairon seems more actively to seek Beren\'s death than he does
in the poem (despite line 1068), and Tinúviel pleads against her
father\'s policy.

For explanation of the references in A to Celegorm (notes to lines 1087,
1102-3) see p. 171. According to the earlier story seen in A the ring
given to Barahir was made by Fëanor, Celegorm\'s father. In B the later
story is present, and the badge of the entwined serpents is that of
Felagund\'s father Finrod (Finarfin in *The Silmarillion)* who now first
appears (other than in a later note to *The Children of Húrin,* see pp.
80, 138. Barahir now first replaces Egnor as Beren\'s father in A; and
by later emendation to B (lines 937, 941) Bëor appears, who at this
time, as is seen from the prose texts, was Barahir\'s father. With
exceedingly complex genealogical and chronological restructuring of the
houses of the Elf-friends in later years Bëor came to be removed from
Barahir by many generations.

The name *Tavros* given to Oromë (891, 904) has occurred long before in
the Gnomish dictionary, defined as the 'chief wood-fay, the Blue Spirit
of the Woods\' (I. 267, entry *Tavari).* With his *tree-propped halls*
(892) compare the description of Oromë\'s dwelling in Valmar in the tale
of *The Coming of the Valar and the Building of Valinor,* I. 75-6. At
line 893 is the first mention of the golden hooves of Oromë\'s horse.

So days drew on from the mournful day;

the curse of silence no more lay

on Doriath, though Dairon\'s flute

and Lúthien\'s singing both were mute.

The murmurs soft awake once more 1210

about the woods, the waters roar

past the great gates of Thingol\'s halls;

but no dancing step of Lúthien falls

on turf or leaf. For she forlorn,

where stumbled once, where bruised and torn, 1215

**198 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

night to Thingol\'s hall. This first part of Synopsis I suggests ideas
that were never given form. Thus Dairon speaks to Thingol of Beren, as
in the Lay, but Beren is actually apprehended and taken to the king as a
prisoner; moreover (while it is of course impossible to be certain of
the precise articulation of the plot from such an extremely compressed
outline) Dairon seems more actively to seek Beren\'s death than he does
in the poem (despite line 1068), and Tinúviel pleads against her
father\'s policy.

For explanation of the references in A to Celegorm (notes to lines 1087,
1102-3) see p. 171. According to the earlier story seen in A the ring
given to Barahir was made by Fëanor, Celegorm\'s father. In B the later
story is present, and the badge of the entwined serpents is that of
Felagund\'s father Finrod (Finarfin in *The Silmarillion)* who now first
appears (other than in a later note to *The Children of Húrin,* see pp.
80, 138. Barahir now first replaces Egnor as Beren\'s father in A; and
by later emendation to B (lines 937, 941) Bëor appears, who at this
time, as is seen from the prose texts, was Barahir\'s father. With
exceedingly complex genealogical and chronological restructuring of the
houses of the Elf-friends in later years Bëor came to be removed from
Barahir by many generations.

The name *Tavros* given to Oromë (891, 904) has occurred long before in
the Gnomish dictionary, defined as the 'chief wood-fay, the Blue Spirit
of the Woods\' (I. 267, entry *Tavari).* With his *tree-propped halls*
(892) compare the description of Oromë\'s dwelling in Valmar in the tale
of *The Coming of the Valar and the Building of Valinor,* I. 75-6. At
line 893 is the first mention of the golden hooves of Oromë\'s horse.

So days drew on from the mournful day;

the curse of silence no more lay

on Doriath, though Dairon\'s flute

and Lúthien\'s singing both were mute.

The murmurs soft awake once more 1210

about the woods, the waters roar

past the great gates of Thingol\'s halls;

but no dancing step of Lúthien falls

on turf or leaf. For she forlorn,

where stumbled once, where bruised and torn, 1215

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 199**

with longing on him like a dream,

had Beren sat by the shrouded stream

Esgalduin the dark and strong,

she sat and mourned in a low song:

'Endless roll the waters past! 1220

To this my love hath come at last,

enchanted waters pitiless,

a heartache and a loneliness.'

The summer turns. In branches tall

she hears the pattering raindrops fall, 1225

the windy tide in leafy seas,

the creaking of the countless trees;

and longs unceasing and in vain

to hear one calling once again

the tender name that nightingales 1230

were called of old. Echo fails.

'Tinúviel! Tinúviel!'

the memory is like a knell,

a faint and far-off tolling bell:

'Tinúviel! Tinúviel!' 1235

\'O mother Melian, tell to me

some part of what thy dark eyes see!

Tell of thy magic where his feet

are wandering! What foes him meet?

O mother, tell me, lives he still 1240

treading the desert and the hill?

Do sun and moon above him shine,

do the rains fall on him, mother mine?'

'Nay, Lúthien my child, I fear

he lives indeed in bondage drear. 1245

The Lord of Wolves hath prisons dark,

chains and enchantments cruel and stark,

there trapped and bound and languishing

now Beren dreams that thou dost sing.'

'Then I alone must go to him 1250

and dare the dread in dungeons dim;

for none there be that will him aid

in all the world, save elven-maid

whose only skill were joy and song,

and both have failed and left her long.' 1255

200 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

Then nought said Melian thereto,

though wild the words. She wept anew,

and ran through the woods like hunted deer

with her hair streaming and eyes of fear.

Dairon she found with ferny crown 1260

silently sitting on beech-leaves brown.

On the earth she cast her at his side.

\'O Dairon, Dairon, my tears,' she cried,

'now pity for our old days\' sake!

Make me a music for heart\'s ache, 1265

for heart\'s despair, and for heart\'s dread,

for light gone dark and laughter dead! '

'But for music dead there is no note,'

Dairon answered, and at his throat

his fingers clutched. Yet his pipe he took, 1270and sadly trembling the
music shook;

and all things stayed while that piping went

wailing in the hollows, and there intent

they listened, their business and mirth,

their hearts\' gladness and the light of earth 1275

forgotten; and bird-voices failed

while Dairon\'s flute in Doriath wailed.

Lúthien wept not for very pain,

and when he ceased she spoke again:

'My friend, I have a need of friends, 1280

as he who a long dark journey wends,

and fears the road, yet dare not turn

and look back where the candles burn

in windows he has left. The night

in front, he doubts to find the light 1285

that far beyond the hills he seeks.'

And thus of Melian\'s words she speaks,

and of her doom and her desire

to climb the mountains, and the fire

and ruin of the Northern realm 1290

to dare, a maiden without helm

or sword, or strength of hardy limb,

where magic founders and grows dim.

His aid she sought to guide her forth

and find the pathways to the North, 1295

if he would not for love of her

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 201**

go by her side a wanderer.

'Wherefore,' said he, 'should Dairon go

into direst peril earth doth know

for the sake of mortal who did steal 1300

his laughter and joy? No love I feel

for Beren son of Barahir,

nor weep for him in dungeons drear,

who in this wood have chains enow,

heavy and dark. But thee, I vow, 1305

I will defend from perils fell

and deadly wandering into hell.'

No more they spake that day, and she

perceived not his meaning. Sorrowfully

she thanked him, and she left him there. 1310

A tree she climbed, till the bright air

above the woods her dark hair blew,

and straining afar her eyes could view

the outline grey and faint and low

of dizzy towers where the clouds go, 1315

the southern faces mounting sheer

in rocky pinnacle and pier

of Shadowy Mountains pale and cold;

and wide the lands before them rolled.

But straightway Dairon sought the king 1320

and told him his daughter\'s pondering,

and how her madness might her lead

to ruin, unless the king gave heed.

Thingol was wroth, and yet amazed;

in wonder and half fear he gazed 1325

on Dairon, and said: 'True hast thou been.

Now ever shall love be us between,

while Doriath lasts; within this realm

thou art a prince of beech and elm!'

He sent for Lúthien, and said:

\'O maiden fair, what hath thee led

to ponder madness and despair

to wander to ruin, and to fare

from Doriath against my will,

stealing like a wild thing men would kill 1335

into the emptiness outside?'

'The wisdom, father,' she replied;

**202 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

nor would she promise to forget,

nor would she vow for love or threat

her folly to forsake and meek 1340

in Doriath her father\'s will to seek.

This only vowed she, if go she must,

that none but herself would she now trust,

no folk of her father\'s would persuade

to break his will or lend her aid; 1345

if go she must, she would go alone

and friendless dare the walls of stone.

In angry love and half in fear

Thingol took counsel his most dear

to guard and keep. He would not bind 1350

in caverns deep and intertwined

sweet Lúthien, his lovely maid,

who robbed of air must wane and fade,

who ever must look upon the sky

and see the sun and moon go by. 1355

But close unto his mounded seat

and grassy throne there ran the feet

of Hirilorn, the beechen queen.

Upon her triple boles were seen

no break or branch, until aloft 1360

in a green glimmer, distant, soft,

the mightiest vault of leaf and bough

from world\'s beginning until now

was flung above Esgalduin\'s shores

and the long slopes to Thingol\'s doors. 1365

Grey was the rind of pillars tall

and silken-smooth, and far and small

to squirrels\' eyes were those who went

at her grey feet upon the bent.

Now Thingol made men in the beech, 1 *370*

in that great tree, as far as reach

their longest ladders, there to build

an airy house; and as he willed

a little dwelling of fair wood

was made, and veiled in leaves it stood 1375

above the first branches. Corners three

it had and windows faint to see,

and by three shafts of Hirilorn

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 203**

in the corners standing was upborne.

There Lúthien was bidden dwell, 1380

until she was wiser and the spell

of madness left her. Up she clomb

the long ladders to her new home

among the leaves, among the birds;

she sang no song, she spoke no words. 1385

White glimmering in the tree she rose,

and her little door they heard her close.

The ladders were taken and no more

her feet might tread Esgalduin\'s shore.

Thither at whiles they climbed and brought 1390

all things she needed or besought;

but death was his, whoso should dare

a ladder leave, or creeping there

should set one by the tree at night;

a guard was held from dusk to light 1395

about the grey feet of Hirilorn

and Lúthien in prison and forlorn.

There Dairon grieving often stood

in sorrow for the captive of the wood,

and melodies made upon his flute 1400

leaning against a grey tree-root.

Lúthien would from her windows stare

and see him far under piping there,

and she forgave his betraying word

for the music and the grief she heard, 1405

and only Dairon would she let

across her threshold foot to set.

Yet long the hours when she must sit

and see the sunbeams dance and flit

in beechen leaves, or watch the stars 1410

peep on clear nights between the bars

of beechen branches. And one night

just ere the changing of the light

a dream there came, from the Gods, maybe,

or Melian\'s magic. She dreamed that she 1415

heard Beren\'s voice o\'er hill and fell

'Tinuviel' call, 'Tinúviel.'

And her heart answered: 'Let me be gone

to seek him no others think upon! '

**2O4 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

She woke and saw the moonlight pale 1420

through the slim leaves. It trembled frail

upon her arms, as these she spread

and there in longing bowed her head,

and yearned for freedom and escape.

Now Lúthien doth her counsel shape; 1425

and Melian\'s daughter of deep lore

knew many things, yea, magics more

than then or now know elven-maids

that glint and shimmer in the glades.

She pondered long, while the moon sank 1430

and faded, and the starlight shrank,

and the dawn opened. At last a smile

on her face nickered. She mused a while,

and watched the morning sunlight grow,

then called to those that walked below. 1435

And when one climbed to her she prayed

that he would in the dark pools wade

of cold Esgalduin, water clear,

the clearest water cold and sheer

to draw for her. 'At middle night,' 1440

she said, 'in bowl of silver white

it must be drawn and brought to me

with no word spoken, silently.'

Another she begged to bring her wine

in a jar of gold where flowers twine - 1445

'and singing let him come to me

at high noon, singing merrily.'

Again she spake: 'Now go, I pray,

to Melian the queen, and say:

"thy daughter many a weary hour 1450

slow passing watches in her bower;

a spinning-wheel she begs thee send.'"

Then Dairon she called: 'I prithee, friend,

climb up and talk to Lúthien!'

And sitting at her window then, 1455

she said: 'My Dairon, thou hast craft,

beside thy music, many a shaft

and many a tool of carven wood

to fashion with cunning. It were good,

if thou wouldst make a little loom 1460

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN** 205

to stand in the corner of my room.

My idle fingers would spin and weave

a pattern of colours, of morn and eve,

of sun and moon and changing light

amid the beech-leaves waving bright. ' 1465

This Dairon did and asked her then:

\'O Lúthien, O Lúthien,

What wilt thou weave? What wilt thou spin?'

'A marvellous thread, and wind therein

a potent magic, and a spell 1470

I will weave within my web that hell

nor all the powers of Dread shall break.'

Then Dairon wondered, but he spake

no word to Thingol, though his heart

feared the dark purpose of her art. 1475

And Lúthien now was left alone.

A magic song to Men unknown

she sang, and singing then the wine

with water mingled three times nine;

and as in golden jar they lay 1480

she sang a song of growth and day;

and as they lay in silver white

another song she sang, of night

and darkness without end, of height

uplifted to the stars, and flight 1485

and freedom. And all names of things

tallest and longest on earth she sings:

the locks of the Longbeard dwarves; the tail

of Draugluin the werewolf pale;

the body of Glómund the great snake; 1490

the vast upsoaring peaks that quake

above the fires in Angband\'s gloom;

the chain Angainor that ere Doom

for Morgoth shall by Gods be wrought

of steel and torment. Names she sought, 1495

and sang of Glend the sword of Nan;

of Gilim the giant of Eruman;

and last and longest named she then

the endless hair of Uinen,

the Lady of the Sea, that lies 1500

through all the waters under skies.

**2OÓ THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Then did she lave her head and sing

a theme of sleep and slumbering,

profound and fathomless and dark

as Lúthien\'s shadowy hair was dark - 1505

each thread was more slender and more fine

than threads of twilight that entwine

in filmy web the fading grass

and closing flowers as day doth pass.

Now long and longer grew her hair, 1510

and fell to her feet, and wandered there

like pools of shadow on the ground.

Then Lúthien in a slumber drowned

was laid upon her bed and slept,

till morning through the windows crept 1515

thinly and faint. And then she woke,

and the room was filled as with a smoke

and with an evening mist, and deep

she lay thereunder drowsed in sleep.

Behold! her hair from windows blew 1520

in morning airs, and darkly grew

waving about the pillars grey

of Hirilorn at break of day.

Then groping she found her little shears,

and cut the hair about her ears, 1525

and close she cropped it to her head,

enchanted tresses, thread by thread.

Thereafter grew they slow once more,

yet darker than their wont before.

And now was her labour but begun:

long was she spinning, long she spun;

and though with elvish skill she wrought,

long was her weaving. If men sought

to call her, crying from below,

'Nothing I need,' she answered, 'go! 1535

I would keep my bed, and only sleep

I now desire, who waking weep.'

Then Dairon feared, and in amaze

he called from under; but three days

she answered not. Of cloudy hair 1540

she wove a web like misty air

of moonless night, and thereof made

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN *207***

a robe as fluttering-dark as shade

beneath great trees, a magic dress

that all was drenched with drowsiness, 1545

enchanted with a mightier spell

than Melian\'s raiment in that dell

wherein of yore did Thingol roam

beneath the dark and starry dome

that hung above the dawning world. 1550

And now this robe she round her furled,

and veiled her garments shimmering white;

her mantle blue with jewels bright

like crystal stars, the lilies gold,

were wrapped and hid; and down there rolled 1555

dim dreams and faint oblivious sleep

falling about her, to softly creep

through all the air. Then swift she takes

the threads unused; of these she makes

a slender rope of twisted strands 1560

yet long and stout, and with her hands

she makes it fast unto the shaft

of Hirilorn. Now, all her craft

and labour ended, looks she forth

from her little window facing North. 1565

Already the sunlight in the trees

is drooping red, and dusk she sees

come softly along the ground below,

and now she murmurs soft and slow.

Now chanting clearer down she cast 15 70

her long hair, till it reached at last

from her window to the darkling ground.

Men far beneath her heard the sound;

but the slumbrous strand now swung and swayed

above her guards. Their talking stayed, 1575

they listened to her voice and fell

suddenly beneath a binding spell.

Now clad as in a cloud she hung;

now down her roped hair she swung

as light as squirrel, and away, 1580

away, she danced, and who could say

what paths she took, whose elvish feet

no impress made a-dancing fleet?

**2O8 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

**NOTES**

1222---3 At lines 651---2 these lines were transposed on C. S. Lewis\'s
suggestion (see p. 323); and *heartache* was emended to *hunger.*

1226 Cf. line 664.

1231 Original reading of B: *are called in elfland. Echo fails.* The
change was probably simply to get rid of 'elfland'.

1249 *now.* uncertain (original reading *doth Beren dream* emended to
*?now Beren dreams).*

1253 Throughout this Canto *elven-* and *elvish* are emendations of
*elfin* made on the B-text.

1260-1 Cf. lines 497---8.

1308---1 o Marked *revise* on the B-text.

1312 *her dark hair:* so also in A. See note to line 558.

1316---17 Cf. lines 389---90. The *Shadowy Mountains* (1318) are the
Mountains of Terror (Ered Gorgoroth): see pp. 170-1.

1323 This line is marked with an X on the B-text.

1329 As line 1323.

1358 Against *Hirilorn* in A is written *Hiradorn,* and so also at lines
1396, 1523. At line 1563 *Hiradorn* is the form in the text of A.

1362-3 Cf. lines 872-3.

1370 *men \> them* A. At 1390, where B has *they,* A had *men* \>
*they;* at 1533, 1573 *men* was not changed in either text.

1414-17 Marked with a line on the B-text; in the margin some new verses
are written, but so faint and rapid as to be quite illegible.

1488 *locks* B\] *beards A*

1489 A: of Carcharas the wolf-ward pale;

In the original draft the spelling is *Carcaras* as in the typescript
version of the *Tale of Tinúviel* (manuscript version *Karkaras).* In
the second version of *The Children of Húrin* (p. 107 line 374) the form
is *Carchafoth* (emended from *Carcharolch).*

1490 *Glomund* B\] *Glorund* A (as in the *Lost Tales,* but there always
without accent).

1493 *Angainor* A, B\] *Engainor* in the original draft.

1496 *Nan* B\] *Nann* A (but *Nan* in the original draft).

1549-50 Cf. lines 406-7.

1563 *Hirilorn* B\] *Hiradorn* A. See note to line 1358.

Commentary on Canto V

The plot-outline 'Synopsis I' covering the narrative of this Canto is
very slight:

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 209**

Mourning of Tinúviel.

Treachery of Dairon.

Building of the Tree House in Hirilorn.

Escape of Tinúviel.

*\[Added in:* Repentance, wandering, and loss of Dairon.\]

The wandering and loss of Dairon goes back to the *Tale of Tinúviel*
(II. 20-1) and survived into *The Silmarillion (p.* 183), but there is
no other mention of his 'repentance' (though this is perhaps implied in
the Lay, lines I3g8ff.)

In my commentary on the passage in the *Tale of Tinúviel* corresponding
to this Canto I remarked (II. 54) that

the story of her imprisonment in the house in Hirilorn and her escape
from it never underwent any significant change. The passage in *The*
*Silmarillion* (p. 172) is indeed very brief, but its lack of detail is
due to compression rather than to omission based on dissatisfaction; the
Lay *of Leithian,* from which the prose account in *The Silmarillion*
directly derives, is in this passage so close, in point of narrative
detail, to the *Tale of Tinúviel* as to be almost identical with it.

There is little to add to this here. In one respect the narrative of the
Lay is at variance with the story told in *The Silmarillion.* What was
'the curse of silence' (1207)? It was due to Dairon (848---53). In a
preliminary, soon abandoned draft for the 'Silmarillion' version, where
the story was to be told far more amply (by following the Lay more
closely) the matter is made more explicit:

But Dairon haunted the trees and watched them from afar; and he cried
aloud in the bitterness of his heart: 'Hateful is now become the land
that I loved, and the trees misshapen. No more shall music here be
heard. Let all voices fail in Doriath, and in every dale and upon every
hill let the trees stand silent!' And there was a hush and a great
stillness; and Thingol\'s folk were filled with wonder. And they spoke
to their king, asking what was the reason of the silence.

Dairon\'s 'curse' was lifted after Beren\'s departure, although Lúthien
no longer sang and Dairon no longer piped. This is in contrast to *The*
*Silmarillion* (p. 168), where after Beren went Lúthien was silent, and
from that hour she sang not again in Doriath.

A *brooding silence fell upon the woods.*

For the names in the 'lengthening spell' see II. 67-8. A new element
among the 'longest things\' is introduced in the version in the Lay, the
peaks above Angband (1491-2); and in B the name of the great Dragon
becomes *Glómund.* The chain with which Morgoth was bound, *Angainol
Angainu* in the *Lost Tales,* becomes *Angainor;* but it is curious that
in the Lay it is only spoken of as a punishment awaiting **2IO THE LAYS
OF BELERIAND**

Morgoth in the future *(ere Doom,* 1493), whereas in the old story of
*The* *Chaining of Melko* (1.104) it was the shackle with which he was
taken prisoner in the original war that led to his captivity in Valinor,
and this survived in *The Silmarillion* (p. 51): at the end of the Elder
Days 'he was bound with the chain Angainor which he had worn aforetime'
*(ibid.*

p\. 252).

New elements in the story that have yet to appear in the actual
narrative of the Lay are seen in *Draugluin,* replacing in B *Carcharas*
of A in the 'lengthening spell' (thus Carcharas is no longer the 'father
of wolves\', see 11.68), and in Melian\'s reference to Beren\'s lying in
the dungeons of the Lord of Wolves (1246).

Lúthien\'s dream in which she heard Beren\'s voice far off is still
ascribed, as it was in the *Tale,* to the Gods, if less positively *(a
dream* *there came, from the Gods, may be, / or Melian\'s magic,*
1414-15); see II. 19, 68. But the passage is marked in B, perhaps
indicating dissatisfaction with the idea.

There is curious detail in a marginal note to the B-text. At some time
(as I think) long afterwards someone unknown wrote against lines
1331---6: 'Thingol is here being rather obtuse'; and against this remark
my father scribbled: 'But he could not believe she *loved* Beren -
unless some evil spell had somehow been laid on her.'

VI

When Morgoth in that day of doom

had slain the Trees and filled with gloom 1585

the shining land of Valinor,

there Fëanor and his sons then swore

the mighty oath upon the hill

of tower-crowned Tun, that still

wrought wars and sorrow in the world. 1590

From darkling seas the fogs unfurled

their blinding shadows grey and cold

where Glingal once had bloomed with gold

and Belthil bore its silver flowers.

The mists were mantled round the towers 1595

of the Elves\' white city by the sea.

There countless torches fitfully

did start and twinkle, as the Gnomes

were gathered to their fading homes,

**2IO THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Morgoth in the future *(ere Doom,* 1493), whereas in the old story of
*The* *Chaining of Melko* (1.104) it was the shackle with which he was
taken prisoner in the original war that led to his captivity in Valinor,
and this survived in *The Silmarillion* (p. 51): at the end of the Elder
Days 'he was bound with the chain Angainor which he had worn aforetime'
*(ibid.*

p\. 252).

New elements in the story that have yet to appear in the actual
narrative of the Lay are seen in *Draugluin,* replacing in B *Carcharas*
of A in the 'lengthening spell' (thus Carcharas is no longer the 'father
of wolves\', see 11.68), and in Melian\'s reference to Beren\'s lying in
the dungeons of the Lord of Wolves (1246).

Lúthien\'s dream in which she heard Beren\'s voice far off is still
ascribed, as it was in the *Tale,* to the Gods, if less positively *(a
dream* *there came, from the Gods, may be, / or Melian\'s magic,*
1414-15); see II. 19, 68. But the passage is marked in B, perhaps
indicating dissatisfaction with the idea.

There is curious detail in a marginal note to the B-text. At some time
(as I think) long afterwards someone unknown wrote against lines
1331---6: 'Thingol is here being rather obtuse'; and against this remark
my father scribbled: 'But he could not believe she *loved* Beren -
unless some evil spell had somehow been laid on her.'

VI

When Morgoth in that day of doom

had slain the Trees and filled with gloom 1585

the shining land of Valinor,

there Fëanor and his sons then swore

the mighty oath upon the hill

of tower-crowned Tun, that still

wrought wars and sorrow in the world. 1590

From darkling seas the fogs unfurled

their blinding shadows grey and cold

where Glingal once had bloomed with gold

and Belthil bore its silver flowers.

The mists were mantled round the towers 1595

of the Elves\' white city by the sea.

There countless torches fitfully

did start and twinkle, as the Gnomes

were gathered to their fading homes,

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 211**

and thronged the long and winding stair 1600

that led to the wide echoing square.

There Fëanor mourned his jewels divine,

the Silmarils he made. Like wine

his wild and potent words them fill;

a great host barkens deathly still. 1605

But all he said both wild and wise,

half truth and half the fruit of lies

that Morgoth sowed in Valinor,

in other songs and other lore

recorded is. He bade them flee 1610

from lands divine, to cross the sea,

the pathless plains, the perilous shores

where ice-infested water roars;

to follow Morgoth to the unlit earth

leaving their dwellings and olden mirth; 1615

to go back to the Outer Lands

to wars and weeping. There their hands

they joined in vows, those kinsmen seven,

swearing beneath the stars of Heaven,

by Varda the Holy that them wrought 1620

and bore them each with radiance fraught

and set them in the deeps to flame.

Timbrenting\'s holy height they name,

whereon are built the timeless halls

of Manwë Lord of Gods. Who calls 1625

these names in witness may not break

his oath, though earth and heaven shake.

Curufin, Celegorm the fair,

Damrod and Diriel were there,

and Cranthir dark, and Maidros tall 1630

(whom after torment should befall),

and Maglor the mighty who like the sea

with deep voice sings yet mournfully.

'Be he friend or foe, or seed defiled

of Morgoth Bauglir, or mortal child 16 *35*

that in after days on earth shall dwell,

no law, nor love, nor league of hell,

not might of Gods, not moveless fate

shall him defend from wrath and hate

of Fëanor\'s sons, who takes or steals 1640

**212 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

or finding keeps the Silmarils,

the thrice-enchanted globes of light

that shine until the final night.'

The wars and wandering of the Gnomes

this tale tells not. Far from their homes 1645

they fought and laboured in the North.

Fingon daring alone went forth

and sought for Maidros where he hung;

in torment terrible he swung,

his wrist in band of forged steel, 1650

from a sheer precipice where reel

the dizzy senses staring down

from Thangorodrim\'s stony crown.

The song of Fingon Elves yet sing,

captain of armies, Gnomish king, 1655

who fell at last in flame of swords

with his white banners and his lords.

They sing how Maidros free he set,

and stayed the feud that slumbered yet

between the children proud of Finn. 1660

Now joined once more they hemmed him in,

even great Morgoth, and their host

beleaguered Angband, till they boast

no Orc nor demon ever dare

their leaguer break or past them fare. 1665

Then days of solace woke on earth

beneath the new-lit Sun, and mirth

was heard in the Great Lands where Men,

a young race, spread and wandered then.

That was the time that songs do call 1670

the Siege of Angband, when like a wall

the Gnomish swords did fence the earth

from Morgoth\'s ruin, a time of birth,

of blossoming, of flowers, of growth;

but still there held the deathless oath, 1675

and still the Silmarils were deep

in Angband\'s darkly-dolven keep.

An end there came, when fortune turned,

and flames of Morgoth\'s vengeance burned,

and all the might which he prepared 1680

in secret in his fastness flared

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 213**

and poured across the Thirsty Plain;

and armies black were in his train.

The leaguer of Angband Morgoth broke;

his enemies in fire and smoke 1685

were scattered, and the Orcs there slew

and slew, until the blood like dew

dripped from each cruel and crooked blade.

Then Barahir the bold did aid

with mighty spear, with shield and men, 1690

Felagund wounded. To the fen

escaping, there they bound their troth,

and Felagund deeply swore an oath

of friendship to his kin and seed,

of love and succour in time of need. 1695

But there of Finrod\'s children four

were Angrod slain and proud Egnor.

Felagund and Orodreth then

gathered the remnant of their men,

their maidens and their children fair; 1700

forsaking war they made their lair

and cavernous hold far in the south.

On Narog\'s towering bank its mouth

was opened; which they hid and veiled,

and mighty doors, that unassailed 1705

till Turin\'s day stood vast and grim,

they built by trees o\'ershadowed dim.

And with them dwelt a long time there

Curufin, and Celegorm the fair;

and a mighty folk grew neath their hands 1710

in Narog\'s secret halls and lands.

Thus Felagund in Nargothrond

still reigned, a hidden king whose bond

was sworn to Barahir the bold.

And now his son through forests cold 1715

wandered alone as in a dream.

Esgalduin\'s dark and shrouded stream

he followed, till its waters frore

were joined to Sirion, Sirion hoar,

pale silver water wide and free 1720

rolling in splendour to the sea.

Now Beren came unto the pools,

**214 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

wide shallow meres where Sirion cools

his gathered tide beneath the stars,

ere chafed and sundered by the bars 1725

of reedy banks a mighty fen

he feeds and drenches, plunging then

into vast chasms underground,

where many miles his way is wound.

Umboth-Muilin, Twilight Meres, 1730

those great wide waters grey as tears

the Elves then named. Through driving rain

from thence across the Guarded Plain

the Hills of the Hunters Beren saw

with bare tops bitten bleak and raw 1735

by western winds; but in the mist

of streaming rains that flashed and hissed

into the meres he knew there lay

beneath those hills the cloven way

of Narog, and the watchful halls 1740

of Felagund beside the falls

of Ingwil tumbling from the wold.

An everlasting watch they hold,

the Gnomes of Nargothrond renowned,

and every hill is tower-crowned, 1745

where wardens sleepless peer and gaze

guarding the plain and all the ways

between Narog swift and Sirion pale;

and archers whose arrows never fail

there range the woods, and secret kill 1750

all who creep thither against their will.

Yet now he thrusts into that land

bearing the gleaming ring on hand

of Felagund, and oft doth cry:

'Here comes no wandering Orc or spy, 1755

but Beren son of Barahir

who once to Felagund was dear.'

So ere he reached the eastward shore

of Narog, that doth foam and roar

o\'er boulders black, those archers green 1760

came round him. When the ring was seen

they bowed before him, though his plight

was poor and beggarly. Then by night

they led him northward, for no ford

**THE LAY OF** LEITHIAN **215**

nor bridge was built where Narog poured 1765

before the gates of Nargothrond,

and friend nor foe might pass beyond.

To northward, where that stream yet young

more slender flowed, below the tongue

of foam-splashed land that Ginglith pens 1770

when her brief golden torrent ends

and joins the Narog, there they wade.

Now swiftest journey thence they made

to Nargothrond\'s sheer terraces

and dim gigantic palaces. 1775

They came beneath a sickle moon

to doors there darkly hung and hewn

with posts and lintels of ponderous stone

and timbers huge. Now open thrown

were gaping gates, and in they strode 1780

where Felagund on throne abode.

Fair were the words of Narog\'s king

to Beren, and his wandering

and all his feuds and bitter wars

recounted soon. Behind closed doors 1785

they sat, while Beren told his tale

of Doriath; and words him fail

recalling Lúthien dancing fair

with wild white roses in her hair,

remembering her elven voice that rung 1790

while stars in twilight round her hung.

He spake of Thingol\'s marvellous halls

by enchantment lit, where fountain falls

and ever the nightingale doth sing

to Melian and to her king. 1795

The quest he told that Thingol laid

in scorn on him; how for love of maid

more fair than ever was born to Men,

of Tinúviel, of Lúthien,

he must essay the burning waste, 1800

and doubtless death and torment taste.

This Felagund in wonder heard,

and heavily spake at last this word:

'It seems that Thingol doth desire

thy death. The everlasting fire 1805

**216 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

of those enchanted jewels all know

is cursed with an oath of endless woe,

and Fëanor\'s sons alone by right

are lords and masters of their light.

He cannot hope within his hoard 1810

to keep this gem, nor is he lord

of all the folk of Elfinesse.

And yet thou saist for nothing less

can thy return to Doriath

be purchased ? Many a dreadful path 1815

in sooth there lies before thy feet ---

and after Morgoth, still a fleet

untiring hate, as I know well,

would hunt thee from heaven unto hell.

Fëanor\'s sons would, if they could, 1820

slay thee or ever thou reached his wood

or laid in Thingol\'s lap that fire,

or gained at least thy sweet desire.

Lo! Celegorm and Curufin

here dwell this very realm within, 1825

and even though I, Finrod\'s son,

am king, a mighty power have won

and many of their own folk lead.

Friendship to me in every need

they yet have shown, but much I fear 1830

that to Beren son of Barahir

mercy or love they will not show

if once thy dreadful quest they know.'

True words he spake. For when the king

to all his people told this thing, 1835

and spake of the oath to Barahir,

and how that mortal shield and spear

had saved them from Morgoth and from woe

on Northern battlefields long ago,

then many were kindled in their hearts 1840

once more to battle. But up there starts

amid the throng, and loudly cries

for hearing, one with flaming eyes,

proud Celegorm with gleaming hair

and shining sword. Then all men stare 1845

upon his stern unyielding face,

THE LAY OF LEITHIAN *217*

and a great hush falls upon that place.

'Be he friend or foe, or demon wild

of Morgoth, Elf, or mortal child,

or any that here on earth may dwell, 1850

no law, nor love, nor league of hell,

no might of Gods, no binding spell,

shall him defend from hatred fell

of Fëanor\'s sons, whoso take or steal

or finding keep a Silmaril. 1855

These we alone do claim by right,

our thrice enchanted jewels bright.'

Many wild and potent words he spoke,

and as before in Tun awoke

his father\'s voice their hearts to fire, 1860

so now dark fear and brooding ire

he cast on them, foreboding war

of friend with friend; and pools of gore

their minds imagined lying red

in Nargothrond about the dead, 1865

did Narog\'s host with Beren go;

or haply battle, ruin, and woe

in Doriath where great Thingol reigned,

if Fëanor\'s fatal jewel he gained.

And even such as were most true 1870

to Felagund his oath did rue,

and thought with terror and despair

of seeking Morgoth in his lair

with force or guile. This Curufin

when his brother ceased did then begin 1875

more to impress upon their minds;

and such a spell he on them binds

that never again till Turin\'s day

would Gnome of Narog in array

of open battle go to war. 1880

With secrecy, ambush, spies, and lore

of wizardry, with silent leaguer

of wild things wary, watchful, eager,

of phantom hunters, venomed darts,

and unseen stealthy creeping arts, 1885

with padding hatred that its prey

with feet of velvet all the day

218 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

followed remorseless out of sight

and slew it unawares at night -

thus they defended Nargothrond, 1890

and forgot their kin and solemn bond

for dread of Morgoth that the art

of Curufin set within their heart.

So would they not that angry day

King Felagund their lord obey, 1895

but sullen murmured that Finrod

nor yet his son were as a god.

Then Felagund took off his crown

and at his feet he cast it down,

the silver helm of Nargothrond: 1900

'Yours ye may break, but I my bond

must keep, and kingdom here forsake.

If hearts here were that did not quake,

or that to Finrod\'s son were true,

then I at least should find a few *1905*

to go with me, not like a poor

rejected beggar scorn endure,

turned from my gates to leave my town,

my people, and my realm and crown!'

Hearing these words there swiftly stood 1910

beside him ten tried warriors good,

men of his house who had ever fought

wherever his banners had been brought.

One stooped and lifted up his crown,

and said: \'O king, to leave this town 1915

is now our fate, but not to lose

thy rightful lordship. Thou shalt choose

one to be steward in thy stead.'

Then Felagund upon the head

of Orodreth set it: 'Brother mine, 1920

till I return this crown is thine.'

Then Celegorm no more would stay,

and Curufin smiled and turned away.

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 219**

**NOTES**

1593-4 Original readings of B *Glingol, Bansil,* as at line 1141.

1598-9 Couplet marked for revision, partly on account of *did start,*
partly on account of *Gnomes.* I do not record further instances of this
sort, which occur casually throughout.

1619 Here is written on the B-text: 'A see the Qenta.' This is the

'Silmarillion' version of 1930, and presumably refers to the form of the
Oath as it appears there.

1620 *Varda the Holy* is written in the margin of the B-text, which like
A has *Bridhil the Blessed. Bridhil* occurs,earlier in A (note to lines
377---81), where B has a different reading.

1632-3 Cf. lines 506-9.

1647 *Finweg* A, and B as typed, early emended in B to *Fingon.*

1654 As line 1647.

1656 Cf. *The Children of Húrin,* first version line 1975, second
version line 19, from which the words (referring to

Finweg/Fingon) fell *in flame of swords* are derived; in the second
version occur also the king\'s *white banners.*

1710-11 A: a great people were gathered of the Gnomes in these
new-builded secret homes.

1736 Against the words *by western winds* is written (in such a way as
to show that this was the point reached, not the starting-point) the
date '29 Mar. 1928', the previous date being 27-28 March 1928 at line
1161.

1859 *Tun* B\] *Cor* A

1867 A: if Felagund should with Beren go;

1891 A: and forgot their blood and kinship\'s bond

1900 *helm* is an emendation in B for *crown.*

1920 An X is written against this line, probably long after when
Orodreth was moved from his place as Felagund\'s brother (seep. 91).

1921 *crown* B\] *realm A*

Commentary on Canto VI

The plot-outline 'Synopsis I' continues thus:

Beren goes to Celegorm, who disguises him *\[struck out:* and gives him
a magic knife. Beren and his Gnomish guides\* are captured by Orcs: and
a few survivors taken before (Melko \>) Morgoth. Beren tells M. he is a
'trapper of the woods\'.\]

**•This phrase was changed to: 'Beren gets lost and separated from his
Gnomish guides\';** **and was then struck out with the rest of the
passage.**

**22O THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

They go and seek to break into Angband disguised as Orcs, but are
captured *\[struck out:* and set in chains, and killed one by one. Beren
lies wondering which will be his turn.\] by the Lord of Wolves, and set
in bonds, and devoured one by one.

It is interesting here to see how the relevant features of the story are
treated in the 'Sketch of the Mythology' of 1926, as originally written.
In this account Beren\'s father is Barahir, and he 'had been a friend of
Celegorm of Nargothrond'. After Thingol\'s demand that Beren get him a
Silmaril:

Beren sets out to achieve this, is captured, and set in dungeon in
Angband, but conceals his real identity, and is given as a slave to Thû
the hunter.

This passage is evidently earlier than 'Synopsis I' (at the earliest,
the end of May 1926, the date of the latest of the three invoices on
which it is written), since the 'Sketch' contains no reference to
Celegorm\'s aid, Beren\'s companions, their disguising as Orcs, and
their capture by the Lord of Wolves. On the contrary, Beren goes to
Angband alone just as he did in the *Tale of Tinúviel,* and - most
notably --- is given to 'Thû the hunter' as a slave, just as in the
*Tale* he was given to Tevildo Prince of Cats as a slave. In Synopsis I
we see, I think, the very point at which the story of Beren\'s Gnomish
companions came into being, of their disguise as Orcs, and of their
deaths one by one in the dungeons of the Lord of Wolves. (Thû appears
first in the fragment of the *Lay of the Fall* *of Gondolin* (p. 146),
and in *The Children of Húrin* as Morgoth\'s most mighty thane: first
version line 391, second version line 763).

But already at lines 296 ff. in the A-text of the *Lay of Leithian*
(summer 1925) there is a reference to the 'deed of service' done by
Egnor Beren\'s father to Celegorm, and the gift of the ring: while in
the 'Sketch'

Barahir 'had been a friend of Celegorm of Nargothrond'. Thus: *Lay of
Leithian* Egnor Beren\'s father performed a service for Cele-Canto II
gorm, from whom he received a ring,

(summer 1925)

*Sketch of the* Barahir Beren\'s father was a friend of Celegorm of
*Mythology* Nargothrond.

\* " *?* ' Beren sets out alone and is captured and imprisoned P\' 3\>
inAngband.butisgivenasaslavetoThuthehunter.

*Synopsis I* Beren goes to Celegorm who aids him (story of the (after
May 1926) Gnomish companions appears).

The rather surprising conclusion must be that the association of
Egnor/Barahir with Celegorm and the gift of the ring *preceded* the
emergence of the story of Beren\'s going to Celegorm for aid.

In the rejected part of Synopsis I here we see a last survival from the
**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 221**

*Tale of Tinúviel:* Beren tells Morgoth that he is a trapper of the
woods; cf. the *Tale* (II. 15): 'Beren said therewith that he was a
great trapper of small animals and a snarer of birds\' --- and it was
indeed this explanation of Beren\'s to Melko that got him his post in
Tevildo\'s kitchens. The mention in this rejected passage of a magic
knife given to Beren by Celegorm was clearly a passing idea to account
for the knife with which Beren would cut the Silmaril from the Iron
Crown, since the kitchen-knife with which he did the deed in the *Tale*
(II. 33) had been abandoned with the kitchens.

Other loose papers in addition to Synopsis I show the further
development of the narrative. The first of these I will refer to as
'Synposis II'; it begins with the beginning of Canto VI and I cite it
here as far as the end of the Canto.

Beren comes to Felagund at Nargothrond; who receives him well, but warns
him of the oath of the sons of Fëanor, and that Curufin and Celegorm
dwelling with him have great power in his realm.

Curufin and Celegorm learn of Beren\'s purpose, and recalling their oath
forbid the Gnomes to aid Beren to get the Silmaril for Thingol.

The Gnomes fearing war in Nargothrond, or war against Thingol, and in
\[any\] case despairing utterly of reaching the depths of Angband by
force or guile will not support Felagund. Felagund mindful of his own
oath hands his kingdom over to Orodreth, and with only his own faithful
followers of his household (ten in number) goes forth with Beren.

In the *Lay of Leithian* the 'Nargothrond Element' in the story had by
this time (the spring of 1928) evolved further (see p. 171). The major
figure of (Felagoth \>) Felagund, son of Finwë\'s third son Finrod, had
emerged (see p. 91), and by Canto VI was present also in the A-text; it
was he, not Celegorm, who was rescued in the battle that ended the Siege
of Angband and who then went south with his brother Orodreth to found
Nargothrond, and Celegorm with his brother Curufin have been shifted by
the movement of the legend into the role of Felagund\'s overpowerful

'guests\' (it is not made explicit in the Lay why they were there,
though it could be guessed that they also had fled from 'the Northern
battlefields').

In the passage from Synopsis II just given my father is seen working out
the narrative from this point and on this narrative basis, and many of
the motives that are important in the final version now appear: on
account of their oath Celegorm and Curufin are the cause of the refusal
of the Elves of Nargothrond to support Felagund in the aiding of Beren;
Felagund gives the crown to Orodreth; and only ten of Felagund\'s people
go with him.\* I think it certain that Synopsis II was written as, and
did in fact provide, the outline narrative for this and the following
Cantos.

•An intermediate stage is seen in a rewritten passage of the 1926
'Sketch of the Mythology', to be given in Vol. IV, where Celegorm has
already been displaced by Felagoth (not yet

![](images/000093.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000094.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000095.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000096.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000097.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000098.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000099.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000100.png){.calibre1}

Felagund) but where Celegorm only learns the errand of Felagoth and
Beren *after* their departure from Nargothrond, and they leave with a
large force.

**222 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

In Canto VI we meet for the first time several central features of the
earlier history of the Gnomes in Beleriand and the North, though these
are not necessarily their first occurrences in my father\'s writings.
Thus the story of the rescue of Maidros by (Finweg \>) Fingon from his

torment on Thangorodrim, where he was hanged by his

right hand, is almost certainly implied in *The Children of* *Húrin,*
where it is said that Maidros wielded his sword with his left (see p.
86); and it is fully told in the

'Sketch' as first written early in 1926, some two years before the date
of the present Canto (see note to line 1736). Here also are references
to the long years of the Siege of Angband after the healing of the feud
among

the Gnomish princes (the cause of which we do not yet know); and to the
bursting of Morgoth\'s *armies black* (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 151:
'the black armies of the Ores\') across *the Thirsty Plain* (for which
see p. 55).

Here we meet for the first time (apart from a later note to *The
Children of Húrin,* p. 80) Angrod and Egnor, sons of Finrod and brothers
of Felagund and Orodreth, who meet their deaths in the battle; and here
it is said that Felagund was wounded (line 1691), and that his rescuers
withdrew

'to the fen' - very probably the 'mighty fen' of Sirion referred to at
line 1726.

For Finweg \> Fingon, and Finn (line 1660) = Finwë, see p. 137-8. The
genealogy of the princes of the

Gnomes as it had emerged in the 1920s is now complete: The earliest
version of the Fëanorian Oath is found in alliterative verse in *The
Flight of the Noldoli* (see pp.

135-6), and that in the *Lay of Leithian* (lines 1634-43) follows it
quite closely despite its being in rhyming couplets, with many of the
same phrases. Further

variations are introduced in Celegorm\'s version (lines 1848-57). On the
name *Tim-brenting* of Taniquetil (taken in witness of the Oath) see pp.
127, 139.

Most of the geographical references and names in this Canto are amply
explained by Part III 'Failivrin' of *The Children of* *Húrin.* For the
Hills of the Hunters, the rivers Ginglith and Ingwil, and the Guarded
Plain see pp. 88-9. It is now made clear that Umboth-Muilin, the
Twilight Meres,

were north of Sirion\'s fall and passage underground (to which there is
a reference in *The Children of Húrin,* line 1467), whereas in the

**222 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

In Canto VI we meet for the first time several central features of the
earlier history of the Gnomes in Beleriand and the North, though these
are not necessarily their first occurrences in my father\'s writings.
Thus the story of the rescue of Maidros by (Finweg \>) Fingon from his

torment on Thangorodrim, where he was hanged by his

right hand, is almost certainly implied in *The Children of* *Húrin,*
where it is said that Maidros wielded his sword with his left (see p.
86); and it is fully told in the

'Sketch' as first written early in 1926, some two years before the date
of the present Canto (see note to line 1736). Here also are references
to the long years of the Siege of Angband after the healing of the feud
among

the Gnomish princes (the cause of which we do not yet know); and to the
bursting of Morgoth\'s *armies black* (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 151:
'the black armies of the Ores\') across *the Thirsty Plain* (for which
see p. 55).

Here we meet for the first time (apart from a later note to *The
Children of Húrin,* p. 80) Angrod and Egnor, sons of Finrod and brothers
of Felagund and Orodreth, who meet their deaths in the battle; and here
it is said that Felagund was wounded (line 1691), and that his rescuers
withdrew

'to the fen' - very probably the 'mighty fen' of Sirion referred to at
line 1726.

For Finweg \> Fingon, and Finn (line 1660) = Finwë, see p. 137-8. The
genealogy of the princes of the

Gnomes as it had emerged in the 1920s is now complete: The earliest
version of the Fëanorian Oath is found in alliterative verse in *The
Flight of the Noldoli* (see pp.

135-6), and that in the *Lay of Leithian* (lines 1634-43) follows it
quite closely despite its being in rhyming couplets, with many of the
same phrases. Further

variations are introduced in Celegorm\'s version (lines 1848-57). On the
name *Tim-brenting* of Taniquetil (taken in witness of the Oath) see pp.
127, 139.

Most of the geographical references and names in this Canto are amply
explained by Part III 'Failivrin' of *The Children of* *Húrin.* For the
Hills of the Hunters, the rivers Ginglith and Ingwil, and the Guarded
Plain see pp. 88-9. It is now made clear that Umboth-Muilin, the
Twilight Meres,

were north of Sirion\'s fall and passage underground (to which there is
a reference in *The Children of Húrin,* line 1467), whereas in the

**222 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

In Canto VI we meet for the first time several central features of the
earlier history of the Gnomes in Beleriand and the North, though these
are not necessarily their first occurrences in my father\'s writings.
Thus the story of the rescue of Maidros by (Finweg \>) Fingon from his

torment on Thangorodrim, where he was hanged by his

right hand, is almost certainly implied in *The Children of* *Húrin,*
where it is said that Maidros wielded his sword with his left (see p.
86); and it is fully told in the

'Sketch' as first written early in 1926, some two years before the date
of the present Canto (see note to line 1736). Here also are references
to the long years of the Siege of Angband after the healing of the feud
among

the Gnomish princes (the cause of which we do not yet know); and to the
bursting of Morgoth\'s *armies black* (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 151:
'the black armies of the Ores\') across *the Thirsty Plain* (for which
see p. 55).

Here we meet for the first time (apart from a later note to *The
Children of Húrin,* p. 80) Angrod and Egnor, sons of Finrod and brothers
of Felagund and Orodreth, who meet their deaths in the battle; and here
it is said that Felagund was wounded (line 1691), and that his rescuers
withdrew

'to the fen' - very probably the 'mighty fen' of Sirion referred to at
line 1726.

For Finweg \> Fingon, and Finn (line 1660) = Finwë, see p. 137-8. The
genealogy of the princes of the

Gnomes as it had emerged in the 1920s is now complete: The earliest
version of the Fëanorian Oath is found in alliterative verse in *The
Flight of the Noldoli* (see pp.

135-6), and that in the *Lay of Leithian* (lines 1634-43) follows it
quite closely despite its being in rhyming couplets, with many of the
same phrases. Further

variations are introduced in Celegorm\'s version (lines 1848-57). On the
name *Tim-brenting* of Taniquetil (taken in witness of the Oath) see pp.
127, 139.

Most of the geographical references and names in this Canto are amply
explained by Part III 'Failivrin' of *The Children of* *Húrin.* For the
Hills of the Hunters, the rivers Ginglith and Ingwil, and the Guarded
Plain see pp. 88-9. It is now made clear that Umboth-Muilin, the
Twilight Meres,

were north of Sirion\'s fall and passage underground (to which there is
a reference in *The Children of Húrin,* line 1467), whereas in the

**222 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

In Canto VI we meet for the first time several central features of the
earlier history of the Gnomes in Beleriand and the North, though these
are not necessarily their first occurrences in my father\'s writings.
Thus the story of the rescue of Maidros by (Finweg \>) Fingon from his

torment on Thangorodrim, where he was hanged by his

right hand, is almost certainly implied in *The Children of* *Húrin,*
where it is said that Maidros wielded his sword with his left (see p.
86); and it is fully told in the

'Sketch' as first written early in 1926, some two years before the date
of the present Canto (see note to line 1736). Here also are references
to the long years of the Siege of Angband after the healing of the feud
among

the Gnomish princes (the cause of which we do not yet know); and to the
bursting of Morgoth\'s *armies black* (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 151:
'the black armies of the Ores\') across *the Thirsty Plain* (for which
see p. 55).

Here we meet for the first time (apart from a later note to *The
Children of Húrin,* p. 80) Angrod and Egnor, sons of Finrod and brothers
of Felagund and Orodreth, who meet their deaths in the battle; and here
it is said that Felagund was wounded (line 1691), and that his rescuers
withdrew

'to the fen' - very probably the 'mighty fen' of Sirion referred to at
line 1726.

For Finweg \> Fingon, and Finn (line 1660) = Finwë, see p. 137-8. The
genealogy of the princes of the

Gnomes as it had emerged in the 1920s is now complete: The earliest
version of the Fëanorian Oath is found in alliterative verse in *The
Flight of the Noldoli* (see pp.

135-6), and that in the *Lay of Leithian* (lines 1634-43) follows it
quite closely despite its being in rhyming couplets, with many of the
same phrases. Further

variations are introduced in Celegorm\'s version (lines 1848-57). On the
name *Tim-brenting* of Taniquetil (taken in witness of the Oath) see pp.
127, 139.

Most of the geographical references and names in this Canto are amply
explained by Part III 'Failivrin' of *The Children of* *Húrin.* For the
Hills of the Hunters, the rivers Ginglith and Ingwil, and the Guarded
Plain see pp. 88-9. It is now made clear that Umboth-Muilin, the
Twilight Meres,

were north of Sirion\'s fall and passage underground (to which there is
a reference in *The Children of Húrin,* line 1467), whereas in the

**222 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

In Canto VI we meet for the first time several central features of the
earlier history of the Gnomes in Beleriand and the North, though these
are not necessarily their first occurrences in my father\'s writings.
Thus the story of the rescue of Maidros by (Finweg \>) Fingon from his

torment on Thangorodrim, where he was hanged by his

right hand, is almost certainly implied in *The Children of* *Húrin,*
where it is said that Maidros wielded his sword with his left (see p.
86); and it is fully told in the

'Sketch' as first written early in 1926, some two years before the date
of the present Canto (see note to line 1736). Here also are references
to the long years of the Siege of Angband after the healing of the feud
among

the Gnomish princes (the cause of which we do not yet know); and to the
bursting of Morgoth\'s *armies black* (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 151:
'the black armies of the Ores\') across *the Thirsty Plain* (for which
see p. 55).

Here we meet for the first time (apart from a later note to *The
Children of Húrin,* p. 80) Angrod and Egnor, sons of Finrod and brothers
of Felagund and Orodreth, who meet their deaths in the battle; and here
it is said that Felagund was wounded (line 1691), and that his rescuers
withdrew

'to the fen' - very probably the 'mighty fen' of Sirion referred to at
line 1726.

For Finweg \> Fingon, and Finn (line 1660) = Finwë, see p. 137-8. The
genealogy of the princes of the

Gnomes as it had emerged in the 1920s is now complete: The earliest
version of the Fëanorian Oath is found in alliterative verse in *The
Flight of the Noldoli* (see pp.

135-6), and that in the *Lay of Leithian* (lines 1634-43) follows it
quite closely despite its being in rhyming couplets, with many of the
same phrases. Further

variations are introduced in Celegorm\'s version (lines 1848-57). On the
name *Tim-brenting* of Taniquetil (taken in witness of the Oath) see pp.
127, 139.

Most of the geographical references and names in this Canto are amply
explained by Part III 'Failivrin' of *The Children of* *Húrin.* For the
Hills of the Hunters, the rivers Ginglith and Ingwil, and the Guarded
Plain see pp. 88-9. It is now made clear that Umboth-Muilin, the
Twilight Meres,

were north of Sirion\'s fall and passage underground (to which there is
a reference in *The Children of Húrin,* line 1467), whereas in the

**222 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

In Canto VI we meet for the first time several central features of the
earlier history of the Gnomes in Beleriand and the North, though these
are not necessarily their first occurrences in my father\'s writings.
Thus the story of the rescue of Maidros by (Finweg \>) Fingon from his

torment on Thangorodrim, where he was hanged by his

right hand, is almost certainly implied in *The Children of* *Húrin,*
where it is said that Maidros wielded his sword with his left (see p.
86); and it is fully told in the

'Sketch' as first written early in 1926, some two years before the date
of the present Canto (see note to line 1736). Here also are references
to the long years of the Siege of Angband after the healing of the feud
among

the Gnomish princes (the cause of which we do not yet know); and to the
bursting of Morgoth\'s *armies black* (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 151:
'the black armies of the Ores\') across *the Thirsty Plain* (for which
see p. 55).

Here we meet for the first time (apart from a later note to *The
Children of Húrin,* p. 80) Angrod and Egnor, sons of Finrod and brothers
of Felagund and Orodreth, who meet their deaths in the battle; and here
it is said that Felagund was wounded (line 1691), and that his rescuers
withdrew

'to the fen' - very probably the 'mighty fen' of Sirion referred to at
line 1726.

For Finweg \> Fingon, and Finn (line 1660) = Finwë, see p. 137-8. The
genealogy of the princes of the

Gnomes as it had emerged in the 1920s is now complete: The earliest
version of the Fëanorian Oath is found in alliterative verse in *The
Flight of the Noldoli* (see pp.

135-6), and that in the *Lay of Leithian* (lines 1634-43) follows it
quite closely despite its being in rhyming couplets, with many of the
same phrases. Further

variations are introduced in Celegorm\'s version (lines 1848-57). On the
name *Tim-brenting* of Taniquetil (taken in witness of the Oath) see pp.
127, 139.

Most of the geographical references and names in this Canto are amply
explained by Part III 'Failivrin' of *The Children of* *Húrin.* For the
Hills of the Hunters, the rivers Ginglith and Ingwil, and the Guarded
Plain see pp. 88-9. It is now made clear that Umboth-Muilin, the
Twilight Meres,

were north of Sirion\'s fall and passage underground (to which there is
a reference in *The Children of Húrin,* line 1467), whereas in the

**222 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

In Canto VI we meet for the first time several central features of the
earlier history of the Gnomes in Beleriand and the North, though these
are not necessarily their first occurrences in my father\'s writings.
Thus the story of the rescue of Maidros by (Finweg \>) Fingon from his

torment on Thangorodrim, where he was hanged by his

right hand, is almost certainly implied in *The Children of* *Húrin,*
where it is said that Maidros wielded his sword with his left (see p.
86); and it is fully told in the

'Sketch' as first written early in 1926, some two years before the date
of the present Canto (see note to line 1736). Here also are references
to the long years of the Siege of Angband after the healing of the feud
among

the Gnomish princes (the cause of which we do not yet know); and to the
bursting of Morgoth\'s *armies black* (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 151:
'the black armies of the Ores\') across *the Thirsty Plain* (for which
see p. 55).

Here we meet for the first time (apart from a later note to *The
Children of Húrin,* p. 80) Angrod and Egnor, sons of Finrod and brothers
of Felagund and Orodreth, who meet their deaths in the battle; and here
it is said that Felagund was wounded (line 1691), and that his rescuers
withdrew

'to the fen' - very probably the 'mighty fen' of Sirion referred to at
line 1726.

For Finweg \> Fingon, and Finn (line 1660) = Finwë, see p. 137-8. The
genealogy of the princes of the

Gnomes as it had emerged in the 1920s is now complete: The earliest
version of the Fëanorian Oath is found in alliterative verse in *The
Flight of the Noldoli* (see pp.

135-6), and that in the *Lay of Leithian* (lines 1634-43) follows it
quite closely despite its being in rhyming couplets, with many of the
same phrases. Further

variations are introduced in Celegorm\'s version (lines 1848-57). On the
name *Tim-brenting* of Taniquetil (taken in witness of the Oath) see pp.
127, 139.

Most of the geographical references and names in this Canto are amply
explained by Part III 'Failivrin' of *The Children of* *Húrin.* For the
Hills of the Hunters, the rivers Ginglith and Ingwil, and the Guarded
Plain see pp. 88-9. It is now made clear that Umboth-Muilin, the
Twilight Meres,

were north of Sirion\'s fall and passage underground (to which there is
a reference in *The Children of Húrin,* line 1467), whereas in the

**222 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

In Canto VI we meet for the first time several central features of the
earlier history of the Gnomes in Beleriand and the North, though these
are not necessarily their first occurrences in my father\'s writings.
Thus the story of the rescue of Maidros by (Finweg \>) Fingon from his

torment on Thangorodrim, where he was hanged by his

right hand, is almost certainly implied in *The Children of* *Húrin,*
where it is said that Maidros wielded his sword with his left (see p.
86); and it is fully told in the

'Sketch' as first written early in 1926, some two years before the date
of the present Canto (see note to line 1736). Here also are references
to the long years of the Siege of Angband after the healing of the feud
among

the Gnomish princes (the cause of which we do not yet know); and to the
bursting of Morgoth\'s *armies black* (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 151:
'the black armies of the Ores\') across *the Thirsty Plain* (for which
see p. 55).

Here we meet for the first time (apart from a later note to *The
Children of Húrin,* p. 80) Angrod and Egnor, sons of Finrod and brothers
of Felagund and Orodreth, who meet their deaths in the battle; and here
it is said that Felagund was wounded (line 1691), and that his rescuers
withdrew

'to the fen' - very probably the 'mighty fen' of Sirion referred to at
line 1726.

For Finweg \> Fingon, and Finn (line 1660) = Finwë, see p. 137-8. The
genealogy of the princes of the

Gnomes as it had emerged in the 1920s is now complete: The earliest
version of the Fëanorian Oath is found in alliterative verse in *The
Flight of the Noldoli* (see pp.

135-6), and that in the *Lay of Leithian* (lines 1634-43) follows it
quite closely despite its being in rhyming couplets, with many of the
same phrases. Further

variations are introduced in Celegorm\'s version (lines 1848-57). On the
name *Tim-brenting* of Taniquetil (taken in witness of the Oath) see pp.
127, 139.

Most of the geographical references and names in this Canto are amply
explained by Part III 'Failivrin' of *The Children of* *Húrin.* For the
Hills of the Hunters, the rivers Ginglith and Ingwil, and the Guarded
Plain see pp. 88-9. It is now made clear that Umboth-Muilin, the
Twilight Meres,

were north of Sirion\'s fall and passage underground (to which there is
a reference in *The Children of Húrin,* line 1467), whereas in the

**222 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

In Canto VI we meet for the first time several central features of the
earlier history of the Gnomes in Beleriand and the North, though these
are not necessarily their first occurrences in my father\'s writings.
Thus the story of the rescue of Maidros by (Finweg \>) Fingon from his

torment on Thangorodrim, where he was hanged by his

right hand, is almost certainly implied in *The Children of* *Húrin,*
where it is said that Maidros wielded his sword with his left (see p.
86); and it is fully told in the

'Sketch' as first written early in 1926, some two years before the date
of the present Canto (see note to line

![](images/000101.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000102.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000103.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000104.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000105.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000106.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000107.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000108.png){.calibre1}

![](images/000109.png){.calibre1}

1736). Here also are references to the long years of the Siege of
Angband after the healing of the feud among

the Gnomish princes (the cause of which we do not yet know); and to the
bursting of Morgoth\'s *armies black* (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 151:
'the black armies of the Ores\') across *the Thirsty Plain* (for which
see p. 55).

Here we meet for the first time (apart from a later note to *The
Children of Húrin,* p. 80) Angrod and Egnor, sons of Finrod and brothers
of Felagund and Orodreth, who meet their deaths in the battle; and here
it is said that Felagund was wounded (line 1691), and that his rescuers
withdrew

'to the fen' - very probably the 'mighty fen' of Sirion referred to at
line 1726.

For Finweg \> Fingon, and Finn (line 1660) = Finwë, see p. 137-8. The
genealogy of the princes of the

Gnomes as it had emerged in the 1920s is now complete: The earliest
version of the Fëanorian Oath is found in alliterative verse in *The
Flight of the Noldoli* (see pp.

135-6), and that in the *Lay of Leithian* (lines 1634-43) follows it
quite closely despite its being in rhyming couplets, with many of the
same phrases. Further

variations are introduced in Celegorm\'s version (lines 1848-57). On the
name *Tim-brenting* of Taniquetil (taken in witness of the Oath) see pp.
127, 139.

Most of the geographical references and names in this Canto are amply
explained by Part III 'Failivrin' of *The Children of* *Húrin.* For the
Hills of the Hunters, the rivers Ginglith and Ingwil, and the Guarded
Plain see pp. 88-9. It is now made clear that Umboth-Muilin, the
Twilight Meres,

were north of Sirion\'s fall and passage underground (to which there is
a reference in *The Children of Húrin,* line 1467), whereas in the

**222 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

In Canto VI we meet for the first time several central features of the
earlier history of the Gnomes in Beleriand and the North, though these
are not necessarily their first occurrences in my father\'s writings.
Thus the story of the rescue of Maidros by (Finweg \>) Fingon from his

torment on Thangorodrim, where he was hanged by his

right hand, is almost certainly implied in *The Children of* *Húrin,*
where it is said that Maidros wielded his sword with his left (see p.
86); and it is fully told in the

'Sketch' as first written early in 1926, some two years before the date
of the present Canto (see note to line 1736). Here also are references
to the long years of the Siege of Angband after the healing of the feud
among

the Gnomish princes (the cause of which we do not yet know); and to the
bursting of Morgoth\'s *armies black* (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 151:
'the black armies of the Ores\') across *the Thirsty Plain* (for which
see p. 55).

Here we meet for the first time (apart from a later note to *The
Children of Húrin,* p. 80) Angrod and Egnor, sons of Finrod and brothers
of Felagund and Orodreth, who meet their deaths in the battle; and here
it is said that Felagund was wounded (line 1691), and that his rescuers
withdrew

'to the fen' - very probably the 'mighty fen' of Sirion referred to at
line 1726.

For Finweg \> Fingon, and Finn (line 1660) = Finwë, see p. 137-8. The
genealogy of the princes of the

Gnomes as it had emerged in the 1920s is now complete: The earliest
version of the Fëanorian Oath is found in alliterative verse in *The
Flight of the Noldoli* (see pp.

135-6), and that in the *Lay of Leithian* (lines 1634-43) follows it
quite closely despite its being in rhyming couplets, with many of the
same phrases. Further

variations are introduced in Celegorm\'s version (lines 1848-57). On the
name *Tim-brenting* of Taniquetil (taken in witness of the Oath) see pp.
127, 139.

Most of the geographical references and names in this Canto are amply
explained by Part III 'Failivrin' of *The Children of* *Húrin.* For the
Hills of the Hunters, the rivers Ginglith and Ingwil, and the Guarded
Plain see pp. 88-9. It is now made clear that Umboth-Muilin, the
Twilight Meres,

were north of Sirion\'s fall and passage underground (to which there is
a reference in *The Children of Húrin,* line 1467), whereas in the

**222 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

In Canto VI we meet for the first time several central features of the
earlier history of the Gnomes in Beleriand and the North, though these
are not necessarily their first occurrences in my father\'s writings.
Thus the story of the rescue of Maidros by (Finweg \>) Fingon from his

torment on Thangorodrim, where he was hanged by his

right hand, is almost certainly implied in *The Children of* *Húrin,*
where it is said that Maidros wielded his sword with his left (see p.
86); and it is fully told in the

'Sketch' as first written early in 1926, some two years before the date
of the present Canto (see note to line 1736). Here also are references
to the long years of the Siege of Angband after the healing of the feud
among

the Gnomish princes (the cause of which we do not yet know); and to the
bursting of Morgoth\'s *armies black* (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 151:
'the black armies of the Ores\') across *the Thirsty Plain* (for which
see p. 55).

Here we meet for the first time (apart from a later note to *The
Children of Húrin,* p. 80) Angrod and Egnor, sons of Finrod and brothers
of Felagund and Orodreth, who meet their deaths in the battle; and here
it is said that Felagund was wounded (line 1691), and that his rescuers
withdrew

'to the fen' - very probably the 'mighty fen' of Sirion referred to at
line 1726.

For Finweg \> Fingon, and Finn (line 1660) = Finwë, see p. 137-8. The
genealogy of the princes of the

Gnomes as it had emerged in the 1920s is now complete: The earliest
version of the Fëanorian Oath is found in alliterative verse in *The
Flight of the Noldoli* (see pp.

135-6), and that in the *Lay of Leithian* (lines 1634-43) follows it
quite closely despite its being in rhyming couplets, with many of the
same phrases. Further

variations are introduced in Celegorm\'s version (lines 1848-57). On the
name *Tim-brenting* of Taniquetil (taken in witness of the Oath) see pp.
127, 139.

Most of the geographical references and names in this Canto are amply
explained by Part III 'Failivrin' of *The Children of* *Húrin.* For the
Hills of the Hunters, the rivers Ginglith and Ingwil, and the Guarded
Plain see pp. 88-9. It is now made clear that Umboth-Muilin, the
Twilight Meres,

were north of Sirion\'s fall and passage underground (to which there is
a reference in *The Children of Húrin,* line 1467), whereas in the

**222 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

In Canto VI we meet for the first time several central features of the
earlier history of the Gnomes in Beleriand and the North, though these
are not necessarily their first occurrences in my father\'s writings.
Thus the story of the rescue of Maidros by (Finweg \>) Fingon from his

torment on Thangorodrim, where he was hanged by his

right hand, is almost certainly implied in *The Children of* *Húrin,*
where it is said that Maidros wielded his sword with his left (see p.
86); and it is fully told in the

'Sketch' as first written early in 1926, some two years before the date
of the present Canto (see note to line 1736). Here also are references
to the long years of the Siege of Angband after the healing of the feud
among

the Gnomish princes (the cause of which we do not yet know); and to the
bursting of Morgoth\'s *armies black* (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 151:
'the black armies of the Ores\') across *the Thirsty Plain* (for which
see p. 55).

Here we meet for the first time (apart from a later note to *The
Children of Húrin,* p. 80) Angrod and Egnor, sons of Finrod and brothers
of Felagund and Orodreth, who meet their deaths in the battle; and here
it is said that Felagund was wounded (line 1691), and that his rescuers
withdrew

'to the fen' - very probably the 'mighty fen' of Sirion referred to at
line 1726.

For Finweg \> Fingon, and Finn (line 1660) = Finwë, see p. 137-8. The
genealogy of the princes of the

Gnomes as it had emerged in the 1920s is now complete: The earliest
version of the Fëanorian Oath is found in alliterative verse in *The
Flight of the Noldoli* (see pp.

135-6), and that in the *Lay of Leithian* (lines 1634-43) follows it
quite closely despite its being in rhyming couplets, with many of the
same phrases. Further

variations are introduced in Celegorm\'s version (lines 1848-57). On the
name *Tim-brenting* of Taniquetil (taken in witness of the Oath) see pp.
127, 139.

Most of the geographical references and names in this Canto are amply
explained by Part III 'Failivrin' of *The Children of* *Húrin.* For the
Hills of the Hunters, the rivers Ginglith and Ingwil, and the Guarded
Plain see pp. 88-9. It is now made clear that Umboth-Muilin, the
Twilight Meres,

were north of Sirion\'s fall and passage underground (to which there is
a reference in *The Children of Húrin,* line 1467), whereas in the

**222 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

In Canto VI we meet for the first time several central features of the
earlier history of the Gnomes in Beleriand and the North, though these
are not necessarily their first occurrences in my father\'s writings.
Thus the story of the rescue of Maidros by (Finweg \>) Fingon from his

torment on Thangorodrim, where he was hanged by his

right hand, is almost certainly implied in *The Children of* *Húrin,*
where it is said that Maidros wielded his sword with his left (see p.
86); and it is fully told in the

'Sketch' as first written early in 1926, some two years before the date
of the present Canto (see note to line 1736). Here also are references
to the long years of the Siege of Angband after the healing of the feud
among

the Gnomish princes (the cause of which we do not yet know); and to the
bursting of Morgoth\'s *armies black* (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 151:
'the black armies of the Ores\') across *the Thirsty Plain* (for which
see p. 55).

Here we meet for the first time (apart from a later note to *The
Children of Húrin,* p. 80) Angrod and Egnor, sons of Finrod and brothers
of Felagund and Orodreth, who meet their deaths in the battle; and here
it is said that Felagund was wounded (line 1691), and that his rescuers
withdrew

'to the fen' - very probably the 'mighty fen' of Sirion referred to at
line 1726.

For Finweg \> Fingon, and Finn (line 1660) = Finwë, see p. 137-8. The
genealogy of the princes of the

Gnomes as it had emerged in the 1920s is now complete: The earliest
version of the Fëanorian Oath is found in alliterative verse in *The
Flight of the Noldoli* (see pp.

135-6), and that in the *Lay of Leithian* (lines 1634-43) follows it
quite closely despite its being in rhyming couplets, with many of the
same phrases. Further

variations are introduced in Celegorm\'s version (lines 1848-57). On the
name *Tim-brenting* of Taniquetil (taken in witness of the Oath) see pp.
127, 139.

Most of the geographical references and names in this Canto are amply
explained by Part III 'Failivrin' of *The Children of* *Húrin.* For the
Hills of the Hunters, the rivers Ginglith and Ingwil, and the Guarded
Plain see pp. 88-9. It is now made clear that Umboth-Muilin, the
Twilight Meres,

were north of Sirion\'s fall and passage underground (to which there is
a reference in *The Children of Húrin,* line 1467), whereas in the

**222 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

In Canto VI we meet for the first time several central features of the
earlier history of the Gnomes in Beleriand and the North, though these
are not necessarily their first occurrences in my father\'s writings.
Thus the story of the rescue of Maidros by (Finweg \>) Fingon from his

torment on Thangorodrim, where he was hanged by his

right hand, is almost certainly implied in *The Children of* *Húrin,*
where it is said that Maidros wielded his sword with his left (see p.
86); and it is fully told in the

'Sketch' as first written early in 1926, some two years before the date
of the present Canto (see note to line 1736). Here also are references
to the long years of the Siege of Angband after the healing of the feud
among

the Gnomish princes (the cause of which we do not yet know); and to the
bursting of Morgoth\'s *armies black* (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 151:
'the black armies of the Ores\') across *the Thirsty Plain* (for which
see p. 55).

Here we meet for the first time (apart from a later note to *The
Children of Húrin,* p. 80) Angrod and Egnor, sons of Finrod and brothers
of Felagund and Orodreth, who meet their deaths in the battle; and here
it is said that Felagund was wounded (line 1691), and that his rescuers
withdrew

'to the fen' - very probably the 'mighty fen' of Sirion referred to at
line 1726.

For Finweg \> Fingon, and Finn (line 1660) = Finwë, see p. 137-8. The
genealogy of the princes of the

Gnomes as it had emerged in the 1920s is now complete: The earliest
version of the Fëanorian Oath is found in alliterative verse in *The
Flight of the Noldoli* (see pp.

135-6), and that in the *Lay of Leithian* (lines 1634-43) follows it
quite closely despite its being in rhyming couplets, with many of the
same phrases. Further

variations are introduced in Celegorm\'s version (lines 1848-57). On the
name *Tim-brenting* of Taniquetil (taken in witness of the Oath) see pp.
127, 139.

Most of the geographical references and names in this Canto are amply
explained by Part III 'Failivrin' of *The Children of* *Húrin.* For the
Hills of the Hunters, the rivers Ginglith and Ingwil, and the Guarded
Plain see pp. 88-9. It is now made clear that Umboth-Muilin, the
Twilight Meres,

were north of Sirion\'s fall and passage underground (to which there is
a reference in *The Children of Húrin,* line 1467), whereas in the

**222 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

In Canto VI we meet for the first time several central features of the
earlier history of the Gnomes in Beleriand and the North, though these
are not necessarily their first occurrences in my father\'s writings.
Thus the story of the rescue of Maidros by (Finweg \>) Fingon from his

torment on Thangorodrim, where he was hanged by his

right hand, is almost certainly implied in *The Children of* *Húrin,*
where it is said that Maidros wielded his sword with his left (see p.
86); and it is fully told in the

'Sketch' as first written early in 1926, some two years before the date
of the present Canto (see note to line 1736). Here also are references
to the long years of the Siege of Angband after the healing of the feud
among

the Gnomish princes (the cause of which we do not yet know); and to the
bursting of Morgoth\'s *armies black* (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 151:
'the black armies of the Ores\') across *the Thirsty Plain* (for which
see p. 55).

Here we meet for the first time (apart from a later note to *The
Children of Húrin,* p. 80) Angrod and Egnor, sons of Finrod and brothers
of Felagund and Orodreth, who meet their deaths in the battle; and here
it is said that Felagund was wounded (line 1691), and that his rescuers
withdrew

'to the fen' - very probably the 'mighty fen' of Sirion referred to at
line 1726.

For Finweg \> Fingon, and Finn (line 1660) = Finwë, see p. 137-8. The
genealogy of the princes of the

Gnomes as it had emerged in the 1920s is now complete: The earliest
version of the Fëanorian Oath is found in alliterative verse in *The
Flight of the Noldoli* (see pp.

135-6), and that in the *Lay of Leithian* (lines 1634-43) follows it
quite closely despite its being in rhyming couplets, with many of the
same phrases. Further

variations are introduced in Celegorm\'s version (lines 1848-57). On the
name *Tim-brenting* of Taniquetil (taken in witness of the Oath) see pp.
127, 139.

Most of the geographical references and names in this Canto are amply
explained by Part III 'Failivrin' of *The Children of* *Húrin.* For the
Hills of the Hunters, the rivers Ginglith and Ingwil, and the Guarded
Plain see pp. 88-9. It is now made clear that Umboth-Muilin, the
Twilight Meres,

were north of Sirion\'s fall and passage underground (to which there is
a reference in *The Children of Húrin,* line 1467), whereas in the

**222 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

In Canto VI we meet for the first time several central features of the
earlier history of the Gnomes in Beleriand and the North, though these
are not necessarily their first occurrences in my father\'s writings.
Thus the story of the rescue of Maidros by (Finweg \>) Fingon from his

torment on Thangorodrim, where he was hanged by his

right hand, is almost certainly implied in *The Children of* *Húrin,*
where it is said that Maidros wielded his sword with his left (see p.
86); and it is fully told in the

'Sketch' as first written early in 1926, some two years before the date
of the present Canto (see note to line 1736). Here also are references
to the long years of the Siege of Angband after the healing of the feud
among

the Gnomish princes (the cause of which we do not yet know); and to the
bursting of Morgoth\'s *armies black* (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 151:
'the black armies of the Ores\') across *the Thirsty Plain* (for which
see p. 55).

Here we meet for the first time (apart from a later note to *The
Children of Húrin,* p. 80) Angrod and Egnor, sons of Finrod and brothers
of Felagund and Orodreth, who meet their deaths in the battle; and here
it is said that Felagund was wounded (line 1691), and that his rescuers
withdrew

'to the fen' - very probably the 'mighty fen' of Sirion referred to at
line 1726.

For Finweg \> Fingon, and Finn (line 1660) = Finwë, see p. 137-8. The
genealogy of the princes of the

Gnomes as it had emerged in the 1920s is now complete: The earliest
version of the Fëanorian Oath is found in alliterative verse in *The
Flight of the Noldoli* (see pp.

135-6), and that in the *Lay of Leithian* (lines 1634-43) follows it
quite closely despite its being in rhyming couplets, with many of the
same phrases. Further

variations are introduced in Celegorm\'s version (lines 1848-57). On the
name *Tim-brenting* of Taniquetil (taken in witness of the Oath) see pp.
127, 139.

Most of the geographical references and names in this Canto are amply
explained by Part III 'Failivrin' of *The Children of* *Húrin.* For the
Hills of the Hunters, the rivers Ginglith and Ingwil, and the Guarded
Plain see pp. 88-9. It is now made clear that Umboth-Muilin, the
Twilight Meres,

were north of Sirion\'s fall and passage underground (to which there is
a reference in *The Children of Húrin,* line 1467), whereas in the

**222 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

In Canto VI we meet for the first time several central features of the
earlier history of the Gnomes in Beleriand and the North, though these
are not necessarily their first occurrences in my father\'s writings.
Thus the story of the rescue of Maidros by (Finweg \>) Fingon from his

torment on Thangorodrim, where he was hanged by his

right hand, is almost certainly implied in *The Children of* *Húrin,*
where it is said that Maidros wielded his sword with his left (see p.
86); and it is fully told in the

'Sketch' as first written early in 1926, some two years before the date
of the present Canto (see note to line 1736). Here also are references
to the long years of the Siege of Angband after the healing of the feud
among

the Gnomish princes (the cause of which we do not yet know); and to the
bursting of Morgoth\'s *armies black* (cf. *The Silmarillion* p. 151:
'the black armies of the Ores\') across *the Thirsty Plain* (for which
see p. 55).

Here we meet for the first time (apart from a later note to *The
Children of Húrin,* p. 80) Angrod and Egnor, sons of Finrod and brothers
of Felagund and Orodreth, who meet their deaths in the battle; and here
it is said that Felagund was wounded (line 1691), and that his rescuers
withdrew

'to the fen' - very probably the 'mighty fen' of Sirion referred to at
line 1726.

For Finweg \> Fingon, and Finn (line 1660) = Finwë, see p. 137-8. The
genealogy of the princes of the

Gnomes as it had emerged in the 1920s is now complete: The earliest
version of the Fëanorian Oath is found in alliterative verse in *The
Flight of the Noldoli* (see pp.

135-6), and that in the *Lay of Leithian* (lines 1634-43) follows it
quite closely despite its being in rhyming couplets, with many of the
same phrases. Further

variations are introduced in Celegorm\'s version (lines 1848-57). On the
name *Tim-brenting* of Taniquetil (taken in witness of the Oath) see pp.
127, 139.

Most of the geographical references and names in this Canto are amply
explained by Part III 'Failivrin' of *The Children of* *Húrin.* For the
Hills of the Hunters, the rivers Ginglith and Ingwil, and the Guarded
Plain see pp. 88-9. It is now made clear that Umboth-Muilin, the
Twilight Meres,

were north of Sirion\'s fall and passage underground (to which there is
a reference in *The Children of Húrin,* line 1467), whereas in the

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 223**

*Lost Tales* the reverse was the case (see 11.217); and also tnat
Esgalduin was a tributary of Sirion (lines 1717-20). In the verses
describing Nargothrond the *Lay of Leithian* looks back to and echoes
*The Children* *of Húrin;* compare

Doors there darkly dim gigantic

were hewn in the hillside; huge their timbers

and their posts and lintels of ponderous stone

(p. 68,1828-30)

with

Nargothrond\'s sheer terraces

and dim gigantic palaces (1774\~5)

and

doors there darkly hung and hewn

with posts and lintels of ponderous stone

and timbers huge. (1777-9)

I have mentioned earlier (pp. 88, 90) the drawing and watercolour of the
entrance to Nargothrond. The drawing is inscribed 'Lyme 1928' (a summer
holiday at Lyme Regis in Dorset) and the watercolour was very likely
done at the same time: thus a few months after the writing of Canto VI
of *the Lay of Leithian.* In both are seen the bare Hills of the Hunters
beyond *(with bare tops bitten bleak and raw,* 1735), and in the
watercolour *Nargothrond\'s sheer terraces* (1774); but neither picture
suggests that the entrance was *hid and veiled* (1704), *by trees
o\'ershadowed dim* (1707) - a feature of the description that goes back
to the *Tale of Turámbar* ('the doors of the caves . . . were cunningly
concealed by trees\', II. 81).

I noticed in my commentary on the *Tale of Turambar* (II. 124 and
footnote) that 'the policy of secrecy and refusal of open war pursued by
the Elves of Nargothrond was always an essential element', but that from
*The Silmarillion* p. 168 'it seems that when Beren came to Nargothrond
the "secret" policy was already pursued under Felagund', whereas from p.
170 'it seems that it came into being from the potent rhetoric of
Curufin after Beren went there'. From this Canto it is seen that this
contradiction, if contradiction it is, has its source in the two
passages lines 1743-51 and 1877-93.

In this latter passage there are again strong echoes of *The Children
of* *Húrin;* compare

a leaguer silent

unseen, stealthy, beset the stranger,

as of wild things wary that watch moveless,

then follow fleetly with feet of velvet

their heedless prey with padding hatred (p. 66, 1749---53) **224 THE
LAYS OF BELERIAND**

with

with silent leaguer

of wild things wary, watchful, eager,

of phantom hunters, venomed darts,

and unseen stealthy creeping arts,

with padding hatred that its prey

with feet of velvet all the day

followed remorseless\... (1882-8)

There remain a couple of points concerning names. The Great Lands are
still so called (1668); but at 1616 the expression 'Outer Lands\'
occurs.

This was used in *The Cottage of Lost Play* as first written in the
sense of the Great Lands, but was subsequently applied to the lands
beyond the Western Sea (see I. 21, 81-2). 'Outer Lands\' = Middle-earth
is frequent in *The Silmarillion.*

The name of the river, Narog, is used, as often later, to refer to the
realm of Nargothrond: the King of Nargothrond is the King of Narog (see
lines 1782, 1866).

VII

Thus twelve alone there ventured forth

from Nargothrond, and to the North 1925

they turned their silent secret way,

and vanished in the fading day.

No trumpet sounds, no voice there sings,

as robed in mail of cunning rings

now blackened dark with helmets grey 1930

and sombre cloaks they steal away.

Far-journeying Narog\'s leaping course

they followed till they found his source,

the flickering falls, whose freshets sheer

a glimmering goblet glassy-clear 193 5

with crystal waters fill that shake

and quiver down from Ivrin\'s lake,

from Ivrin\'s mere that mirrors dim

the pallid faces bare and grim

of Shadowy Mountains neath the moon. 1940

Now far beyond the realm immune

from Ore and demon and the dread

**224 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

with

with silent leaguer

of wild things wary, watchful, eager,

of phantom hunters, venomed darts,

and unseen stealthy creeping arts,

with padding hatred that its prey

with feet of velvet all the day

followed remorseless\... (1882-8)

There remain a couple of points concerning names. The Great Lands are
still so called (1668); but at 1616 the expression 'Outer Lands\'
occurs.

This was used in *The Cottage of Lost Play* as first written in the
sense of the Great Lands, but was subsequently applied to the lands
beyond the Western Sea (see I. 21, 81-2). 'Outer Lands\' = Middle-earth
is frequent in *The Silmarillion.*

The name of the river, Narog, is used, as often later, to refer to the
realm of Nargothrond: the King of Nargothrond is the King of Narog (see
lines 1782, 1866).

VII

Thus twelve alone there ventured forth

from Nargothrond, and to the North 1925

they turned their silent secret way,

and vanished in the fading day.

No trumpet sounds, no voice there sings,

as robed in mail of cunning rings

now blackened dark with helmets grey 1930

and sombre cloaks they steal away.

Far-journeying Narog\'s leaping course

they followed till they found his source,

the flickering falls, whose freshets sheer

a glimmering goblet glassy-clear 193 5

with crystal waters fill that shake

and quiver down from Ivrin\'s lake,

from Ivrin\'s mere that mirrors dim

the pallid faces bare and grim

of Shadowy Mountains neath the moon. 1940

Now far beyond the realm immune

from Ore and demon and the dread

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 225**

of Morgoth\'s might their ways had led.

In woods o\'ershadowed by the heights

they watched and waited many nights, 1945

till on a time when hurrying cloud

did moon and constellation shroud,

and winds of autumn\'s wild beginning

soughed in the boughs, and leaves went spinning

down the dark eddies rustling soft, 1950

they heard a murmur hoarsely waft

from far, a croaking laughter coming;

now louder; now they heard the drumming

of hideous stamping feet that tramp
:::

::: {#calibre_link-6 .calibre}
the weary earth. Then many a lamp 1955

of sullen red they saw draw near,

swinging, and glistening on spear

and scimitar. There hidden nigh

they saw a band of Orcs go by

with goblin-faces swart and foul. 1960

Bats were about them, and the owl,

the ghostly forsaken night-bird cried

from trees above. The voices died,

the laughter like clash of stone and steel

passed and faded. At their heel 1965

the Elves and Beren crept more soft

than foxes stealing through a croft

in search of prey. Thus to the camp

lit by flickering fire and lamp

they stole, and counted sitting there 1970

full thirty Orcs in the red flare

of burning wood. Without a sound

they one by one stood silent round,

each in the shadow of a tree;

each slowly, grimly, secretly 1975

bent then his bow and drew the string.

Hark! how they sudden twang and sing,

when Felagund lets forth a cry;

and twelve Orcs sudden fall and die.

Then forth they leap casting their bows. 1980

Out their bright swords, and swift their blows!

The stricken Orcs now shriek and yell

as lost things deep in lightless hell.

**220 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Battle there is beneath the trees

bitter and swift; but no Orc flees; 1985

there left their lives that wandering band

and stained no more the sorrowing land

with rape and murder. Yet no song

of joy, or triumph over wrong,

the Elves there sang. In peril sore 1990

they were, for never alone to war

so small an Ore-band went, they knew.

Swiftly the raiment off they drew

and cast the corpses in a pit.

This desperate counsel had the wit 1995

of Felagund for them devised:

as Orcs his comrades he disguised.

The poisoned spears, the bows of horn,

the crooked swords their foes had borne

they took; and loathing each him clad 2000

in Angband\'s raiment foul and sad.

They smeared their hands and faces fair

with pigment dark; the matted hair

all lank and black from goblin head

they shore, and joined it thread by thread 2005

with Gnomish skill. As each one leers

at each dismayed, about his ears

he hangs it noisome, shuddering.

Then Felagund a spell did sing

of changing and of shifting shape; 2010

their ears grew hideous, and agape

their mouths did start, and like a fang

each tooth became, as slow he sang.

Their Gnomish raiment then they hid,

and one by one behind him slid, 2015

behind a foul and goblin thing

that once was elven-fair and king.

Northward they went; and Orcs they met

who passed, nor did their going let,

but hailed them in greeting; and more bold 2020

they grew as past the long miles rolled.

At length they came with weary feet

beyond Beleriand. They found the fleet

young waters, rippling, silver-pale

**THE** LAY OF LEITHIAN 227

of Sirion hurrying through that vale 2025

where Taur-na-Fuin, Deadly Night,

the trackless forest\'s pine-clad height,

falls dark forbidding slowly down

upon the east, while westward frown

the northward-bending Mountains grey 2030

and bar the westering light of day.

An isléd hill there stood alone

amid the valley, like a stone

rolled from the distant mountains vast

when giants in tumult hurtled past. 2035

Around its feet the river looped

a stream divided, that had scooped

the hanging edges into caves.

There briefly shuddered Sirion\'s waves

and ran to other shores more clean. 2040

An elven watchtower had it been,

and strong it was, and still was fair;

but now did grim with menace stare

one way to pale Beleriand,

the other to that mournful land 2045

beyond the valley\'s northern mouth.

Thence could be glimpsed the fields of drouth,

the dusty dunes, the desert wide;

and further far could be descried

the brooding cloud that hangs and lowers 2050

on Thangorodrim\'s thunderous towers.

Now in that hill was the abode

of one most evil; and the road

that from Beleriand thither came

he watched with sleepless eyes of flame. 2055

(From the North there led no other way,

save east where the Gorge of Aglon lay,

and that dark path of hurrying dread

which only in need the Orcs would tread

through Deadly Nightshade\'s awful gloom 2060

where Taur-na-Fuin\'s branches loom;

and Aglon led to Doriath,

and Fëanor\'s sons watched o\'er that path.)

Men called him Thû, and as a god

**228 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

in after days beneath his rod 2065

bewildered bowed to him, and made

his ghastly temples in the shade.

Not yet by Men enthralled adored,

now was he Morgoth\'s mightiest lord,

Master of Wolves, whose shivering howl 2070

for ever echoed in the hills, and foul

enchantments and dark sigaldry

did weave and wield. In glamoury

that necromancer held his hosts

of phantoms and of wandering ghosts, 2075

of misbegotten or spell-wronged

monsters that about him thronged,

working his bidding dark and vile:

the werewolves of the Wizard\'s Isle.

From Thû their coming was not hid; 2080

and though beneath the eaves they slid

of the forest\'s gloomy-hanging boughs,

he saw them afar, and wolves did rouse:

'Go! fetch me those sneaking Orcs,' he said,

'that fare thus strangely, as if in dread, 2085

and do not come, as all Orcs use

and are commanded, to bring me news

of all their deeds, to me, to Thû.'

From his tower he gazed, and in him grew

suspicion and a brooding thought, 2090

waiting, leering, till they were brought.

Now ringed about with wolves they stand,

and fear their doom. Alas! the land,

the land of Narog left behind!

Foreboding evil weights their mind, 2095

as downcast, halting, they must go

and cross the stony bridge of woe

to Wizard\'s Isle, and to the throne

there fashioned of blood-darkened stone.

'Where have ye been ? What have ye seen ? ' 21 oo

'In Elfinesse; and tears and distress,

the fire blowing and the blood flowing,

these have we seen, there have we been.

Thirty we slew and their bodies threw

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 229**

in a dark pit. The ravens sit 2105

and the owl cries where our swath lies.'

'Come, tell me true, O Morgoth\'s thralls,

what then in Elfinesse befalls?

What of Nargothrond? Who reigneth there?

Into that realm did your feet dare?' 2110

'Only its borders did we dare.

There reigns King Felagund the fair.'

'Then heard ye not that he is gone,

that Celegorm sits his throne upon?'

'That is not true! If he is gone, 2115

then Orodreth sits his throne upon.'

'Sharp are your ears, swift have they got

tidings of realms ye entered not!

What are your names, O spearmen bold?

Who your captain, ye have not told.' 2120

'Nereb and Dungalef and warriors ten,

so we are called, and dark our den

under the mountains. Over the waste

we march on an errand of need and haste.

Boldog the captain awaits us there 2125

where fires from under smoke and flare.'

'Boldog, I heard, was lately slain

warring on the borders of that domain

where Robber Thingol and outlaw folk

cringe and crawl beneath elm and oak 2130

in drear Doriath. Heard ye not then

of that pretty fay, of Lúthien?

Her body is fair, very white and fair.

Morgoth would possess her in his lair.

Boldoghesent, but Boldog was slain: 2135

strange ye were not in Boldog\'s train.

Nereb looks fierce, his frown is grim.

Little Lúthien! What troubles him?

Why laughs he not to think of his lord

crushing a maiden in his hoard, 2140

that foul should be what once was clean,

that dark should be where light has been?

230 **THE** LAYS OF BELERIAND

Whom do ye serve, Light or Mirk?

Who is the maker of mightiest work?

Who is the king of earthly kings, 2145

the greatest giver of gold and rings?

Who is the master of the wide earth?

Who despoiled them of their mirth,

the greedy Gods? Repeat your vows,

Orcs of Bauglir! Do not bend your brows! 2150

Death to light, to law, to love!

Cursed be moon and stars above!

May darkness everlasting old

that waits outside in surges cold

drown Manwë, Varda, and the sun! 2155

May all in hatred be begun,

and all in evil ended be,

in the moaning of the endless Sea!'

But no true Man nor Elf yet free

would ever speak that blasphemy, 2160

and Beren muttered: 'Who is Thû

to hinder work that is to do?

Him we serve not, nor to him owe

obeisance, and we now would go.'

Thû laughed: ' Patience! Not very long 2165

shall ye abide. But first a song

I will sing to you, to ears intent.'

Then his flaming eyes he on them bent,

and darkness black fell round them all.

Only they saw as through a pall 2 1 70

of eddying smoke those eyes profound

in which their senses choked and drowned.

He chanted a song of wizardry,

of piercing, opening, of treachery,

revealing, uncovering, betraying. 2175

Then sudden Felagund there swaying

sang in answer a song of staying,

resisting, battling against power,

of secrets kept, strength like a tower,

and trust unbroken, freedom, escape; 2180

of changing and of shifting shape,

of snares eluded, broken traps,

the prison opening, the chain that snaps.

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 231**

Backwards and forwards swayed their song.

Reeling and foundering, as ever more strong 2185

Thû\'s chanting swelled, Felagund fought,

and all the magic and might he brought

of Elfinesse into his words.

Softly in the gloom they heard the birds

singing afar in Nargothrond, 2190

the sighing of the sea beyond,

beyond the western world, on sand,

on sand of pearls in Elvenland.

Then the gloom gathered: darkness growing

in Valinor, the red blood flowing 2195

beside the sea, where the Gnomes slew

the Foamriders, and stealing drew

their white ships with their white sails

from lamplit havens. The wind wails.

The wolf howls. The ravens flee. 2200

The ice mutters in the mouths of the sea.

The captives sad in Angband mourn.

Thunder rumbles, the fires burn,

a vast smoke gushes out, a roar ---

and Felagund swoons upon the floor. 2205

Behold! they are in their own fair shape,

fairskinned, brighteyed. No longer gape

Orclike their mouths; and now they stand

betrayed into the wizard\'s hand.

Thus came they unhappy into woe, 2210

to dungeons no hope nor glimmer know,

where chained in chains that eat the flesh

and woven in webs of strangling mesh

they lay forgotten, in despair.

Yet not all unavailing were 2215

the spells of Felagund; for Thû

neither their names nor purpose knew.

These much he pondered and bethought,

and in their woeful chains them sought,

and threatened all with dreadful death, 2220

if one would not with traitor\'s breath

reveal this knowledge. Wolves should come

and slow devour them one by one

**232 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

before the others\' eyes, and last

should one alone be left aghast, 2225

then in a place of horror hung

with anguish should his limbs be wrung,

in the bowels of the earth be slow

endlessly, cruelly, put to woe

and torment, till he all declared. 2230

Even as he threatened, so it fared.

From time to time in the eyeless dark

two eyes would grow, and they would hark

to frightful cries, and then a sound

of rending, a slavering on the ground, 2235

and blood flowing they would smell.

But none would yield, and none would tell.

NOTES

1943 Against the end of this line is written the date 'March 30

1928\'. The previous date was 29 March 1928 at line 1736.

2023 (and subsequently) *Broseliand* A, and B as typed.

2026 *Deadly Night\] Tangled Night* A, and B as typed. Cf.

*Deadly Nightshade* as a name of Taur-na-Fuin in *The* *Children of
Húrin* (p. 55) and at line 2060 in the present Canto.

2047 *fields of drouth:* the expression *Plains of Drouth* occurs in
*The Children of Húrin,* p. 36, line 826.

2056-63 These lines are marked with an X and a sign for deletion in the
B-text, probably not on account of anything in their content but because
my father felt them to be intrusive.

2064-6 Emended in B to:

Gnomes called him Gorthû, as a god

in after days beneath his rod

bewildered they bowed to him, and made

*(Sauron* was first substituted for *Thû Men* is written beside *they*
in line 2066.) *Thû \> Gorthû* at all subsequent occurrences in this
Canto, or the name avoided by substitution of pronoun or article; thus
2088 *of all their deeds to me,* *Gorthû;* 2161---2 *Doth Gorthû / now
hinder work;* 2165

*He laughed;* 2186 *the chanting;* etc.

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 233**

This change is difficult to date, but was made when

*Gnomes* was still employed (2064). In Canto VIII *Thû* was left
unchanged, and subsequently, until 3290, which was emended to *where
Gorthu reigned',* at the end of the poem (3947, 3951) *Thû* was changed
to *Sauron.*

2100---6 On the changed metre of these lines see the Commentary.

2114 After this line is written the date 'March 31st\' (i.e. 1928).

The previous date was 30 March 1928 at line 1943.

2121 *Nereb and Dungalef:* emended in B to *Wrath and Hate,* at the same
time as *Thû \> Gorthû.*

2137 *Nereb looks fierce:* emended in B to *Fierce is your chief.*

2155 *Bridhil* A, and B as typed; the change to *Varda* made at the same
time as *Thû* to *Gorthû.* Cf. note to line 1620.

2175\~7 The three rhyming lines go back through A to the original draft.

2193 *Elvenland* is an emendation to B *Fairyland.*

Commentary on Canto VII

The plot-outline 'Synopsis I' for the narrative in this Canto has
already been given (pp. 219-20). 'Synopsis II' continues from the point
reached on p. 221.

They ambush an Ore-band, and disguising themselves in the raiment and
fashion of the slain, march on Northward. Between the Shadowy Mountains
and the Forest of Night, where the young Sirion flows in the narrowing
valley, they come upon the *werewolves,* and the host of Thû Lord of
Wolves. They are taken before Thû, and after a contest of riddling
questions and answers are revealed as spies, but Beren is taken as a
Gnome, and that Felagund is King of Nargothrond remains hidden.

They are placed in a deep dungeon. Thû desires to discover their purpose
and real names and vows death, one by one, and torment to the last one,
if they will not reveal them. From time to time a great werewolf
*\[struck through:* Thû in disguise\] comes and devours one of the
companions.

This is obviously the narrative basis for Canto VII, and the story here
reaches its final form. There may seem to be a difference between the
outline and the Lay, in that the former says that 'after a contest of
riddling questions and answers they are revealed as spies\', whereas in
the latter Felagund is overcome by song of greater power. In fact, the
riddling contest is present, but seems not to have been fully developed.

In the original draft my father scribbled the following note before he
wrote the passage lines 21ooff.:

**234 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Riddling questions. Where have you been, who have you slain? Thirty men.
Who reigns in Nargothrond? Who is captain of Orcs? Who wrought the
world? Who is king &c. They show Elfin \[?bias\] and too little
knowledge of Angband, too much of Elfland. Thû and Felagund

\..... enchantments against one another and Thû\'s slowly win, till they
stand revealed as Elves.

Lines 2100---6 are in a changed metre, especially suitable to a riddle
contest, and their content (the reply to Thû\'s question 'Where have ye
been? What have ye seen?') is riddling ('misleading accuracy'). But
after this the verse returns to the common metre, and the riddling
element disappears (except in *dark our den / under the mountains\').*
The name *Dungalef(2121),* though it sounds Orcish enough, was an oddly
transparent device, *since Felagund* had just been mentioned; but it
succeeded (2217). No doubt Thû\'s ponderings on the matter were too
subtle.

This is the first full portrait of Thû, who emerges as a being of great
power, far advanced in sorcery, and is indeed here called 'necromancer'

(2074). Here also is the first suggestion that his history would extend
far beyond the tale of Beren and Lúthien, when 'in after days\' Men
would worship him, and build 'his ghastly temples in the shade'.

It is in this Canto, also, that the island in the river Sirion (not
actually mentioned in Synopsis II) makes its first appearance, together
with a mention of the origin of the fortress:

An elven watchtower had it been,

and strong it was, and still was fair. (2041-2)

My father\'s drawing *(Pictures by j. R. R. Tolkien,* no. 36) was made
at Lyme Regis in Dorset in July 1928, less than four months after these
lines were written; and in the drawing the caves scooped by the waters
in the edges of the island (lines 2037-8) can be seen.

The Shadowy Mountains referred to in Synopsis II and in the poem are no
longer the Mountains of Terror (Ered Gorgoroth), as they were at lines
386, 1318 (see pp. 170-1). In Synopsis II it is said that the young
Sirion flows in the narrowing valley between the Shadowy Mountains and
the Forest of Night (Taur-na-Fuin), and in the poem Ivrin\'s lake
mirrors

the pallid faces bare and grim

of Shadowy Mountains neath the moon (1939---40)

as in *The Children of Húrin* (p. 62, lines 1581---2). Thus the term now
reverts to its meaning in the alliterative poem, a meaning that it would
henceforward retain. It is also to be noted that this mountain-range is

'northward-bending' (2030).

The lines concerning Ivrin in *The Children of Húrin* (1594---7):
newborn Narog, nineteen fathoms

o\'er a flickering force falls in wonder,

THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 235

and a glimmering goblet with glass-lucent

fountains fills he by his freshets carven

are echoed in *The Lay of Leithian* (1934---6):

the flickering falls, whose freshets sheer

a glimmering goblet glassy-clear

with crystal waters fill\...

A new feature of the northern lands appears in this Canto: the Gorge of
Aglon (2057), already placed (as other evidence shows)' at the eastern
end of Taur-na-Fuin; and line 2063 gives the first indication that this
region was the territory of the Fëanorians.

The raid of the Ore-captain Boldog into Doriath, seeking to capture
Lúthien for Morgoth, was an important element in the history of this
time, though later it disappeared and there is no trace of it in *The*
*Silmarillion.* Discussion of it is postponed till later in the *Lay of
Leithian,* but it may be noticed here that an early reference to it is
found in *The* *Children of Húrin* (p. 16 lines 392---4, p. 117 lines
764-6). There it was Thû himself who was bidden by Morgoth *go ravage
the realm of the* *robber Thingol.*

The term *Foamriders,* used of the Third Kindred of the Elves in line
2197, is found earlier in the alliterative *Flight of the Noldoli* (see
p. 140).

VIII

Hounds there were in Valinor

with silver collars. Hart and boar,

the fox and hare and nimble roe 2240

there in the forests green did go.

Oromë was the lord divine

of all those woods. The potent wine

went in his halls and hunting song.

The Gnomes anew have named him long 2245

Tavros, the God whose horns did blow

over the mountains long ago;

who alone of Gods had loved the world

before the banners were unfurled

of Moon and Sun; and shod with gold 2250

were his great horses. Hounds untold

baying in woods beyond the West

THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 235

and a glimmering goblet with glass-lucent

fountains fills he by his freshets carven

are echoed in *The Lay of Leithian* (1934---6):

the flickering falls, whose freshets sheer

a glimmering goblet glassy-clear

with crystal waters fill\...

A new feature of the northern lands appears in this Canto: the Gorge of
Aglon (2057), already placed (as other evidence shows)' at the eastern
end of Taur-na-Fuin; and line 2063 gives the first indication that this
region was the territory of the Fëanorians.

The raid of the Ore-captain Boldog into Doriath, seeking to capture
Lúthien for Morgoth, was an important element in the history of this
time, though later it disappeared and there is no trace of it in *The*
*Silmarillion.* Discussion of it is postponed till later in the *Lay of
Leithian,* but it may be noticed here that an early reference to it is
found in *The* *Children of Húrin* (p. 16 lines 392---4, p. 117 lines
764-6). There it was Thû himself who was bidden by Morgoth *go ravage
the realm of the* *robber Thingol.*

The term *Foamriders,* used of the Third Kindred of the Elves in line
2197, is found earlier in the alliterative *Flight of the Noldoli* (see
p. 140).

VIII

Hounds there were in Valinor

with silver collars. Hart and boar,

the fox and hare and nimble roe 2240

there in the forests green did go.

Oromë was the lord divine

of all those woods. The potent wine

went in his halls and hunting song.

The Gnomes anew have named him long 2245

Tavros, the God whose horns did blow

over the mountains long ago;

who alone of Gods had loved the world

before the banners were unfurled

of Moon and Sun; and shod with gold 2250

were his great horses. Hounds untold

baying in woods beyond the West

**236 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

of race immortal he possessed:

grey and limber, black and strong,

white with silken coats and long, 2255

brown and brindled, swift and true

as arrow from a bow of yew;

their voices like the deeptoned bells

that ring in Valmar\'s citadels,

their eyes like living jewels, their teeth 2260

like ruel-bone. As sword from sheath

they flashed and fled from leash to scent

for Tavros' joy and merriment.

In Tavros' friths and pastures green

had Huan once a young whelp been. 2265

He grew the swiftest of the swift,

and Oromë gave him as a gift

to Celegorm, who loved to follow

the great God\'s horn o\'er hill and hollow.

Alone of hounds of the Land of Light, 2270

when sons of Fëanor took to flight

and came into the North, he stayed

beside his master. Every raid

and every foray wild he shared,

and into mortal battle dared. 2275

Often he saved his Gnomish lord

from Orc and wolf and leaping sword.

A wolf-hound, tireless, grey and fierce

he grew; his gleaming eyes would pierce

all shadows and all mist, the scent 2280

moons old he found through fen and bent,

through rustling leaves and dusty sand;

all paths of wide Beleriand

he knew. But wolves, he loved them best;

he loved to find their throats and wrest 2285

their snarling lives and evil breath.

The packs of Thû him feared as Death.

No wizardry, nor spell, nor dart,

no fang, nor venom devil\'s art

could brew had harmed him; for his weird 2290

was woven. Yet he little feared

that fate decreed and known to all:

before the mightiest he should fall,

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 237**

before the mightiest wolf alone

that ever was whelped in cave of stone. 2295

Hark! afar in Nargothrond,

far over Sirion and beyond,

there are dim cries and horns blowing,

and barking hounds through the trees going.

The hunt is up, the woods are stirred. 2300

Who rides to-day? Ye have not heard

that Celegorm and Curufin

have loosed their dogs? With merry din

they mounted ere the sun arose,

and took their spears and took their bows. 2305

The wolves of Thû of late have dared

both far and wide. Their eyes have glared

by night across the roaring stream

of Narog. Doth their master dream,

perchance, of plots and counsels deep, 2310

of secrets that the Elf-lords keep,

of movements in the Gnomish realm

and errands under beech and elm?

Curufin spake: 'Good brother mine,

I like it not. What dark design 2315

doth this portend? These evil things,

we swift must end their wanderings!

And more, \'twould please my heart full well

to hunt a while and wolves to fell.'

And then he leaned and whispered low 2320

that Orodreth was a dullard slow;

long time it was since the king had gone,

and rumour or tidings came there none.

'At least thy profit it would be

to know whether dead he is or free; 2325

to gather thy men and thy array.

"I go to hunt" then thou wilt say,

and men will think that Narog\'s good

ever thou heedest. But in the wood

things may be learned; and if by grace, 2330

by some blind fortune he retrace

his footsteps mad, and if he bear

a Silmaril - I need declare

no more in words; but one by right

**238 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

is thine (and ours), the jewel of light; 2335

another may be won - a throne.

The eldest blood our house doth own.'

Celegorm listened. Nought he said,

but forth a mighty host he led;

and Huan leaped at the glad sounds, 2340

the chief and captain of his hounds.

Three days they ride by holt and hill

the wolves of Thû to hunt and kill,

and many a head and fell of grey

they take, and many drive away, 2345

till nigh to the borders in the West

of Doriath a while they rest.

There were dim cries and horns blowing,

and barking dogs through the woods going.

The hunt was up. The woods were stirred, 2350

and one there fled like startled bird,

and fear was in her dancing feet.

She knew not who the woods did beat.

Far from her home, forwandered, pale,

she flitted ghostlike through the vale; 2355

ever her heart bade her up and on,

but her limbs were worn, her eyes were wan.

The eyes of Huan saw a shade

wavering, darting down a glade

like a mist of evening snared by day 2360

and hasting fearfully away.

He bayed, and sprang with sinewy limb

to chase the shy thing strange and dim.

On terror\'s wings, like a butterfly

pursued by a sweeping bird on high, 2365

she fluttered hither, darted there,

now poised, now flying through the air-

in vain. At last against a tree

she leaned and panted. Up leaped he.

No word of magic gasped with woe, 2370

no elvish mystery she did know

or had entwined in raiment dark

availed against that hunter stark,

whose old immortal race and kind

no spells could ever turn or bind. 2375

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 239**

Huan alone that she ever met

she never in enchantment set

nor bound with spells. But loveliness

and gentle voice and pale distress

and eyes like starlight dimmed with tears 2380

tamed him that death nor monster fears.

Lightly he lifted her, light he bore

his trembling burden. Never before

had Celegorm beheld such prey:

'What hast thou brought, good Huan say! 2385

Dark-elvish maid, or wraith, or fay?

Not such to hunt we came today.'

"Tis Lúthien of Doriath,'

the maiden spake. 'A wandering path

far from the Wood-Elves\' sunny glades 2390

she sadly winds, where courage fades

and hope grows faint.' And as she spoke

down she let slip her shadowy cloak,

and there she stood in silver and white.

Her starry jewels twinkled bright 2395

in the risen sun like morning dew;

the lilies gold on mantle blue

gleamed and glistened. Who could gaze

on that fair face without amaze?

Long did Curufin look and stare. 2400

The perfume of her flower-twined hair,

her lissom limbs, her elvish face,

smote to his heart, and in that place

enchained he stood. \'O maiden royal,

O lady fair, wherefore\>in toil 2405

and lonely journey dost thou go?

What tidings dread of war and woe

In Doriath have betid? Come tell!

For fortune thee hath guided well;

friends thou hast found, ' said Celegorm, 2410

and gazed upon her elvish form.

In his heart him thought her tale unsaid

he knew in part, but nought she read

of guile upon his smiling face.

'Who are ye then, the lordly chase 2415

**240 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

that follow in this perilous wood?'

she asked; and answer seeming-good

they gave. 'Thy servants, lady sweet,

lords of Nargothrond thee greet,

and beg that thou wouldst with them go 2420

back to their hills, forgetting woe

a season, seeking hope and rest.

And now to hear thy tale were best.'

So Lúthien tells of Beren\'s deeds

in northern lands, how fate him leads 2425

to Doriath, of Thingol\'s ire,

the dreadful errand that her sire

decreed for Beren. Sign nor word

the brothers gave that aught they heard

that touched them near. Of her escape 2430

and the marvellous mantle she did shape

she lightly tells, but words her fail

recalling sunlight in the vale,

moonlight, starlight in Doriath,

ere Beren took the perilous path. 2435

'Need, too, my lords, there is of haste!

No time in ease and rest to waste.

For days are gone now since the queen,

Melian whose heart hath vision keen,

looking afar me said in fear 2440

that Beren lived in bondage drear.

The Lord of Wolves hath prisons dark,

chains and enchantments cruel and stark,

and there entrapped and languishing

doth Beren lie-if direr thing 2445

hath not brought death or wish for death':

than gasping woe bereft her breath.

To Celegorm said Curufin

apart and low: 'Now news we win

of Felagund, and now we know 2450

wherefore Thû\'s creatures prowling go',

and other whispered counsels spake,

and showed him what answer he should make.

'Lady,\' said Celegorm, 'thou seest

we go a-hunting roaming beast, 2455

and though our host is great and bold,

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 241**

\'tis ill prepared the wizard\'s hold

and island fortress to assault.

Deem not our hearts or wills at fault.

Lo! here our chase we now forsake 2460

and home our swiftest road we take,

counsel and aid there to devise

for Beren that in anguish lies.'

To Nargothrond they with them bore

Lúthien, whose heart misgave her sore. 2465

Delay she feared; each moment pressed

upon her spirit, yet she guessed

they rode not as swiftly as they might.

Ahead leaped Huan day and night,

and ever looking back his thought 2470

was troubled. What his master sought,

and why he rode not like the fire,

why Curufin looked with hot desire

on Lúthien, he pondered deep,

and felt some evil shadow creep 2475

of ancient curse o\'er Elfinesse.

His heart was torn for the distress

of Beren bold, and Lúthien dear,

and Felagund who knew no fear.

In Nargothrond the torches flared 2480

and feast and music were prepared.

Lúthien feasted not but wept.

Her ways were trammelled; closely kept

she might not fly. Her magic cloak

was hidden, and no prayer she spoke 2485

was heeded, nor did answer find

her eager questions. Out of mind,

it seemed, were those afar that pined

in anguish and in dungeons blind

in prison and in misery. 2490

Too late she knew their treachery.

It was not hid in Nargothrond

that Feanor\'s sons her held in bond,

who Beren heeded not, and who

had little cause to wrest from Thû 2495

the king they loved not and whose quest

old vows of hatred in their breast

242 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

had roused from sleep. Orodreth knew

the purpose dark they would pursue:

King Felagund to leave to die, 2500

and with King Thingol\'s blood ally

the house of Fëanor by force

or treaty. But to stay their course

he had no power, for all his folk

the brothers had yet beneath their yoke, 2505

and all yet listened to their word.

Orodreth\'s counsel no man heard;

their shame they crushed, and would not heed

the tale of Felagund\'s dire need.

At Lúthien\'s feet there day by day 2510

and at night beside her couch would stay

Huan the hound of Nargothrond;

and words she spoke to him soft and fond:

\'O Huan, Huan, swiftest hound

that ever ran on mortal ground, 2515

what evil doth thy lords possess

to heed no tears nor my distress?

Once Barahir all men above

good hounds did cherish and did love;

once Beren in the friendless North, 2520

when outlaw wild he wandered forth,

had friends unfailing among things

with fur and fell and feathered wings,

and among the spirits that in stone

in mountains old and wastes alone 2525

still dwell. But now nor Elf nor Man,

none save the child of Melian,

remembers him who Morgoth fought

and never to thraldom base was brought.'

Nought said Huan; but Curufin 2530

thereafter never near might win

to Lúthien, nor touch that maid,

but shrank from Huan\'s fangs afraid.

Then on a night when autumn damp

was swathed about the glimmering lamp 2535

of the wan moon, and fitful stars

were flying seen between the bars

of racing cloud, when winter\'s horn

THE LAY OF LEITHIAN **243**

already wound in trees forlorn,

lo! Huan was gone. Then Lúthien lay 2540

fearing new wrong, till just ere day,

when all is dead and breathless still

and shapeless fears the sleepless fill,

a shadow came along the wall.

Then something let there softly fall 2545

her magic cloak beside her couch.

Trembling she saw the great hound crouch

beside her, heard a deep voice swell

as from a tower a far slow bell.

Thus Huan spake, who never before 2550

had uttered words, and but twice more

did speak in elven tongue again:

'Lady beloved, whom all Men,

whom Elfmesse, and whom all things

with fur and fell and feathered wings 2555

should serve and love --- arise! away!

Put on thy cloak! Before the day

comes over Nargothrond we fly

to Northern perils, thou and I.'

And ere he ceased he counsel wrought 2560

for achievement of the thing they sought.

There Lúthien listened in amaze,

and softly on Huan did she gaze.

Her arms about his neck she cast ---

in friendship that to death should last. 2565

NOTES

2246 *Tavros* not emended, nor at lines 2263-4 *(see p.* 195\> note to
lines 891, 904).

2248 *of Gods had loved* B \] *of Valar loved* A 2283 *Beleriand\]
Broseliand* A, and B as typed.

2385 After this line is written the date 'April 2nd'. The previous date
was 31 March 1928 at line 2114.

2423 After this line is written the date 'April 3rd'. The previous date
was 2 April 1928 at line 2385.

2442-4 Cf. lines 1246-8.

**244 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

2484---5 The reference to the hiding of Luthien\'s cloak is not in A.

2522-6 Cf. lines 349-53. Line 2523 is repeated at 2555.

2551 *But twice more* emendation in B; *nor ever more A, but* *once
more* B as typed.

2552 *elven: elfin* B, but since *elfin* is changed at almost every
occurrence I have done so here.

Commentary on Canto VIII

The development of the narrative of this Canto from the *Tale of
Tinúviel* to *The Silmarillion* can be followed step by step. The first
stage is seen in the very brief words of the 'Sketch', following on the
passage given on p. 220.

Lúthien is imprisoned by Thingol, but escapes and goes in search of
Beren. With the aid of Huan lord of dogs she rescues Beren \[i.e. from

'Thu the hunter'\], and gains entrance to Angband . . .

This is too compressed to reveal what ideas underlay it; but at least it
is clear that Huan was still independent of any master. In the earliest
map Huan is assigned a territory (south and east of Ivrin), and this
clearly belongs with the old conception.

Synopsis I, a little later than the 'Sketch' (see p. 220), continues
from the point reached on pp. 219-20:

Tinúviel flies in her magic robe, she meets Celegorm out hunting, and is
pursued by him and captured by Huan his dog and hurt. *\[Struck* *out:*
In redress he offers to help\] He offers redress - but cannot help; he
lent his Gnomes to Beren and all perished, and *so* must Beren.

Huan goes with her.

A little later in the outline it is said:

It was written in the fate of Huan that he could only be slain by a
wolf.

At this stage, where Celegorm was the ruler of Nargothrond to whom Beren
went in his trouble, Celegorm 'lent his Gnomes\' to Beren;\*

Lúthien fleeing from Doriath was pursued by Celegorm while out hunting
and was hurt by Huan, who now first appears as Celegorm\'s hound.

Here there is no suggestion of evil behaviour towards her (and no
mention of Curufin); Celegorm is unable to assist her, further than he
has already assisted Beren, but Huan goes with her on her quest: was
this the 'redress' for her hurt that Celegorm offered her? It is not
said. It is clear that the position of the ruler of Nargothrond as a son
of Fëanor,

\* If the previous passage of Synopsis I (p. 219) is strictly
interpreted Celegorm went with Beren from Nargothrond, but this is
obviously not meant: my father must have struck out more than he
intended to. It is now clear that in this form of the story Celegorm
disguised Beren and gave him guides.

THE LAY **OF** LEITHIAN 245

bound by the Oath, must have developed quite differently if this form of
the story had been retained, since he was also sworn to aid the kin of
Barahir (see below, p. 247).

In Synopsis II, given on p. 233 to the point equivalent to the end of
Canto VII, the plot reaches almost to its development in the present
Canto of the Lay; but this was achieved in stages, and the original text
of the outline was so much changed and extended by later alterations
that it would be extremely difficult to follow if set out as hitherto. I
give it therefore in two forms. As first written it read:

Curufin and Celegorm go hunting with all their hounds. Huan the
sleepless is the chief. He is proof against magic sleep or death - it is
his fate to be slain only by the 'greatest wolf. They espy Lúthien who
flees, but is caught by Huan whom she cannot enchant. The hound bears
her to Celegorm, who learns her purpose. Hearing who she is, and falling
in love with her he takes away her magic cloak, and holds her captive.

At last he yields to her tears to let her free and give her back her
cloak, but he will not aid her because of his oath. Nor does he desire
to rescue Felagund, since he is now all-powerful in Nargothrond. She
departs from Celegorm. But Huan has become devoted to her, and goes with
her.

At this stage, the hunting evidently had no significance in itself: it
was the device by which Huan (already in Synopsis I the hound of
Celegorm, and with a peculiar fate) was to be brought to accompany
Lúthien, an essential feature going back to the *Tale of Tinúviel.*
There is no mention of her being hurt by Huan, as there is in Synopsis I
(and so no question of

'redress'); and here Celegorm falls in love with her and therefore holds
her captive. But this is only for a time; he yields to her prayer and
gives her back her cloak, though because of his oath he will not aid
her; and the evil motive of his desiring to let Felagund perish so that
he may retain power in Nargothrond appears. Lúthien leaves Celegorm;
Huan goes with her, as in Synopsis I, but the motive is now explicitly
the hound\'s love for her.

After emendation the outline read as follows:

Because of the disguise of Felagund Thû is suspicious and his wolves
fare far abroad. Celegorm seizes pretext for a wolfhunt.

Curufin and Celegorm go wolf-hunting guilefully (really to intercept
Felagund\*) with all their hounds. Huan the sleepless is the chief.

(Huan came with him \[i.e. Celegorm\] from Tavros' halls.) He is proof
against magic sleep or death --- it is his fate to be slain only by the

•i.e., if he should return to Nargothrond; see lines 2330ff.

246 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

'greatest wolf\'. They espy Lúthien who flees, but is caught by Huan
whom she cannot enchant. The hound bears her to Celegorm, who learns her
purpose. Hearing who she is, and falling in love with her, Curufin takes
away her magic cloak, and holds her captive. Although she tells him
Melian\'s words and that Felagund and Beren are in Thû\'s power he
won\'t attempt a rescue even of Felagund. *(Marginal note:* It is
Curufin who put evil into Celegorm\'s heart.)

In spite of her tears to let her free and give her back her cloak he
will not aid her because of his oath and love. Nor does he desire to
rescue Felagund, since he is now all-powerful in Nargothrond. But Huan
has become devoted to her, and aids her to escape *without her cloak.*

The hunting of Celegorm and Curufin is now given a sinister import, and
is related to the wolves of Thû who 'fare far abroad'. Huan\'s
Valinórean ancestry appears; and Curufin becomes the evil genius of the
brothers, and also the lover of Lúthien. Lúthien is now held prisoner in
Nargothrond until she escapes by the aid of Huan --- but she does not
get back her cloak.

Which of the brothers is referred to in the latter part of the emended
outline is not clear: as originally written it was Celegorm throughout,
but by the change of 'falling in love with her he takes away her magic
cloak' to

'falling in love with her Curufin takes away her magic cloak' Curufin
becomes the antecedent to all that follows. Whether my father really
intended this is hard to say.

When he came to write Canto VIII, on the basis of this emended outline,
some further change took place - notably, the return to Lúthien by Huan
of her cloak before they left Nargothrond; and the element added to the
outline 'It is Curufin who put evil into Celegorm\'s heart' is expanded.
It is now Curufin who suggests the wolfhunt, with its secret intention,
and line 2453 shows him as the subtler and more longheaded schemer,
standing behind his brother and prompting him - it is clear from lines
2324 ff. that Celegorm has some authority --- or is felt by Curufin to
have some authority - that Curufin lacks.

Curufin expresses his contempt for Orodreth ('a dullard slow', 2321),
and this is the first hint of that weakening of Orodreth\'s character to
which I referred earlier (p. 91). Of course the emergence of Felagund
pushed him in any case into a subordinate role, as the younger brother
of the founder of Nargothrond, and the concomitant development whereby
Celegorm and Curufin remained in Nargothrond as powerful interlopers
weakened his position still further. It may be that the position imposed
on him by the movements in the legend led to the conclusion that he
cannot have been made of very stern stuff.

These subtleties in the relationship between Celegorm and Curufin are
passed over in the prose version *(The Silmarillion* pp. 172-3), and
there is no suggestion that Curufin was the more sinister of the pair,
and **THE LAV OF LEITHIAN 247**

the prime mover in their machinations. Celegorm recovers his earlier
role as the one who was enamoured of Lúthien. In the Lay appears the
motive, not mentioned in Synopsis II, of the intention of Celegorm and
Curufin to ally themselves with 'King Thingol\'s blood' by the forced
marriage of Lúthien (lines 2498-2503); and this reappears in *The*
*Silmarillion,* where it is to Celegorm that Thingol is to be compelled
to give her.

The process whereby the legends of Beren and Lúthien on the one hand and
of Nargothrond on the other became entwined is now (to this point in the
story) almost complete, and this is a convenient point to recapitulate
the main shifts in its evolution.

In the Losf *Tales* Orodreth was lord of the Rodothlim, a people of the
Gnomes, in the caves that were to become Nargothrond, but Beren had no
connection with the Rodothlim (and Huan had no master). Then Celegorm
appeared as the Gnomish prince rescued by Beren\'s father (Egnor \>
Barahir) in the battle that afterwards became the Battle of Sudden
Flame, to whom he swore an oath of abiding friendship and aid; and
Celegorm and Curufin became the founders of Nargothrond after the battle
(p. 84). It was to Celegorm that Beren therefore came seeking aid; and
Celegorm plays the later role of Felagund in Synopsis I to the extent
that he gives him Gnomish guides. Lúthien fleeing from Doriath is caught
by Huan, now the hound of Celegorm, and hurt, but this has no outcome
beyond the departure of Lúthien in Huan\'s company (Synopsis I).

The most major change came with the emergence of Felagund and his taking
over Celegorm\'s part both as founder of Nargothrond and as the one
rescued by Barahir. Orodreth became his younger brother, the only other
son of Finrod to survive the battle in which the Siege of Angband ended.
But Celegorm\'s association with Nargothrond was not abandoned ; and his
powerful presence there together with that of his brother Curufin ---
again as a result of the battle --- introduces the motive of conflict
between the Fëanorians and the King, each held by their own oaths. This
conflict had been present in the earlier plot, but there it was a
conflict within Celegorm\'s mind alone, since he had sworn both oaths;
there is however no real evidence as to how my father would have treated
this, unless we assume from his giving Gnomish guides to Beren in
Synopsis I that he gave precedence to his oath to Barahir.

When Lúthien is captured by Huan and taken to Nargothrond she is caught
up in the ambitions of Celegorm and Curufin, and indeed her capture
itself is made to come about from their evil intentions towards Felagund
and determination to prevent his return.

Of Huan it is told in the Lay that he was the only hound of Valinor to
come east over the sea (2270). His fate that he should meet death only
when 'he encountered the mightiest wolf that would ever walk the world'

**248 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

*(The Silmarillion* p. 173) appears (already referred to in Synopsis II,
pp. 245-6), but it is not said as it is in *The Silmarillion* that this
was because as the hound of Celegorm he came under the Doom of the
Noldor. In the A-text of the Lay (note to line 2551) he spoke only once
in his life, in the B-text twice; but this was emended to three times,
as still in *The Silmarillion.*

The statement in lines 2248---50 that Oromë

alone of Gods had loved the world

before the banners were unfurled

of Moon and Sun

seems to forget Yavanna: see the tale of *The Chaining of Melko*
(1.98---9) and *The Silmarillion* pp. 40---1.

The *dim cries and horns blowing, I and barking hounds through* *the
trees going* (lines 2298---9, repeated with variations in lines
2348---9) derive from the Middle English Lay of Sir Orfeo:

With dim cri & bloweing

& houndes also wip him berking.\*

IX

In Wizard\'s Isle still lay forgot,

enmeshed and tortured in that grot

cold, evil, doorless, without light,

and blank-eyed stared at endless night

two comrades. Now alone they were. 2570

The others lived no more, but bare

their broken bones would lie and tell

how ten had served their master well.

To Felagtind then Beren said:

"Twere little loss if I were dead, 2575

and I am minded all to tell,

and thus, perchance, from this dark hell

thy life to loose. I set thee free

\* Auchinleck manuscript lines 285-6 (ed. A. J. Bliss, Oxford 1954, p.
26); cf. my father\'s translation *(Sir Gaviain and the Green Knight,
Peari, and Sir Orfeo,* 1975): with blowing far and crying dim

and barking hounds that were with him

**248 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

*(The Silmarillion* p. 173) appears (already referred to in Synopsis II,
pp. 245-6), but it is not said as it is in *The Silmarillion* that this
was because as the hound of Celegorm he came under the Doom of the
Noldor. In the A-text of the Lay (note to line 2551) he spoke only once
in his life, in the B-text twice; but this was emended to three times,
as still in *The Silmarillion.*

The statement in lines 2248---50 that Oromë

alone of Gods had loved the world

before the banners were unfurled

of Moon and Sun

seems to forget Yavanna: see the tale of *The Chaining of Melko*
(1.98---9) and *The Silmarillion* pp. 40---1.

The *dim cries and horns blowing, I and barking hounds through* *the
trees going* (lines 2298---9, repeated with variations in lines
2348---9) derive from the Middle English Lay of Sir Orfeo:

With dim cri & bloweing

& houndes also wip him berking.\*

IX

In Wizard\'s Isle still lay forgot,

enmeshed and tortured in that grot

cold, evil, doorless, without light,

and blank-eyed stared at endless night

two comrades. Now alone they were. 2570

The others lived no more, but bare

their broken bones would lie and tell

how ten had served their master well.

To Felagtind then Beren said:

"Twere little loss if I were dead, 2575

and I am minded all to tell,

and thus, perchance, from this dark hell

thy life to loose. I set thee free

\* Auchinleck manuscript lines 285-6 (ed. A. J. Bliss, Oxford 1954, p.
26); cf. my father\'s translation *(Sir Gaviain and the Green Knight,
Peari, and Sir Orfeo,* 1975): with blowing far and crying dim

and barking hounds that were with him

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 249**

from thine old oath, for more for me

hast thou endured than e\'er was earned. ' 2580

'A! Beren, Beren hast not learned

that promises of Morgoth\'s folk

are frail as breath. From this dark yoke

of pain shall neither ever go,

whether he learn our names or no, 2585

with Thû\'s consent. Nay more, I think

yet deeper of torment we should drink,

knew he that son of Barahir

and Felagund were captive here,

and even worse if he should know 2590

the dreadful errand we did go.'

A devil\'s laugh they ringing heard

within their pit. 'True, true the word

I hear you speak,' a voice then said.

"Twere little loss if he were dead, 2595

the outlaw mortal. But the king,

the Elf undying, many a thing

no man could suffer may endure.

Perchance, when what these walls immure

of dreadful anguish thy folk learn, 2600

their king to ransom they will yearn

with gold and gem and high hearts cowed;

or maybe Celegorm the proud

will deem a rival\'s prison cheap,

and crown and gold himself will keep. 2605

Perchance, the errand I shall know,

ere all is done, that ye did go.

The wolf is hungry, the hour is nigh;

no more need Beren wait to die.'

The slow time passed. Then in the gloom 261 o

two eyes there glowed. He saw his doom,

Beren, silent, as his bonds he strained

beyond his mortal might enchained.

Lo! sudden there was rending sound

of chains that parted and unwound, 2615

of meshes broken. Forth there leaped

upon the wolvish thing that crept

in shadow faithful Felagund,

**250 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

careless of fang or venomed wound.

There in the dark they wrestled slow, 2620

remorseless, snarling, to and fro,

teeth in flesh, gripe on throat,

fingers locked in shaggy coat,

spurning Beren who there lying

heard the werewolf gasping, dying. 2625

Then a voice he heard: 'Farewell!

On earth I need no longer dwell,

friend and comrade, Beren bold.

My heart is burst, my limbs are cold.

Here all my power I have spent 2630

to break my bonds, and dreadful rent

of poisoned teeth is in my breast.

I now must go to my long rest

neath Timbrenting in timeless halls

where drink the Gods, where the light falls 2635

upon the shining sea.' Thus died the king,

as elvish singers yet do sing.

There Beren lies. His grief no tear,

his despair no horror has nor fear,

waiting for footsteps, a voice, for doom. 2640

Silences profounder than the tomb

of long-forgotten kings, neath years

and sands uncounted laid on biers

and buried everlasting-deep,

slow and unbroken round him creep. 2645

The silences were sudden shivered

to silver fragments. Faint there quivered

a voice in song that walls of rock,

enchanted hill, and bar and lock,

and powers of darkness pierced with light. 2650

He felt about him the soft night

of many stars, and in the air

were rustlings and a perfume rare;

the nightingales were in the trees,

slim fingers flute and viol seize 2655

beneath the moon, and one more fair

than all there be or ever were

upon a lonely knoll of stone

in shimmering raiment danced alone.

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 251**

Then in his dream it seemed he sang, 2660

and loud and fierce his chanting rang,

old songs of battle in the North,

of breathless deeds, of marching forth

to dare uncounted odds and break

great powers, and towers, and strong walls shake; 2665

and over all the silver fire

that once Men named the Burning Briar,

the Seven Stars that Varda set

about the North, were burning yet,

a light in darkness, hope in woe, 2670

the emblem vast of Morgoth\'s foe.

'Huan, Huan! I hear a song

far under welling, far but strong;

a song that Beren bore aloft.

I hear his voice, I have heard if oft 2675

in dream and wandering.' Whispering low

thus Lúthien spake. On the bridge of woe

in mantle wrapped at dead of night

she sat and sang, and to its height

and to its depth the Wizard\'s Isle, 2680

rock upon rock and pile on pile,

trembling echoed. The werewolves howled,

and Huan hidden lay and growled

watchful listening in the dark,

waiting for battle cruel and stark. 2685

Thû heard that voice, and sudden stood

wrapped in his cloak and sable hood

in his high tower. He listened long,

and smiled, and knew that elvish song.

'A! little Lúthien! What brought 2690

the foolish fly to web unsought?

Morgoth! a great and rich reward

to me thou wilt owe when to thy hoard

this jewel is added.' Down he went,

and forth his messengers he sent. 2695

Still Lúthien sang. A creeping shape

with bloodred tongue and jaws agape

stole on the bridge; but she sang on

with trembling limbs and wide eyes wan.

**252 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

The creeping shape leaped to her side, 2700

and gasped, and sudden fell and died.

And still they came, still one by one,

and each was seized, and there were none

returned with padding feet to tell

that a shadow lurketh fierce and fell 2705

at the bridge\'s end, and that below

the shuddering waters loathing flow

o\'er the grey corpses Huan killed.

A mightier shadow slowly filled

the narrow bridge, a slavering hate, 2710

an awful werewolf fierce and great:

pale Draugluin, the old grey lord

of wolves and beasts of blood abhorred,

that fed on flesh of Man and Elf

beneath the chair of Thû himself. 2715

No more in silence did they fight.

Howling and baying smote the night,

till back by the chair where he had fed

to die the werewolf yammering fled.

'Huan is there' he gasped and died, 2720

and Thû was filled with wrath and pride.

'Before the mightiest he shall fall,

before the mightiest wolf of all',

so thought he now, and thought he knew

how fate long spoken should come true. 2725

Now there came slowly forth and glared

into the night a shape long-haired,

dank with poison, with awful eyes

wolvish, ravenous; but there lies

a light therein more cruel and dread 2730

than ever wolvish eyes had fed.

More huge were its limbs, its jaws more wide,

its fangs more gleaming-sharp, and dyed

with venom, torment, and with death.

The deadly vapour of its breath 2735

swept on before it. Swooning dies

the song of Lúthien, and her eyes

are dimmed and darkened with a fear,

cold and poisonous and drear.

Thus came Thû, as wolf more great 2740

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 253**

than e\'er was seen from Angband\'s gate

to the burning south, than ever lurked

in mortal lands or murder worked.

Sudden he sprang, and Huan leaped

aside in shadow. On he swept 2745

to Lúthien lying swooning faint.

To her drowning senses came the taint

of his foul breathing, and she stirred;

dizzily she spake a whispered word,

her mantle brushed across his face. 2750

He stumbled staggering in his pace.

Out leaped Huan. Back he sprang.

Beneath the stars there shuddering rang

the cry of hunting wolves at bay,

the tongue of hounds that fearless slay. 2755

Backward and forth they leaped and ran

feinting to flee, and round they span,

and bit and grappled, and fell and rose.

Then suddenly Huan holds and throws

his ghastly foe; his throat he rends, 2760

choking his life. Not so it ends.

From shape to shape, from wolf to worm,

from monster to his own demon form,

Thû changes, but that desperate grip

he cannot shake, nor from it slip. 2765

No wizardry, nor spell, nor dart,

no fang, nor venom, nor devil\'s art

could harm that hound that hart and boar

had hunted once in Valinor.

Nigh the foul spirit Morgoth made 2770

and bred of evil shuddering strayed

from its dark house, when Lúthien rose

and shivering looked upon his throes.

\'O demon dark, O phantom vile

of foulness wrought, of lies and guile, 2775

here shall thou die, thy spirit roam

quaking back to thy master\'s home

his scorn and fury to endure;

thee he will in the bowels immure

of groaning earth, and in a hole 2780

everlastingly thy naked soul

254 **THE** LAYS **OF BELERIAND**

shall wail and gibber - this shall be,

unless the keys thou render me

of thy black fortress, and the spell

that bindeth stone to stone thou tell, 2785

and speak the words of opening.'

With gasping breath and shuddering

he spake, and yielded as he must,

and vanquished betrayed his master\'s trust.

Lo! by the bridge a gleam of light, 2790

like stars descended from the night

to burn and tremble here below.

There wide her arms did Lúthien throw,

and called aloud with voice as clear

as still at whiles may mortal hear 2795

long elvish trumpets o\'er the hill

echo, when all the world is still.

The dawn peered over mountains wan,

their grey heads silent looked thereon.

The hill trembled; the citadel 2800

crumbled, and all its towers fell;

the rocks yawned and the bridge broke,

and Sirion spumed in sudden smoke.

Like ghosts the owls were flying seen

hooting in the dawn, and bats unclean 2805

went skimming dark through the cold airs

shrieking thinly to find new lairs

in Deadly Nightshade\'s branches dread.

The wolves whimpering and yammering fled

like dusky shadows. Out there creep 281o

pale forms and ragged as from sleep,

crawling, and shielding blinded eyes:

the captives in fear and in surprise

from dolour long in clinging night

beyond all hope set free to light. 2815

A vampire shape with pinions vast

screeching leaped from the ground, and passed,

its dark blood dripping on the trees;

and Huan neath him lifeless sees

a wolvish corpse --- for Thû had flown 2820

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 255**

to Taur-na-Fuin, a new throne

and darker stronghold there to build.

The captives came and wept and shrilled

their piteous cries of thanks and praise.

But Lúthien anxious-gazing stays. 2825

Beren comes not. At length she said:

'Huan, Huan, among the dead

must we then find him whom we sought,

for love of whom we toiled and fought?'

Then side by side from stone to stone 2830

o\'er Sirion they climbed. Alone

unmoving they him found, who mourned

by Felagund, and never turned

to see what feet drew halting nigh.

'A! Beren, Berenl\'camehercry, 2835

'almost too late have I thee found?

Alas! that here upon the ground

the noblest of the noble race

in vain thy anguish doth embrace!

Alas! in tears that we should meet 2840

who once found meeting passing sweet!'

Her voice such love and longing filled

he raised his eyes, his mourning stilled,

and felt his heart new-turned to flame

for her that through peril to him came. 2845

\'O Lúthien, O Lúthien,

more fair than any child of Men,

O loveliest maid of Elfinesse,

what might of love did thee possess

to bring thee here to terror\'s lair! 2850

O lissom limbs and shadowy hair,

O flower-entwined brows so white,

O slender hands in this new light!'

She found his arms and swooned away

just at the rising of the day. 2855

**256 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

NOTES

2637 *elfin* B, not here emended, but it is clear that the intention was
to change *elfin* to *elvish (elven)* in all cases.

2666-7 Cf. lines 377-9 and note. In the present passage A\'s reading
isasB.

2699 Line marked with an X on the B-text.

2712-13 These lines (referring to Draugluin) not in A.

2722-3 Cf. lines 2293-4.

2755 Line marked with an X on the B-text.

2766-7 Cf. lines 2288-9.

2769 After this line is written the date 'April 4th\'. The previous date
was 3 April 1928 at line 2423.

2842 Cf. line 741.

2854-5 Cf. the ending of Canto III, lines 756-7.

Commentary on Canto IX

Synopsis I continues from the point reached on p. 244: Huan goes with
her. She goes to the castle of the Lord of Wolves and sings for him. The
captives in the dungeons hear her.

It was written in the fate of Huan that he could only be slain by a
wolf.

She tells (by arrangement) of the sickness of Huan and so induces the
Lord of Wolves to go werewolf and seek him. The wolf-battle of the
glade. The 'words of opening' wrung from the Lord of Wolves and the
castle broken. Rescue of Beren.

Synopsis II is here less affected by later changes and can be given in a
single text (taking it up from the point reached on p. 246).

But Huan has become devoted to her, and aids her to escape *without*
*her cloak. \[Bracketed:* He trails Beren and Felagund to the House of
Thû.\]

At last only Felagund and Beren remain. It is Beren\'s turn to be
devoured. But Felagund bursts his bonds and wrestles with the werewolf
and slays him, but is killed. Beren is reserved for torment.

Lúthien sings outside the house *\[added:* on the bridge of woe\] of Thû
and Beren hears her voice, and his answering song comes up from
underground to Huan\'s ears.

Thû takes her inside. She tells him a twisted tale - by the desire of
Huan, and because without her cloak she cannot enchant him. She tells of
her bondage to Celegorm and her capture by Huan of whom she feigns
hatred. Of all things in the world Thû hates Huan most. His weird to be
slain only by the 'greatest wolf is known. Lúthien says Huan is lying
sick in the woods. Thû disguises himself as a mighty **THE** LAY OF
LEITHIAN 257

werewolf and is led by her to where Huan is lying in ambush. *\[Added:*
But he purposes to make her a thrall.\]

There follows the battle of the werewolf. Huan slays Thû\'s companions
and with his teeth in Thû\'s throat wrests in return for life 'the words
of opening' from him. The house of Thû is broken, and the captives set
free. Beren is found *\[struck out:* and borne back to Nargothrond.\]

There is also to be considered now another outline, 'Synopsis III', very
hastily written and not entirely legible. This outline begins here and I
follow it to the end of the narrative in this Canto.

Thû lies choking under Huan. Lúthien arouses. She says 'thou phantom
made of foulness by Morgoth, thou shall die and thy spirit go back in
fear to Angband to meet thy master\'s scorn and languish in the dark
bosom of the world, if the "spoken keys" of thy fortress are not
yielded.'

With his gasping breath he says them. Lúthien standing on the bridge
with her arms spread calls them aloud. The dawn comes pale over the
mountains. The hill quivers and gapes, the towers fall, the bridge falls
and block\[s\] Sirion on one side, the dungeons gape.

The owls flee away like phantoms in the first light, great bats are seen
skimming away to Taur-na-Fuin shrieking thinly. *\[Added:* and one as
large as an eagle leads them. The spirit of Thû. His body has a \...
\..... \.... a wolf.\] The wolves flee whimpering and yammering. Pale
captives blinking in the light creep and crawl into the light. *\[Struck
out:* Beren comes forth.\] No Beren. They seek for him and find him
sitting beside Felagund.

These outlines are of great interest, since they show very clearly an
intermediate stage in the evolution of the legend, between the original
story of Tevildo Prince of Cats in the *Tale of Tinúviel* and the story
of Thû in the *Lay of Leithian.* Still present is Lúthien\'s untrue tale
that Huan is lying sick in the woods (see II. 26), and in Synopsis II
Thû retains the (originally feline) Tevildo-trait of hating Huan more
than any other creature in the world (II. 21). The old element of
Tinúviel\'s entering the castle alone in order to inveigle Tevildo out
of it, so that he may be attacked by Huan, was not yet abandoned - but
in Synopsis II she does not have her cloak, and so cannot enchant Thû,
whereas in the *Tale* the drowsiness which came upon the doorkeeper cat
Umuiyan, and afterwards on Tevildo himself, is ascribed to her 'robe of
sable mist'

(II. 24-5). In the Lay, as in the account in *The Silmarillion* based on
the Lay, Lúthien\'s sleep-bearing cloak has come back into the story at
this juncture, since Huan retrieved it before they left Nargothrond, and
she used it against Thû in the battle on the bridge.

A new element enters in Synopsis I with the singing of Lúthien before
Thû, and the captives in the dungeons hearing her; in the old *Tale*
**258 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Tinúviel merely spoke very loudly so that Beren might hear her in the
kitchen where he toiled. In Synopsis II this element is developed to the
final form, with Lúthien singing on the bridge leading to the Wizard\'s
Isle; but she still enters the castle by herself, before 'the battle of
the werewolf.

The sentence added in Synopsis II saying that Thû 'purposes to make her
a thrall' goes back to the *Tale* (II. 26), and survived into the Lay
and *The Silmarillion* ('he thought to make her captive and hand her
over to the power of Morgoth, for his reward would be great').

The statement in II that 'Huan slays Thu\'s companions\' doubtless
proceeds from the story in the *Tale,* where when Tevildo set out to
find Huan he was accompanied by two of his 'thanes\', though in the
*Tale* only Oikeroi was slain by Huan, and the other (unnamed) cat fled
up a tree, as also did Tevildo himself (II. 28). In II, and in more
detail in III, Thû is at Huan\'s mercy on the ground. In neither I nor
II (III only takes up after this point) is there any suggestion of the
wolves coming out from the castle and being slain by Huan one by one and
silently, until at last Draugluin came forth; but as I noted in my
commentary on the *Tale* (II. 54-5) 'the killing of the cat Oikeroi is
the germ of Huan\'s fight with Draugluin - the skin of Huan\'s dead
opponent is put to the same use in either case'. This element of the
procession of wolves before Thû comes only enters with the poem. The
verses naming Draugluin as the last and greatest of them (2712---13) are
not in A, but in Lúthien\'s 'lengthening spell' *Draugluin the werewolf
pale* is named in B (1489), where A has *Carcharas.*

Most interesting of all the features of this part of the story is that
of the 'words of opening' or 'spoken keys\', which goes back to the
*Tale* (11.28-9). I have discussed there (11.55) the implications of
this element in the enlarged context (the fortress of Thû had been an
Elvish watchtower): the consequent 'displacement' of the spell that held
the stones together.

In Synopsis III appear other features of the final story: the flight of
Thû as a great bat; the finding of Beren sitting beside the body of
Felagund. The pale captives who creep blinking into the light go back
ultimately to the host of cats, reduced by the breaking of Tevildo\'s
spell to puny size, who came forth from the castle in the *Tale*
(II.29,55).

In Canto IX the story reaches its final form, and the passage in *The*
*Silmarillion* derives from it closely, with only minor differences -
the chief being the omission of all mention of Thû\'s voice in the
dungeon, which is only found in the poem (lines 2592-2609). The old
element still present in Synopsis II of Lúthien entering the castle
alone has at last disappeared.

There remain a few matters of interest apart from the development of the
story. Felagund\'s dying words (2633---6):

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 259**

I now must go to my long rest

neath Timbrenting in timeless halls

where drink the Gods, where the light falls

upon the shining sea

are closely similar to Turin\'s words of parting to Beleg dead (p. 58,
1408-11):

Now fare well, Beleg, to feasting long

neath Tengwethil in the timeless halls

where drink the Gods, neath domes golden

o\'er the sea shining.

As I have said (p. 94), Turin foresees for Beleg an afterlife in
Valinor, in the halls of the Gods, and does not speak, as does Beleg
himself in Turin\'s dream, of a time of 'waiting':

my life has winged to the long waiting

in the halls of the Moon o\'er the hills of the sea.

(p. 55, 1696-7)

Very notable are the words about Thû: 'the foul spirit Morgoth *made'*

(line 2770).

In the passage (2666-71) referring to the constellation of the Great
Bear is the first suggestion of the idea that Varda set the Seven Stars
in the sky as an emblem of hope against Morgoth. Cf. *The Silmarillion*
(p. 174):

\[Beren\] sang a song of challenge that he had made in praise of the
Seven Stars, the Sickle of the Valar that Varda hung above the North as
a sign for the fall of Morgoth.

X

Songs have recalled the Elves have sung

in old forgotten elven tongue

how Lúthien and Beren strayed

by the banks of Sirion. Many a glade

they filled with joy, and there their feet 2860

passed by lightly, and days were sweet.

Though winter hunted through the wood,

still flowers lingered where she stood.

Tinúviel! Tinúviel!

the birds are unafraid to dwell 2865

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 259**

I now must go to my long rest

neath Timbrenting in timeless halls

where drink the Gods, where the light falls

upon the shining sea

are closely similar to Turin\'s words of parting to Beleg dead (p. 58,
1408-11):

Now fare well, Beleg, to feasting long

neath Tengwethil in the timeless halls

where drink the Gods, neath domes golden

o\'er the sea shining.

As I have said (p. 94), Turin foresees for Beleg an afterlife in
Valinor, in the halls of the Gods, and does not speak, as does Beleg
himself in Turin\'s dream, of a time of 'waiting':

my life has winged to the long waiting

in the halls of the Moon o\'er the hills of the sea.

(p. 55, 1696-7)

Very notable are the words about Thû: 'the foul spirit Morgoth *made'*

(line 2770).

In the passage (2666-71) referring to the constellation of the Great
Bear is the first suggestion of the idea that Varda set the Seven Stars
in the sky as an emblem of hope against Morgoth. Cf. *The Silmarillion*
(p. 174):

\[Beren\] sang a song of challenge that he had made in praise of the
Seven Stars, the Sickle of the Valar that Varda hung above the North as
a sign for the fall of Morgoth.

X

Songs have recalled the Elves have sung

in old forgotten elven tongue

how Lúthien and Beren strayed

by the banks of Sirion. Many a glade

they filled with joy, and there their feet 2860

passed by lightly, and days were sweet.

Though winter hunted through the wood,

still flowers lingered where she stood.

Tinúviel! Tinúviel!

the birds are unafraid to dwell 2865

**260 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

and sing beneath the peaks of snow

where Beren and where Lúthien go.

The isle in Sirion they left behind;

but there on hill-top might one find

a green grave, and a stone set, 2870

and there there lie the white bones yet

of Felagund, of Finrod\'s son -

unless that land is changed and gone,

or foundered in unfathomed seas,

while Felagund laughs beneath the trees 2875

in Valinor, and comes no more

to this grey world of tears and war.

To Nargothrond no more he came;

but thither swiftly ran the fame

of their king dead, of Thûo\'erthrown, 2880

of the breaking of the towers of stone.

For many now came home at last,

who long ago to shadow passed;

and like a shadow had returned

Huan the hound, and scant had earned 2885

or praise or thanks of master wroth;

yet loyal he was, though he was loath.

The halls of Narog clamours fill

that vainly Celegorm would still.

There men bewailed their fallen king, 2890

crying that a maiden dared that thing

which sons of Fëanor would not do.

'Let us slay these faithless lords untrue!'

the fiickle folk now loudly cried

with Felagund who would not ride. 2895

Orodreth spake: 'The kingdom now

is mine alone. I will allow

no spilling of kindred blood by kin.

But bread nor rest shall find herein

these brothers who have set at nought 2900

the house of Finrod.' They were brought.

Scornful, unbowed, and unashamed

stood Celegorm. In his eye there flamed

a light of menace. Curufin

smiled with his crafty mouth and thin. 2905

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 261**

'Be gone for ever --- ere the day

shall fall into the sea. Your way

shall never lead you hither more,

nor any son of Fëanor;

nor ever after shall be bond 291 o

of love twixt yours and Nargothrond.'

'We will remember it,' they said,

and turned upon their heels, and sped,

and took their horses and such folk

as still them followed. Nought they spoke 2915

but sounded horns, and rode like fire,

and went away in anger dire.

Towards Doriath the wanderers now

were drawing nigh. Though bare the bough,

though cold the wind, and grey the grasses 2920

through which the hiss of winter passes,

they sang beneath the frosty sky

uplifted o\'er them pale and high.

They came to Mindeb\'s narrow stream

that from the hills doth leap and gleam 2925

by western borders where begin

the spells of Melian to fence in

King Thingol\'s land, and stranger steps

to wind bewildered in their webs.

There sudden sad grew Beren\'s heart: 2930

'Alas, Timiviel, here we part

and our brief song together ends,

and sundered ways each lonely wends! '

'Why part we here? What dost thou say,

just at the dawn of brighter day?' 2935

'For safe thou\'rt come to borderlands

o\'er which in the keeping of the hands

of Melian thou wilt walk at ease

and find thy home and well-loved trees.'

'My heart is glad when the fair trees 2940

far off uprising grey it sees

of Doriath inviolate.

Yet Doriath my heart did hate,

and Doriath my feet forsook,

**262 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

my home, my kin. I would not look 2945

on grass nor leaf there evermore

without thee by me. Dark the shore

of Esgalduin the deep and strong!

Why there alone forsaking song

by endless waters rolling past 2950

must I then hopeless sit at last,

and gaze at waters pitiless

in heartache and in loneliness?'

'For never more to Doriath

can Beren find the winding path, 2955

though Thingol willed it or allowed;

for to thy father there I vowed

to come not back save to fulfill

the quest of the shining Silmaril,

and win by valour my desire. 2960

"Not rock nor steel nor Morgoth\'s fire

nor all the power of Elfinesse,

shall keep the gem I would possess":

thus swore I once of Lúthien

more fair than any child of Men. 2965

My word, alas! I must achieve,

though sorrow pierce and parting grieve.'

'Then Lúthien will not go home,

but weeping in the woods will roam,

nor peril heed, nor laughter know. 2970

And if she may not by thee go

against thy will thy desperate feet

she will pursue, until they meet,

Beren and Lúthien, love once more

on earth or on the shadowy shore. ' 2975

'Nay, Lúthien, most brave of heart,

thou makest it more hard to part.

Thy love me drew from bondage drear,

but never to that outer fear,

that darkest mansion of all dread, 2980

shall thy most blissful light be led.'

'Never, never!' he shuddering said.

But even as in his arms she pled,

a sound came like a hurrying storm.

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 263**

There Curufin and Celegorm 2985

in sudden tumult like the wind

rode up. The hooves of horses dinned

loud on the earth. In rage and haste

madly northward they now raced

the path twixt Doriath to find 2990

and the shadows dreadly dark entwined

of Taur-na-Fuin. That was their road

most swift to where their kin abode

in the east, where Himling\'s watchful hill

o\'er Aglon\'s gorge hung tall and still. 2995

They saw the wanderers. With a shout

straight on them swung their hurrying rout,

as if neath maddened hooves to rend

the lovers and their love to end.

But as they came the horses swerved 3000

with nostrils wide and proud necks curved;

Curufin, stooping, to saddlebow

with mighty arm did Lúthien throw,

and laughed. Too soon; for there a spring

fiercer than tawny lion-king 3005

maddened with arrows barbed smart,

greater than any horned hart

that hounded to a gulf leaps o\'er,

there Beren gave, and with a roar

leaped on Curufin; round his neck 3010

his arms entwined, and all to wreck

both horse and rider fell to ground;

and there they fought without a sound.

Dazed in the grass did Lúthien lie

beneath bare branches and the sky; 3015

the Gnome felt Beren\'s fingers grim

close on his throat and strangle him,

and out his eyes did start, and tongue

gasping from his mouth there hung.

Up rode Celegorm with his spear, 3020

and bitter death was Beren near.

With elvish steel he nigh was slain

whom Lúthien won from hopeless chain,

but baying Huan sudden sprang

before his master\'s face with fang 3025

264 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

white-gleaming, and with bristling hair,

as if he on boar or wolf did stare.

The horse in terror leaped aside,

and Celegorm in anger cried:

'Curse thee, thou baseborn dog, to dare 3030

against thy master teeth to bare!'

But dog nor horse nor rider bold

would venture near the anger cold

of mighty Huan fierce at bay.

Red were his jaws. They shrank away, 3°35

and fearful eyed him from afar:

nor sword nor knife, nor scimitar,

no dart of bow, nor cast of spear,

master nor man did Huan fear.

There Curufin had left his life, 3040

had Lúthien not stayed that strife.

Waking she rose and softly cried

standing distressed at Beren\'s side:

'Forbear thy anger now, my lord!

nor do the work of Orcs abhorred; 3045

for foes there be of Elfinesse

unnumbered, and they grow not less,

while here we war by ancient curse

distraught, and all the world to worse

decays and crumbles. Make thy peace! ' 3050

Then Beren did Curufin release;

but took his horse and coat of mail,

and took his knife there gleaming pale,

hanging sheathless, wrought of steel.

No flesh could leeches ever heal 3055

that point had pierced; for long ago

the dwarves had made it, singing slow

enchantments, where their hammers fell

in Nogrod ringing like a bell.

Iron as tender wood it cleft, 3060

and sundered mail like woollen weft.

But other hands its haft now held;

its master lay by mortal felled.

Beren uplifting him, far him flung,

and cried 'Begone! ', with stinging tongue; 3065

'Begone! thou renegade and fool,

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 265**

and let thy lust in exile cool!

Arise and go, and no more work

like Morgoth\'s slaves or cursed Orc;

and deal, proud son of Fëanor, 3070

in deeds more proud than heretofore!'

Then Beren led Lúthien away,

while Huan still there stood at bay.

'Farewell,' cried Celegorm the fair.

'Far get you gone! And better were 3075

to die forhungered in the waste

than wrath of Fëanor\'s sons to taste,

that yet may reach o\'er dale and hill.

No gem, nor maid, nor Silmaril

shall ever long in thy grasp lie! 3080

We curse thee under cloud and sky,

we curse thee from rising unto sleep!

Farewell! ' He swift from horse did leap,

his brother lifted from the ground;

then bow of yew with gold wire bound 3085

he strung, and shaft he shooting sent,

as heedless hand in hand they went;

a dwarvish dart and cruelly hooked.

They never turned nor backward looked.

Loud bayed Huan, and leaping caught 3090

the speeding arrow. Quick as thought

another followed deadly singing;

but Beren had turned, and sudden springing

defended Lúthien with his breast.

Deep sank the dart in flesh to rest. 3095

He fell to earth. They rode away,

and laughing left him as he lay;

yet spurred like wind in fear and dread

of Huan\'s pursuing anger red.

Though Curufin with bruised mouth laughed, 3100

yet later of that dastard shaft

was tale and rumour in the North,

and Men remembered at the Marching Forth,

and Morgoth\'s will its hatred helped.

Thereafter never hound was whelped 3105

would follow horn of Celegorm

or Curufin. Though in strife and storm,

**266 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

though all their house in ruin red

went down, thereafter laid his head

Huan no more at that lord\'s feet, 3110

but followed Lúthien, brave and fleet.

Now sank she weeping at the side

of Beren, and sought to stem the tide

of welling blood that flowed there fast.

The raiment from his breast she cast; 3115

from shoulder plucked the arrow keen;

his wound with tears she washed it clean.

Then Huan came and bore a leaf,

of all the herbs of healing chief,

that evergreen in woodland glade 3120

there grew with broad and hoary blade.

The powers of all grasses Huan knew,

who wide did forest-paths pursue.

Therewith the smart he swift allayed,

while Lúthien murmuring in the shade 3125

the staunching song, that Elvish wives

long years had sung in those sad lives

of war and weapons, wove o\'er him.

The shadows fell from mountains grim.

Then sprang about the darkened North 3130

the Sickle of the Gods, and forth

each star there stared in stony night

radiant, glistering cold and white.

But on the ground there is a glow,

a spark of red that leaps below: 3135

under woven boughs beside a fire

of crackling wood and sputtering briar

there Beren lies in drowsing deep,

walking and wandering in sleep.

Watchful bending o\'er him wakes 3140

a maiden fair; his thirst she slakes,

his brow caresses, and softly croons

a song more potent than in runes

or leeches\' lore hath since been writ.

Slowly the nightly watches flit. 3145

The misty morning crawleth grey

from dusk to the reluctant day.

Then Beren woke and opened eyes,

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 267**

and rose and cried: 'Neath other skies,

in lands more awful and unknown, 3150

I wandered long, methought, alone

to the deep shadow where the dead dwell;

but ever a voice that I knew well,

like bells, like viols, like harps, like birds,

like music moving without words, 31 55

called me, called me through the night,

enchanted drew me back to light!

Healed the wound, assuaged the pain!

Now are we come to morn again,

new journeys once more lead us on --- 3160

to perils whence may life be won,

hardly for Beren; and for thee

a waiting in the wood I see,

beneath the trees of Doriath,

while ever follow down my path 3165

the echoes of thine elvish song,

where hills are haggard and roads are long.'

'Nay, now no more we have for foe

dark Morgoth only, but in woe,

in wars and feuds of Elfinesse 3170

thy quest is bound; and death, no less,

for thee and me, for Huan bold

the end of weird of yore foretold,

all this I bode shall follow swift,

if thou go on. Thy hand shall lift 3175

and lay in Thingol\'s lap the dire

and flaming jewel, Fëanor\'s fire,

never, never! A why then go?

Why turn we not from fear and woe

beneath the trees to walk and roam 3180

roofless, with all the world as home,

over mountains, beside the seas,

in the sunlight, in the breeze?'

Thus long they spoke with heavy hearts;

and yet not all her elvish arts, 3185

nor lissom arms, nor shining eyes

as tremulous stars in rainy skies,

nor tender lips, enchanted voice,

his purpose bent or swayed his choice.

**208 THE** LAYS OF BELERIAND

Never to Doriath would he fare *3190*

save guarded fast to leave her there;

never to Nargothrond would go

with her, lest there came war and woe;

and never would in the world untrod

to wander suffer her, worn, unshod, 3195

roofless and restless, whom he drew

with love from the hidden realms she knew.

'For Morgoth\'s power is now awake;

already hill and dale doth shake,

the hunt is up, the prey is wild: 3200

a maiden lost, an elven child.

Now Orcs and phantoms prowl and peer

from tree to tree, and fill with fear

each shade and hollow. Thee they seek!

At thought thereof my hope grows weak, 3205

my heart is chilled. I curse mine oath,

I curse the fate that joined us both

and snared thy feet in my sad doom

of flight and wandering in the gloom!

Now let us haste, and ere the day 3210

be fallen, take our swiftest way,

till o\'er the marches of thy land

beneath the beech and oak we stand

in Doriath, fair Doriath

whither no evil finds the path, 3215

powerless to pass the listening leaves

that droop upon those forest-eaves.'

Then to his will she seeming bent.

Swiftly to Doriath they went,

and crossed its borders. There they stayed 3220

resting in deep and mossy glade;

there lay they sheltered from the wind

under mighty beeches silken-skinned,

and sang of love that still shall be,

though earth be foundered under sea, 3225

and sundered here for evermore

shall meet upon the Western Shore.

One morning as asleep she lay

upon the moss, as though the day

too bitter were for gentle flower 3230

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 269**

to open in a sunless hour,

Beren arose and kissed her hair,

and wept, and softly left her there.

'Good Huan,' said he, 'guard her well!

In leafless field no asphodel, 3235

in thorny thicket never a rose

forlorn, so frail and fragrant blows.

Guard her from wind and frost, and hide

from hands that seize and cast aside;

keep her from wandering and woe, 3240

for pride and fate now make me go.'

The horse he took and rode away,

nor dared to turn; but all that day

with heart as stone he hastened forth

and took the paths toward the North. 3245

NOTES

2877 Against this line is written the date 'April 5th\'. The previous
date was 4 April 1928 at line 2769.

2929 At the end of this line is written the date 'April 6th\'.

2950---3 Cf. lines 649-52, 1220-3.

2998 Against this line is written the date 'April 27th 1928'.

3031 Before this line is written the date 'Nov. 1929'. This date may
refer forward or backward; but both it and the text that follows is
written with a slightly finer nib than that used for the preceding
portion of the poem. The previous date was 27

April 1928 at line 2998.

3076-84 Against these seven lines, as first written in the margin of the
manuscript A, is the date 'Sept. 1930'.

3119 Against this line my father wrote in the margin of the B-text the
word *athelas.* In *The Fellowship of the Ring* (I. 12) Aragorn said
that it was brought to Middle-earth by the Númenóreans.

3220 After the word *borders* is written the date '25 September 1930'.

3242-5 These last four lines of the Canto are only found in A, but I
suspect that they were omitted inadvertently.

**270 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Commentary on Canto X

The development of the story in this Canto can again be followed step by
step in the outlines. In the *Tale of Tinúviel* (11.30-1) Beren and
Tinúviel wandered away with Huan after the defeat of Tevildo, and it was
her desire to return to Artanor but unwillingness to part from Beren
that led to their resolve to try to gain a Silmaril. The catskin of
Oikeroi, thane of Tevildo, was carried by Huan as a trophy, and they
begged it from him; it was in the guise of a cat that Beren went to
Angband.

Synopsis I says no more of this part of the narrative than 'Tinúviel and
Beren disguised as a werewolf go to Angband', and apart from the fact
that the skin was that of a werewolf and not of a cat there had probably
been no development from the *Tale.*

Synopsis II continues from the point reached on p. 257 as follows:
Lúthien tends Beren in the wood .Huan brings news to Nargothrond.

The Gnomes drive forth Curufin and Celegorm, grieving for Felagund, and
send the cloak back to Lúthien. Lúthien takes her cloak again and led by
Huan they go to Angband. By his guidance and her magic they escape
capture. Huan dare not come any further. Beren is disguised as a
werewolf. They enter Angband.

The sentences 'and send the cloak back to Lúthien. Lúthien takes her
cloak again' were changed at the time of writing to read: 'and send to
succour Beren and Lúthien. Huan brings Lúthien back her cloak again.'

(This outline was written of course before my father reached Canto VIII,
at the end of which Huan brought Lúthien her cloak before she escaped
from Nargothrond.)

Here Synopsis II ends. At the bottom of the page is written very
roughly:

Celegorm\'s embassy to Thingol so that Thingol knows or thinks he knows
Beren dead and Lúthien in Nargothrond.

Why Celegorm and Curufin hated by Thingol. . \.....

The loss of Dairon.

While the expulsion of Celegorm and Curufin from Nargothrond is now
first mentioned, it is clear that the story of their attack on Beren and
Lúthien did not exist. Huan brings the news of the destruction of the
Wizard\'s Tower, but it seems that he does not leave Nargothrond with
Celegorm and brings back the cloak to Lúthien independently.

Synopsis III has been given on p. 257 to the point where Lúthien and
Huan find Beren 'sitting beside Felagund'. I give the next portion of
this outline as it was first written:

They hallow the isle and bury Felagund on its top, and no wolf or evil
creature will ever come there again. Beren is led into the woods.

*\[The following sentence was bracketed with a marginal direction that
it should come later:* Morgoth hearing of the breaking of **THE LAY OF
LEITHIAN 271**

the Wizard\'s Tower sends out an army of Orcs; finding the wolves are
slain with \...\... throats he thinks it is Huan and fashions a vast
wolf-Carcharas - mightiest of all wolves to guard his door.\]

They hide in Taur-na-Fuin careful not to lose sight of light at edge.

Lúthien bids Beren desist. He cannot, he says, return to Doriath.

Then, she says, she will live in the woods with Beren and Huan. But he
has spoken his word; he has vowed not to fear Morgoth . . . hell. Then
she says \[that she\] fears that their lives will all be forfeit. But
life perchance lies after death. Where Beren goes she goes. This gives
him pause. They ask Huan. He speaks for second and last time. 'No more
may Huan go with you - what you see at the gate, he will see later - his
fate does not lead to Angband. Perchance, though his eyes are dim,

\[?thy\] paths lead out of it again.' He goes to Nargothrond. They will
not return to Nargothrond with him.

Lúthien and Beren leave Taur-na-Fuin and wander about together a while.
Longing to look on Doriath seizes her and Beren thinks of the quest
unaccomplished. Beren offers to lead her to the borders of Doriath, but
they cannot bear to part.

They go to the Wizard\'s Isle and take a 'wolf-ham' and a bat-robe.

Thus they trembling inwardly set forth. The journey to Angband over
Dor-na-Fauglith and into the dark ravines of the hills.

Here first appears the burial of Felagund on the summit of the isle, and
its hallowing. This outline makes no mention of the events in
Nargothrond, and concentrates exclusively on Beren and Lúthien. They are
in Taur-na-Fuin, and Huan is with them; and we have the first version of
Huan\'s counsel to them, and his foreseeing that what they meet at the
Gate of Angband he will himself see later. Since the attack by Celegorm
and Curufin had still not been devised, the story is briefer than it was
to become; thus Huan speaks to them in Taur-na-Fuin soon after the
destruction of the Wizard\'s Tower, and then departs to Nargothrond,
while they after a while go to the Isle and take the 'wolf-ham'
(\'wolf-hame\'

in *The Silmarillion* p. 178, Old English *hama)* and 'bat-robe', which
now first appear (though the \'wolf-hame\' derives from the catskin of
Oikeroi in the *Tale).* From the words 'They will not return to
Nargothrond with him' and from the fact that as the outline was written
he is not mentioned again, it is clear that Huan was now out of the
story (until his reappearance in a later episode). His speech is here
called 'the second and last time' that he spoke with words. Afterwards
the story was changed in this point, for he spoke to Beren a third time
at his death (see note to line 2551).

Pencilled changes were made to this passage of Synopsis III, and these
move the narrative a long way to the final version:

They hallow the isle and bury Felagund on its top, and no wolf or evil
creature will ever come there again.

Lúthien and Beren leave Taur-na-Fuin and wander about together a **272
THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

while. Longing to look on Doriath seizes her and Beren thinks of the
quest unaccomplished. Beren offers to lead her to the borders of
Doriath, but they cannot bear to part.

News by captives and Huan is brought to Nargothrond. Celegorm and
Curufin in a revulsion of feeling the Nargothronders wish to slay them.
Orodreth will not. They are exiled and all Fëanorians from Nargothrond
for ever. They ride off. Assault of Celegorm and Curufin in wood on
Beren and Lúthien. Rescue by Huan. Beren wrestles with Curufin and gets
his magic knife - *\[eight further words illegible\]*

Huan brings them a wolf-ham. Thus they trembling inwardly set forth.
Huan speaks for last time and says farewell. He will not come.

The journey to Angband, &c.

Here more is told of the expulsion of Celegorm and Curufin from
Nargothrond, and Orodreth\'s refusal to allow them to be slain, and here
at last is mention - probably written here at the very time of its
devising ---of the attack on Beren and Lúthien as the Fëanorians rode
from Nargothrond. The desertion of Celegorm by Huan is implied; Beren
gets Curufin\'s knife, which is to replace the knife from Tevildo\'s
kitchens as the implement with which Beren cut the Silmaril from the
Iron Crown; and it is Huan who gets the wolfskin, and then utters his
parting speech.

An extremely difficult page in pencil ('Synopsis IV) shows these new
elements being developed further:

Beren\'s heart grows sad. He says he has led Tinúviel back to the border
of her land where she is safe. Alas for their second parting. She says
but from this land she herself escaped and fled only to be with him -
yet she admits that her heart longs for Doriath and Melian too, but not
Doriath without him. He quotes his own words to Thingol: 'Not Morgoth\'s
fire &c.\'-and says he cannot (even if Thingol would allow) return
emptyhanded. \.... she will not go back. She will wander in the woods -
and if he will not take her with him she will follow his feet against
his will. He protests - at this moment Celegorm and Curufin ride up
seeking the way North *\[struck out at time of writing:* round Doriath
by the Gorgoroth\] between Doriath and Taur-na-Fuin to the Gorge of
Aglon and their own kin.

They ride straight on and seek to ride Beren down. Curufin stoops and
lifts Lúthien to his saddle. Beren leaps aside and leaps at Curufin\'s
neck \[?hurling\] him down. Celegorm with his spear rides up to slay
Beren. Huan intervenes scattering the \[?brothers'\] folk and dogs and
holds Celegorm at bay while Beren wrestles with Curufin and chokes him
senseless. Beren takes his weapons - especially his magic knife, and
bids him get on horse and be gone. They ride off. Huan stays with Beren
and Lúthien and forsakes his master \[?for ever\]. Celegorm suddenly
turns and shoots an arrow at Huan which of course falls **THE LAY OF
LEITHIAN 273**

harmless from him, but Curufin shoots at Beren (and Lúthien)

*\[changed to:* shoots at Lúthien\] and wounds Beren.

Lúthien heals Beren. They tell Huan of their doubts and debate and he
goes off and brings the wolfham and batskin from the Wizard\'s Isle.

Then he speaks for the last time.

They prepare to go to Angband.

This was certainly prepared as an outline for Canto 10 of the Lay, for
the section of the synopsis that follows is headed ' 11 '.

There is here the further development that Beren and Lúthien have come
to the borders of Doriath; but the solitary departure of Beren after his
healing, leaving Lúthien with Huan, has still not emerged. There are a
few differences in the account of the fight with Celegorm and Curufin
from the final form, but for the most part the detail of the events was
never changed from its first writing down (as I believe it to be) on
this page. There is here no mention of Beren\'s taking Curufin\'s horse,
on which he was later to ride north by himself to Anfauglith; and the
detail of the shooting is different --- in the synopsis Celegorm aimed
at Huan, and Curufin (who seems to have retained his bow, though Beren
took all his weapons) at (Beren and) Lúthien. There is also mention of
'folk'

accompanying the brothers on their journey from Nargothrond.

In this outline is the first occurrence of the name *Gorgomth.*

There is one further outline ('Synopsis V), consisting of four pages
that are the concluding part of a text of which the beginning has
disappeared: it begins with a heading '10 continued', which is certainly
a Canto number, though the content extends much beyond the end of Canto
X in the Lay.\* The text takes up with the healing of Beren\'s wound.

Huan brings a herb of healing, and Lúthien and the hound tend Beren in
the forest, building a hut of boughs. Beren mending will still go on his
quest. But Lúthien foretells that all their lives will be forfeit if
they pursue. Beren will not go back to Doriath otherwise. Nor will he or
Huan go to Nargothrond, or keep Lúthien in Thingol\'s despite, for war
would certainly arise twixt Elf and Elf, \[?even\] if Orodreth harboured
them. 'Then why shall we not dwell here in the wood?' saith Lúthien.
Because of danger outside Doriath, and the Orcs, and the knowledge
Morgoth must now possess of Lúthien\'s wandering.

One morning early Beren steals away on Curufin\'s horse and reaches the
eaves of Taur-na-Fuin.

Here at last is the element of Beren\'s solitary departure.

**\* It is also possible that ' i o continued' means only that my father
began Synopsis V at** **thi**

**point, i.e. he had already reached about line 3117 in the actual
composition of the Lay** **whci**

**he began the outline.**

274 THE LAYS **OF BELERIAND**

The casting out of Celegorm and Curufin from Nargothrond in the Lay is
very closely followed in *The Silmarillion* (even to phrases, as

'neither bread nor rest'); in the Lay, however, there are some who will
go with them (lines 2914-15), a detail found in Synopsis IV, whereas in
*The* *Silmarillion* it is explicit that they went alone.\*

The debate between Beren and Lúthien which was interrupted by the coming
of Celegorm and Curufin (lines 2930-82) is clearly based on the scheme
of it given in Synopsis IV (p. 272); in *The Silmarillion* it reappears,
though much reduced and changed. The fight with Celegorm and Curufin is
likewise derived from Synopsis IV, and is followed in the prose of *The
Silmarillion -* with such detail as the cursing of Beren

'under cloud and sky', and Curufin\'s knife that would cut iron as if it
were green wood, hanging sheathless by his side. In the Lay the knife
becomes a dwarf-made weapon from Nogrod, though neither it nor its maker
is yet named. In the Lay the shooter of the treacherous shafts is
Celegorm; in *The Silmarillion* it is Curufin, using Celegorm\'s bow,
and the vile act is settled on the wickeder (as he was certainly also
the cleverer) of the brothers - in this Canto he is given the proper
visage of a cunning villain:

'with his crafty mouth and thin' (2905). The reference of line 3103 'and
Men remembered at the Marching Forth' is to the Union of Maidros before
the Battle of Unnumbered Tears.

The second debate between Beren and Lúthien after his recovery from the
wound is derived from Synopsis V; it is not present at all in *The*
*Silmarillion,* though it is not without its importance in its
representation of Beren\'s utter determination in the face of Lúthien\'s
persuasions to abandon the quest.

Two new elements in the geography appear in this Canto: the Hill of
Himling (later Himring) rising to the east of the Gorge of Aglon (2994),
and the river Mindeb: lines 2924-5 (and the rewritten verses given on p.
360) seem to be the only description of it anywhere.

The curious element of Morgoth\'s particular interest in Lúthien (so
that he sent the Ore-captain Boldog to Doriath to capture her, lines
2127-36) reappears in this Canto (3198---3201).

At the beginning of the Canto the burial of Felagund leads to a further
reference to his fate after death without mention of Mandos (see p.
259): while Felagund laughs beneath the trees

in Valinor, and comes no more

to this grey world of tears and war.

\*The reference in *The Silmarillion* to Celebrimbor son of Curufin
remaining in Nargothrond at this time and renouncing his father was a
much later development.

THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 275

XI

Once wide and smooth a plain was spread,

where King Fingolfin proudly led

his silver armies on the green,

his horses white, his lances keen;

his helmets tall of steel were hewn, 3250

his shields were shining as the moon.

There trumpets sang both long and loud,

and challenge rang unto the cloud

that lay on Morgoth\'s northern tower,

while Morgoth waited for his hour. 3 25 5

Rivers of fire at dead of night

in winter lying cold and white

upon the plain burst forth, and high

the red was mirrored in the sky.

From Hithlum\'s walls they saw the fire, 3260

the steam and smoke in spire on spire

leap up, till in confusion vast

the stars were choked. And so it passed,

the mighty field, and turned to dust,

to drifting sand and yellow rust, 3 265

to thirsty dunes where many bones

lay broken among barren stones.

Dor-na-Fauglith, Land of Thirst,

they after named it, waste accurst,

the raven-haunted roofless grave 3270

of many fair and many brave.

Thereon the stony slopes look forth

from Deadly Nightshade falling north,

from sombre pines with pinions vast,

black-plumed and drear, as many a mast 3275

of sable-shrouded ships of death

slow wafted on a ghostly breath.

Thence Beren grim now gazes out

across the dunes and shifting drought,

and sees afar the frowning towers 3280

where thunderous Thangorodrim lowers.

The hungry horse there drooping stood,

proud Gnomish steed; it feared the wood;

upon the haunted ghastly plain

**276 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

no horse would ever stride again. 3285

'Good steed of master ill,' he said,

'farewell now here! Lift up thy head,

and get thee gone to Sirion\'s vale,

back as we came, past island pale

where Thû once reigned, to waters sweet 3290

and grasses long about thy feet.

And if Curufin no more thou find,

grieve not! but free with hart and hind

go wander, leaving work and war,

and dream thee back in Valinor, 3295

whence came of old thy mighty race

from Tavros' mountain-fenced chase.'

There still sat Beren, and he sang,

and loud his lonely singing rang.

Though Ore should hear, or wolf a-prowl, 3300

or any of the creatures foul

within the shade that slunk and stared

of Taur-na-Fuin, nought he cared,

who now took leave of light and day,

grim-hearted, bitter, fierce and fey. 3305

'Farewell now here, ye leaves of trees,

your music in the morning-breeze!

Farewell now blade and bloom and grass

that see the changing seasons pass;

ye waters murmuring over stone, 3310

and meres that silent stand alone!

Farewell now mountain, vale, and plain!

Farewell now wind and frost and rain,

and mist and cloud, and heaven\'s air;

ye star and moon so blinding-fair 3315

that still shall look down from the sky

on the wide earth, though Beren die -

though Beren die not, and yet deep,

deep, whence comes of those that weep

no dreadful echo, lie and choke 3320

in everlasting dark and smoke.

'Farewell sweet earth and northern sky,

for ever blest, since here did lie,

and here with lissom limbs did run,

beneath the moon, beneath the sun, 3325

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 277**

Lúthien Tinúviel

more fair than mortal tongue can tell.

Though all to ruin fell the world,

and were dissolved and backward hurled

unmade into the old abyss, 333°

yet were its making good, for this ---

the dawn, the dusk, the earth, the sea ---

that Lúthien on a time should be! '

His blade he lifted high in hand,

and challenging alone did stand 3335

before the threat of Morgoth\'s power;

and dauntless cursed him, hall and tower,

o\'ershadowing hand and grinding foot,

beginning, end, and crown and root;

then turned to stride forth down the slope 3340

abandoning fear, forsaking hope.

'A, Beren, Beren! ' came a sound,

'almost too late have I thee found!

O proud and fearless hand and heart,

not yet farewell, not yet we part! 3345

Not thus do those of elven race

forsake the love that they embrace.

A love is mine, as great a power

as thine, to shake the gate and tower

of death with challenge weak and frail 335°

that yet endures, and will not fail

nor yield, unvanquished were it hurled

beneath the foundations of the world.

Beloved fool! escape to seek

from such pursuit; in might so weak 3355

to trust not, thinking it well to save

from love thy loved, who welcomes grave

and torment sooner than in guard

of kind intent to languish, barred,

wingless and helpless him to aid 3360

for whose support her love was made! '

Thus back to him came Lúthien:

they met beyond the ways of Men;

upon the brink of terror stood

between the desert and the wood. 3365

**278 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

He looked on her, her lifted face

beneath his lips in sweet embrace:

'Thrice now mine oath I curse,' he said,

'that under shadow thee hath led!

But where is Huan, where the hound 337°

to whom I trusted, whom I bound

by love of thee to keep thee well

from deadly wandering unto hell?'

'I know not! But good Huan\'s heart

is wiser, kinder than thou art, 3375

grim lord, more open unto prayer!
:::

::: {#calibre_link-7 .calibre}
Yet long and long I pleaded there,

until he brought me, as I would,

upon thy trail --- a palfrey good

would Huan make, of flowing pace: 338o

thou wouldst have laughed to see us race,

as Ore on werewolf ride like fire

night after night through fen and mire,

through waste and wood! But when I heard

thy singing clear---(yea, every word 3385

of Lúthien one rashly cried,

and listening evil fierce defied) -,

he set me down, and sped away;

but what he would I cannot say.'

Ere long they knew, for Huan came, 339°

his great breath panting, eyes like flame,

in fear lest her whom he forsook

to aid some hunting evil took

ere he was nigh. Now there he laid

before their feet, as dark as shade, 3395

two grisly shapes that he had won

from that tall isle in Sirion:

a wolfhame huge --- its savage fell

was long and matted, dark the spell

that drenched the dreadful coat and skin, 3400

the werewolf cloak of Draugluin;

the other was a batlike garb

with mighty fingered wings, a barb

like iron nail at each joint\'s end ---

such wings as their dark cloud extend 34°5

against the moon, when in the sky

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 279**

**from Deadly Nightshade screeching fly**

**Thu\'s messengers.**

'What hast thou brought,

good Huan? What thy hidden thought?

Of trophy of prowess and strong deed, 3410

when Thû thou vanquishedst, what need

here in the waste?' Thus Beren spoke,

and once more words in Huan woke:

his voice was like the deeptoned bells

that ring in Valmar\'s citadels: 3415

'Of one fair gem thou must be thief,

Morgoth\'s or Thingol\'s, loath or lief;

thou must here choose twixt love and oath!

If vow to break is still thee loath,

then Lúthien must either die 3420

alone, or death with thee defie

beside thee, marching on your fate

that hidden before you lies in wait.

Hopeless the quest, but not yet mad,

unless thou, Beren, run thus clad 3425

in mortal raiment, mortal hue,

witless and redeless, death to woo.

'Lo! good was Felagund\'s device,

but may be bettered, if advice

of Huan ye will dare to take, 3430

and swift a hideous change will make

to forms most cursed, foul and vile,

of werewolf of the Wizard\'s Isle,

of monstrous bat\'s envermined fell

with ghostly clawlike wings of hell. 3435

'To such dark straits, alas! now brought

are ye I love, for whom I fought.

Nor further with you can I go --- -

whoever did a great hound know

in friendship at a werewolf\'s side 344°

to Angband\'s grinning portals stride?

Yet my heart tells that at the gate

what there ye find, \'twill be my fate

myself to see, though to that door

my feet shall bear me nevermore. 3445

Darkened is hope and dimmed my eyes,

**280 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

I see not clear what further lies;

yet maybe backwards leads your path

beyond all hope to Doriath,

and thither, perchance, we three shall wend, 3450

and meet again before the end.'

They stood and marvelled thus to hear

his mighty tongue so deep and clear;

then sudden he vanished from their sight

even at the onset of the night. 3455

His dreadful counsel then they took,

and their own gracious forms forsook;

in werewolf fell and batlike wing

prepared to robe them, shuddering.

With elvish magic Lúthien wrought, 3460

lest raiment foul with evil fraught

to dreadful madness drive their hearts;

and there she wrought with elvish arts

a strong defence, a binding power,

singing until the midnight hour. 3465

Swift as the wolvish coat he wore,

Beren lay slavering on the floor,

redtongued and hungry; but there lies

a pain and longing in his eyes,

a look of horror as he sees 3470

a batlike form crawl to its knees

and drag its creased and creaking wings.

Then howling undermoon he springs

fourfooted, swift, from stone to stone,

from hill to plain - but not alone: 3475

a dark shape down the slope doth skim,

and wheeling flitters over him.

Ashes and dust and thirsty dune

withered and dry beneath the moon,

under the cold and shifting air 3480

sifting and sighing, bleak and bare;

of blistered stones and gasping sand,

of splintered bones was built that land,

o\'er which now slinks with powdered fell

and hanging tongue a shape of hell. 3485

Many parching leagues lay still before

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 281**

when sickly day crept back once more;

many choking miles yet stretched ahead

when shivering night once more was spread

with doubtful shadow and ghostly sound 3490

that hissed and passed o\'er dune and mound.

A second morning in cloud and reek

struggled, when stumbling, blind and weak,

a wolvish shape came staggering forth

and reached the foothills of the North; 3495

upon its back there folded lay

a crumpled thing that blinked at day.

The rocks were reared like bony teeth,

and claws that grasped from opened sheath,

on either side the mournful road 3500

that onward led to that abode

far up within the Mountain dark

with tunnels drear and portals stark.

They crept within a scowling shade,

and cowering darkly down them laid. 3505

Long lurked they there beside the path,

and shivered, dreaming of Doriath,

of laughter and music and clean air,

in fluttered leaves birds singing fair.

They woke, and felt the trembling sound, 3510

the beating echo far underground

shake beneath them, the rumour vast

of Morgoth\'s forges; and aghast

they heard the tramp of stony feet

that shod with iron went down that street: 3515

the Orcs went forth to rape and war,

and Balrog captains marched before.

They stirred, and under cloud and shade

at eve stepped forth, and no more stayed;

as dark things on dark errand bent 3520

up the long slopes in haste they went.

Ever the sheer cliffs rose beside,

where birds of carrion sat and cried;

and chasms black and smoking yawned,

whence writhing serpent-shapes were spawned; 3525

until at last in that huge gloom,

heavy as overhanging doom,

282 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

that weighs on Thangorodrim\'s foot

like thunder at the mountain\'s root,

they came, as to a sombre court

walled with great towers, fort on fort

of cliffs embattled, to that last plain

353°

that opens, abysmal and inane,

before the final topless wall

of Bauglir\'s immeasurable hall,

whereunder looming awful waits

the gigantic shadow of his gates.

3535

NOTES

3249---53 Cf. the opening of the Lay, lines 5---10.

3267 Against this line is written the date 'Sep. 26 1930'. The previous
date was 25 Sept. 1930 at line 3220.

3297 *Tavros \> Tauros* B: see notes to lines 891, 904; 2246.

3303 *Taur-na-Fuin \> Taur-nu-Fuin* B (a late change).

3401 *Draugluin* appears here in the A-text (see p. 258).

3414-15 Cf. lines 2258---9.

3419---23 The shift from *thee* to *your* and *you* is intentional, and
indicates that Huan now refers to both Beren and Lúthien.

3478 Against this line is written the date 'Sep. 27 1930'.

Commentary on Canto XI

The earliest version of the narrative of this Canto describes
Tinuviel\'s sewing of Beren into the catskin of Oikeroi and teaching him
some aspects of feline behaviour; she herself was not disguised. Very
little is made of the journey to Angamandi, but the approach to the
gates is described:

At length however they drew near to Angamandi, as indeed the rumblings
and deep noises, and the sound of mighty hammerings of ten thousand
smiths labouring unceasingly, declared to them. Nigh were the sad
chambers where the thrall-Noldoli laboured bitterly under the Orcs and
goblins of the hills, and here the gloom and darkness was great so that
their hearts fell. . . (II. 31).

Synopses I and II have virtually nothing here beyond the bare event (p.
270). In its emended form Synopsis III comes near to the final **THE**
LAY OF LEITHIAN 283

story of the 'wolfhame' and the parting from Huan (p. 272); and this
outline continues:

Thangorodrim towers above them. There are rumblings, steam and vapours
burst from fissures in the rock. Ten thousand smiths are hammering- they
pass the vaults where the thrall-Gnomes are labouring without rest. The
gloom sinks into their hearts.

This is remarkably close to the passage cited above from the *Tale of*
*Tinúviel.*

Synopsis IV (p. 273) adds no more, for after 'They prepare to go to
Angband' it continues with events in Doriath and the embassy to Thingol
from Celegorm, which at this stage my father was going to introduce
before the Angband adventure, and in this outline virtually nothing is
said of that.

There remains Synopsis V, whose outline for Canto \'io\' has been given
on p. 273 as far as 'One morning early Beren steals away on Curufin\'s
horse and reaches the eaves of Taur-na-Fuin\', and it is here that
Beren\'s solitary departure first enters. This outline continues, still
under the heading 'Canto 1o\':

There he looks upon Thangorodrim and sings a song of farewell to earth
and light, and to Lúthien. In the midst up come Lúthien and Huan! With
the hound\'s aid she has followed him; and moreover from the Wizard\'s
Isle Huan has brought a wolf-ham and a bat-coat. *\[Struck* *through at
time of writing:* Beren sets Lúthien upon the horse and they ride
through Taur-na-Fuin.\*\] Beren sets Curufin\'s horse to gallop free and
he speeds away. Now Beren takes the shape of werewolf and Tinúviel of
bat. Then Huan bids farewell. And speaks. No hound can walk with
werewolf --- more peril should I be than help in Morgoth\'s land. Yet
what ye shall see at Angband\'s gate I perchance too shall see, though
my fate doth not lead to those doors. Darkened is all hope, and dimmed
my eyes, yet perchance I see thy paths leading from that place once
more. Then he vanishes. They make a grievous journey. Than-

gorodrim looms over them, \...\..... in its smoky foothills.

This ends the outline for 'Canto 1o\' in Synopsis V.

There is a notable difference in the structure of the story in the Lay
from that in *The Silmarillion* (pp. 178---9): in the Lay Huan is absent
(gone to the Wizard\'s Isle for the wolfcoat and batskin) when Lúthien
finds Beren - she does not know where he has gone --- but he comes up a
little later; whereas in the prose account Huan and Lúthien came
together, and they were clad in 'the ghastly wolf-hame of Draugluin and
the bat-fell of Thuringwethil' - an apparition that filled Beren with

\* Beren must in fact have been on the northern edge of Taur-na-Fuin
when Lúthien and **Huan** came up with him, since 'he looks upon
Thangorodrim'.

**284 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

dismay. The story in *The Silmarillion* is a reversion, at least in so
far as Huan and Lúthien arrive together, to that of Synopsis V ('In the
midst up come Lúthien and Huan', p. 283).

In the Lay the bat-wings are only said to be such as bear up Thû\'s
messengers, and are not associated with a particular or chief messenger
(Thuringwethil, 'messenger of Sauron').

But the prose version in other respects follows that of the Lay closely,
with as before retention of phrases ('between the desert and the wood',

'Thrice now I curse my oath', 'fingered wings . . . barbed at each
joint\'s end', 'the bat wheeled and flittered above him'); and the
speech of Huan is closely modelled on that in the Lay.

From Beren\'s words to the horse (3288-90)

get thee gone to Sirion\'s vale,

back as we came, past island pale

where Thû once reigned

it is clear that as in *The Silmarillion* 'he rode northward again with
all speed to the Pass of Sirion, and coming to the skirts of
Taur-nu-Fuin he looked out across the waste of Anfauglith'. It is not
said in the Lay how Lúthien and Huan came there, but in *The
Silmarillion* 'clad in these dreadful garments\' they 'ran through
Taur-nu-Fuin, and all things fled before them'.

The Battle of Sudden Flame (lines 3256 ff.) has been described earlier
in the Lay (lines 1678 ff.), but it has not been actually stated before
that the northern plain was once green and grassy (3246-8), and became a
desert after the 'rivers of fire . . . upon the plain burst forth'.

With Beren\'s words to Curufin\'s horse (3295---7):

**dream thee back in Valinor,**

**whence came of old thy mighty race**

**ef. *The Silmarillion*** **p. 119, where it is told that 'many of the
sires\' of** **the**

**horses of the Noldor of Hithlum who rode on Ard-galen came from**
**Valinor.**

**XII**

**In that vast shadow once of yore**

Fingolfin stood: his shield he bore

**with field of heaven\'s blue and star 3540**

of crystal shining pale afar.

**In overmastering wrath and hate**

desperate he smote upon that gate,

**284 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

dismay. The story in *The Silmarillion* is a reversion, at least in so
far as Huan and Lúthien arrive together, to that of Synopsis V ('In the
midst up come Lúthien and Huan', p. 283).

In the Lay the bat-wings are only said to be such as bear up Thû\'s
messengers, and are not associated with a particular or chief messenger
(Thuringwethil, 'messenger of Sauron').

But the prose version in other respects follows that of the Lay closely,
with as before retention of phrases ('between the desert and the wood',

'Thrice now I curse my oath', 'fingered wings . . . barbed at each
joint\'s end', 'the bat wheeled and flittered above him'); and the
speech of Huan is closely modelled on that in the Lay.

From Beren\'s words to the horse (3288-90)

get thee gone to Sirion\'s vale,

back as we came, past island pale

where Thû once reigned

it is clear that as in *The Silmarillion* 'he rode northward again with
all speed to the Pass of Sirion, and coming to the skirts of
Taur-nu-Fuin he looked out across the waste of Anfauglith'. It is not
said in the Lay how Lúthien and Huan came there, but in *The
Silmarillion* 'clad in these dreadful garments\' they 'ran through
Taur-nu-Fuin, and all things fled before them'.

The Battle of Sudden Flame (lines 3256 ff.) has been described earlier
in the Lay (lines 1678 ff.), but it has not been actually stated before
that the northern plain was once green and grassy (3246-8), and became a
desert after the 'rivers of fire . . . upon the plain burst forth'.

With Beren\'s words to Curufin\'s horse (3295---7):

**dream thee back in Valinor,**

**whence came of old thy mighty race**

**ef. *The Silmarillion*** **p. 119, where it is told that 'many of the
sires\' of** **the**

**horses of the Noldor of Hithlum who rode on Ard-galen came from**
**Valinor.**

**XII**

**In that vast shadow once of yore**

Fingolfin stood: his shield he bore

**with field of heaven\'s blue and star 3540**

of crystal shining pale afar.

**In overmastering wrath and hate**

desperate he smote upon that gate,

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 285**

the Gnomish king, there standing lone,

while endless fortresses of stone 3545

engulfed the thin clear ringing keen

of silver horn on baldric green.

His hopeless challenge dauntless cried

Fingolfin there: 'Come, open wide,

dark king, your ghastly brazen doors! 355°

Come forth, whom earth and heaven abhors!

Come forth, O monstrous craven lord,

and fight with thine own hand and sword,

thou wielder of hosts of banded thralls,

thou tyrant leaguered with strong walls, 3555

thou foe of Gods and elvish race!

I wait thee here. Come! Show thy face!'

Then Morgoth came. For the last time

in those great wars he dared to climb

from subterranean throne profound, 3560

the rumour of his feet a sound

of rumbling earthquake underground.

Black-armoured, towering, iron-crowned

he issued forth; his mighty shield

a vast unblazoned sable field 3565

with shadow like a thundercloud;

and o\'er the gleaming king it bowed,

as huge aloft like mace he hurled

that hammer of the underworld,

Grond. Clanging to ground it tumbled 3570

down like a thunder-bolt, and crumbled

the rocks beneath it; smoke up-started,

a pit yawned, and a fire darted.

Fingolfin like a shooting light

beneath a cloud, a stab of white, 3575

sprang then aside, and Ringil drew

like ice that gleameth cold and blue,

his sword devised of elvish skill

to pierce the flesh with deadly chill.

With seven wounds it rent his foe, 3580

and seven mighty cries of woe

rang in the mountains, and the earth quook,

and Angband\'s trembling armies shook.

Yet Orcs would after laughing tell

**286 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

of the duel at the gates of hell; 3585

though elvish song thereof was made

ere this but one --- when sad was laid

the mighty king in barrow high,

and Thorndor, Eagle of the sky,

the dreadful tidings brought and told 3590

to mourning Elfinesse of old.

Thrice was Fingolfin with great blows

to his knees beaten, thrice he rose

still leaping up beneath the cloud

aloft to hold star-shining, proud, 3595

his stricken shield, his sundered helm,

that dark nor might could overwhelm

till all the earth was burst and rent

in pits about him. He was spent.

His feet stumbled. He fell to wreck 3600

upon the ground, and on his neck

a foot like rooted hills was set,

and he was crushed --- not conquered yet;

one last despairing stroke he gave:

the mighty foot pale Ringil clave 3605

about the heel, and black the blood

gushed as from smoking fount in flood.

Halt goes for ever from that stroke

great Morgoth; but the king he broke,

and would have hewn and mangled thrown 3610

to wolves devouring. Lo! from throne

that Manwë bade him build on high,

on peak unsealed beneath the sky,

Morgoth to watch, now down there swooped

Thorndor the King of Eagles, stooped, 3615

and rending beak of gold he smote

in Bauglir\'s face, then up did float

on pinions thirty fathoms wide

bearing away, though loud they cried,

the mighty corse, the Elven-king; 3620

and where the mountains make a ring

far to the south about that plain

where after Gondolin did reign,

embattled city, at great height

upon a dizzy snowcap white 3625

in mounded cairn the mighty dead

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 287**

he laid upon the mountain\'s head.

Never Ore nor demon after dared

that pass to climb, o\'er which there stared

Fingolfin\'s high and holy tomb, 3630

till Gondolin\'s appointed doom.

Thus Bauglir earned the furrowed scar

that his dark countenance doth mar,

and thus his limping gait he gained;

but afterward profound he reigned 3635

darkling upon his hidden throne;

and thunderous paced his halls of stone,

slow building there his vast design

the world in thraldom to confine.

Wielder of armies, lord of woe, 3640

no rest now gave he slave or foe;

his watch and ward he thrice increased,

his spies were sent from West to East

and tidings brought from all the North,

who fought, who fell; who ventured forth, 3645

who wrought in secret; who had hoard;

if maid were fair or proud were lord;

well nigh all things he knew, all hearts

well nigh enmeshed in evil arts.

Doriath only, beyond the veil 3650

woven by Melian, no assail

could hurt or enter; only rumour dim

of things there passing came to him.

A rumour loud and tidings clear

of other movements far and near 3655

among his foes, and threat of war

from the seven sons of Fëanor,

from Nargothrond, from Fingon still

gathering his armies under hill

and under tree in Hithlum\'s shade, 3660

these daily came. He grew afraid

amidst his power once more; renown

of Beren vexed his ears, and down

the aisled forests there was heard

great Huan baying.

Then came word 3665

most passing strange of Lúthien

**288 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

wild-wandering by wood and glen,

and Thingol\'s purpose long he weighed,

and wondered, thinking of that maid

so fair, so frail. A captain dire, 3670

Boldog, he sent with sword and fire

to Doriath\'s march; but battle fell

sudden upon him: news to tell

never one returned of Boldog\'s host,

and Thingol humbled Morgoth\'s boast. 3675

Then his heart with doubt and wrath was burned:

new tidings of dismay he learned,

how Thû was o\'erthrown and his strong isle

broken and plundered, how with guile

his foes now guile beset; and spies 3680

he feared, till each Ore to his eyes

was half suspect. Still ever down

the aisled forests came renown

of Huan baying, hound of war

that Gods unleashed in Valinor. 3685

Then Morgoth of Huan\'s fate bethought

long-rumoured, and in dark he wrought.

Fierce hunger-haunted packs he had

that in wolvish form and flesh were clad,

but demon spirits dire did hold; 3690

and ever wild their voices rolled

in cave and mountain where they housed

and endless snarling echoes roused.

From these a whelp he chose and fed

with his own hand on bodies dead, 3695

on fairest flesh of Elves and Men,

till huge he grew and in his den

no more could creep, but by the chair

of Morgoth\'s self would lie and glare,

nor suffer Balrog, Ore, nor beast 3700

to touch him. Many a ghastly feast

he held beneath that awful throne,

rending flesh and gnawing bone.

There deep enchantment on him fell,

the anguish and the power of hell; 3705

more great and terrible he became

with fire-red eyes and jaws aflame,

THE LAY OF LEITHIAN ***289***

with breath like vapours of the grave,

than any beast of wood or cave,

than any beast of earth or hell 3710

that ever in any time befell,

surpassing all his race and kin,

the ghastly tribe of Draugluin.

Him Carcharoth, the Red Maw, name

the songs of Elves. Not yet he came 3715

disastrous, ravening, from the gates

of Angband. There he sleepless waits;

where those great portals threatening loom

his red eyes smoulder in the gloom,

his teeth are bare, his jaws are wide; 3720

and none may walk, nor creep, nor glide,

nor thrust with power his menace past

to enter Morgoth\'s dungeon vast.

Now, lo! before his watchful eyes

a slinking shape he far descries 3725

that crawls into the frowning plain

and halts at gaze, then on again

comes stalking near, a wolvish shape

haggard, wayworn, with jaws agape;

and o\'er it batlike in wide rings 373°

a reeling shadow slowly wings.

Such shapes there oft were seen to roam,

this land their native haunt and home;

and yet his mood with strange unease

is filled, and boding thoughts him seize. 3735

'What grievous terror, what dread guard

hath Morgoth set to wait, and barred

his doors against all entering feet?

Long ways we have come at last to meet

the very maw of death that opes 374°

between us and our quest! Yet hopes

we never had. No turning back! '

Thus Beren speaks, as in his track

he halts and sees with werewolf eyes

afar the horror that there lies. 3745

Then onward desperate he passed,

skirting the black pits yawning vast,

**29O THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

where King Fingolfin ruinous fell

alone before the gates of hell.

Before those gates alone they stood, 375°

while Carcharoth in doubtful mood

glowered upon them, and snarling spoke,

and echoes in the arches woke:

'Hail! Draugluin, my kindred\'s lord!

'Tis very long since hitherward 3755

thou earnest. Yea, \'tis passing strange

to see thee now: a grievous change

is on thee, lord, who once so dire,

so dauntless, and as fleet as fire,

ran over wild and waste, but now 3760

with weariness must bend and bow!

'Tis hard to find the struggling breath

when Huan\'s teeth as sharp as death

have rent the throat? What fortune rare

brings thee back living here to fare - 3765

if Draugluin thou art? Come near!

I would know more, and see thee clear.'

'Who art thou, hungry upstart whelp,

to bar my ways whom thou shouldst help?

I fare with hasty tidings new 377°

to Morgoth from forest-haunting Thû.

Aside! for I must in; or go

and swift my coming tell below! '

Then up that doorward slowly stood,

eyes shining grim with evil mood, 3775

uneasy growling: 'Draugluin,

if such thou be, now enter in!

But what is this that crawls beside,

slinking as if \'twould neath thee hide?

Though winged creatures to and fro 3780

unnumbered pass here, all I know.

I know not this. Stay, vampire, stay!

I like not thy kin nor thee. Come, say

what sneaking errand thee doth bring,

thou winged vermin, to the king! 3785

Small matter, I doubt not, if thou stay

or enter, or if in my play

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 29I**

I crush thee like a fly on wall,

or bite thy wings and let thee crawl.'

Huge-stalking, noisome, close he came. 379°

In Beren\'s eyes there gleamed a flame;

the hair upon his neck uprose.

Nought may the fragrance fair enclose,

the odour of immortal flowers

in everlasting spring neath showers 3795

that glitter silver in the grass

in Valinor. Where\'er did pass

Tinuviel, such air there went.

From that foul devil-sharpened scent

its sudden sweetness no disguise 3800

enchanted dark to cheat the eyes

could keep, if near those nostrils drew

snuffling in doubt. This Beren knew

upon the brink of hell prepared

for battle and death. There threatening stared 3805

those dreadful shapes, in hatred both,

false Draugluin and Carcharoth

when, lo! a marvel to behold:

some power, descended from of old,

from race divine beyond the West, 3810

sudden Tinuviel possessed

like inner fire. The vampire dark

she flung aside, and like a lark

cleaving through night to dawn she sprang,

while sheer, heart-piercing silver, rang 3815

her voice, as those long trumpets keen

thrilling, unbearable, unseen

in the cold aisles of morn. Her cloak

by white hands woven, like a smoke,

like all-bewildering, all-enthralling, 3820

all-enfolding evening, falling

from lifted arms, as forth she stepped,

across those awful eyes she swept,

a shadow and a mist of dreams

wherein entangled starlight gleams. 3825

'Sleep, O unhappy, tortured thrall!

Thou woebegotten, fail and fall

down, down from anguish, hatred, pain,

THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

from lust, from hunger, bond and chain,

to that oblivion, dark and deep, 3830

the well, the lightless pit of sleep!

For one brief hour escape the net,

the dreadful doom of life forget! '

His eyes were quenched, his limbs were loosed;

he fell like running steer that noosed 3835

and tripped goes crashing to the ground.

Deathlike, moveless, without a sound

outstretched he lay, as lightning stroke

had felled a huge o\'ershadowing oak.

NOTES

3554 *banded* A, B; \> *branded* B, but I think that the *r* was written
in by somebody else.

3589 *Thorndor* emended to *Thorondor* in B, but I think that this was a
late correction.

3606 *pinned it to earth A,* B; *about the heel* apparently a late
emendation to B.

3615 *Thorndor* later emended to *Thorondor* in B, see 3589.

3623 *after \> secret* B, a late emendation when Gondolin\'s foundation
had been made much earlier.

3638---9 A: nor ever again to war came forth

until the last battle of the North,

but builded slow his mighty thought

of pride and lust unfathomed wrought.

3650 Against this line is written the date 'Sep. 28'. The previous date
was 27 Sept. 1930 against line 3478.

3658 *Finweg* A, B, emended to *Fingon* B, as at lines 1647, 1654.

3712-13 This couplet not in A, as originally written.

3714 A (as originally written):

Him Carcharos, the Knife-fang, name

*Carcharos* then \> *Carcharas,* and then \> *Carcharoth* (see notes to
lines 3751, 3807). In the margin of A is written *Red* *Maw,* and
*Caras* with another, illegible, word beginning *Car-;* also
*Gargaroth;* and *Fearphantom Draugluin is his* *name.* This may mean
that my father was thinking of using the name *Draugluin* for the Wolf
of Angband, though THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 293

*Draugluin* had by now appeared in the A-text (3401) for the great wolf
of the Wizard\'s Isle.

3751 *Carcharas* A, not emended to *Carcharoth* (see note to 3714).

3790 Against this line is written the date 'Sep. 30 1930'. The previous
date was 28 Sept. 1930 against line 3650.

3807 *Carcharoth* A (rhyming with *both);* see notes to 3714, 3751.

Commentary on Canto XII

The greater part of this Canto is retrospective: beginning with the
death of Fingolfin in combat with Morgoth, it passes to Morgoth\'s
doubts and fears and his rearing of Carcharoth. By this time (September
1930) a large part, at any rate, of the prose 'Silmarillion' developed
out of the

'Sketch of the Mythology' had been written, as I hope to demonstrate
later, and it seems certain that the story of Fingolfin\'s duel with
Morgoth as it appears in this Canto followed the prose version, though
we meet it here for the first time (together with the names *Grond,* the
Hammer of the Underworld, and *Ringil,* Fingolfin\'s sword). The text in
*The Silmarillion* (pp. 153-4) was largely based on the Lay, which it
follows in the structure of the account and from which derive many
phrases;\* but independent traces of the 'prose tradition' are also
present. The account in the poem gives no indication of when the duel
took place, or of what led Fingolfin to challenge Morgoth. For the much
earlier mention of Fingolfin\'s death (now very obscure, but certainly
quite differently conceived) see pp. 146-7.

The further mention in this Canto of Boldog\'s raid (lines 3665---75)
will be discussed at the end of the poem (pp. 310-13).

Turning to the 'foreground' narrative, a passage in Synopsis III already
given (pp. 270-1) bears on the content of Canto XII: it was bracketed
and marked 'Later'.

Morgoth hearing of the breaking of the Wizard\'s Tower sends out an army
of Orcs; finding the wolves are slain with \...\... throats he thinks it
is Huan and fashions a vast wolf - Carcharas - mightiest of all wolves
to guard his door.

Synopsis III continues from the point reached on p. 283: The hideous
gates of Angband. There lay *Carcharoth knifefang.*

He gets slowly to his feet and bars the gate. 'Growl not O Wolf for I go
to seek Morgoth with news of Thû.' He approached to snuff the air of

\*For example: 'the rumour of his feet' (cf. line 3561); Morgoth 'like a
tower, iron-crowned\* (cf. 3563); he swung Grond down 'like a bolt of
thunder' (cf. 3571); 'smoke and fire darted' (cf. 3572-3); 'the blood
gushed forth black and smoking' (cf. 3606-7); &c.

**294 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

her, for faint suspicion moved in his wicked heart, and he fell into
slumber.

The interpretation of the wolf\'s name as 'Knife-fang' goes back to the
*Tale ofTinúviel* and survived into the A-text of the Lay (see note to
line 3714), but was replaced in B by the translation 'Red Maw'. The
words

'red maw' are used of Karkaras in the *Tale,* but not as his name (II.
34).

The idea of Carcharoth\'s approaching Lúthien 'to snuff the air of her'

is also derived, in these same words, from the *Tale* (11.31).

Synopsis IV does not here concern us (see p. 283); Synopsis V, after the
point reached on p. 283, now has a heading \'II\', and is clearly the
basis for the story in Canto XII of the Lay:

*\[Added in pencil:* Battle of Morgoth and Fingolfin.\]

Morgoth hears of the ruin of Thû\'s castle. His mind is filled with
misgiving and anger. The gates of Angband strengthened; because of the
rumour of Huan he *\[struck out at time of writing:* fashions the
greatest\] chooses the fiercest wolf from all the whelps of his packs,
and feeds him on flesh of Men and Elves, and enchants him so that he
becomes the most great and terrible of all beasts that ever have been -

Carcharos.

Beren and Lúthien approach. *\[Added in pencil:* the pitted plain of
Fingolfin\'s fight.\] The enchanting of Carcharos.

XIII

Into the vast and echoing gloom, 3840

more dread than many-tunnelled tomb

in labyrinthine pyramid

where everlasting death is hid,

down awful corridors that wind

down to a menace dark enshrined; 3845

down to the mountain\'s roots profound,

devoured, tormented, bored and ground

by seething vermin spawned of stone;

down to the depths they went alone.

The arch behind of twilit shade 3850

they saw recede and dwindling fade;

the thunderous forges\' rumour grew,

a burning wind there roaring blew

foul vapours up from gaping holes.

**294 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

her, for faint suspicion moved in his wicked heart, and he fell into
slumber.

The interpretation of the wolf\'s name as 'Knife-fang' goes back to the
*Tale ofTinúviel* and survived into the A-text of the Lay (see note to
line 3714), but was replaced in B by the translation 'Red Maw'. The
words

'red maw' are used of Karkaras in the *Tale,* but not as his name (II.
34).

The idea of Carcharoth\'s approaching Lúthien 'to snuff the air of her'

is also derived, in these same words, from the *Tale* (11.31).

Synopsis IV does not here concern us (see p. 283); Synopsis V, after the
point reached on p. 283, now has a heading \'II\', and is clearly the
basis for the story in Canto XII of the Lay:

*\[Added in pencil:* Battle of Morgoth and Fingolfin.\]

Morgoth hears of the ruin of Thû\'s castle. His mind is filled with
misgiving and anger. The gates of Angband strengthened; because of the
rumour of Huan he *\[struck out at time of writing:* fashions the
greatest\] chooses the fiercest wolf from all the whelps of his packs,
and feeds him on flesh of Men and Elves, and enchants him so that he
becomes the most great and terrible of all beasts that ever have been -

Carcharos.

Beren and Lúthien approach. *\[Added in pencil:* the pitted plain of
Fingolfin\'s fight.\] The enchanting of Carcharos.

XIII

Into the vast and echoing gloom, 3840

more dread than many-tunnelled tomb

in labyrinthine pyramid

where everlasting death is hid,

down awful corridors that wind

down to a menace dark enshrined; 3845

down to the mountain\'s roots profound,

devoured, tormented, bored and ground

by seething vermin spawned of stone;

down to the depths they went alone.

The arch behind of twilit shade 3850

they saw recede and dwindling fade;

the thunderous forges\' rumour grew,

a burning wind there roaring blew

foul vapours up from gaping holes.

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 295**

Huge shapes there stood like carven trolls 3855

enormous hewn of blasted rock

to forms that mortal likeness mock;

monstrous and menacing, entombed,

at every turn they silent loomed

in fitful glares that leaped and died. 3860

There hammers clanged, and tongues there cried

with sound like smitten stone; there wailed

faint from far under, called and failed

amid the iron clink of chain

voices of captives put to pain. 3865

Loud rose a din of laughter hoarse,

self-loathing yet without remorse;

loud came a singing harsh and fierce

like swords of terror souls to pierce.

Red was the glare through open doors 3870

of firelight mirrored on brazen floors,

and up the arches towering clomb

to glooms unguessed, to vaulted dome

swathed in wavering smokes and steams

stabbed with flickering lightning-gleams. 3875

To Morgoth\'s hall, where dreadful feast

he held, and drank the blood of beast

and lives of Men, they stumbling came:

their eyes were dazed with smoke and flame.

The pillars, reared like monstrous shores 3880

to bear earth\'s overwhelming floors,

were devil-carven, shaped with skill

such as unholy dreams doth fill:

they towered like trees into the air,

whose trunks are rooted in despair, 3885

whose shade is death, whose fruit is bane,

whose boughs like serpents writhe in pain.

Beneath them ranged with spear and sword

stood Morgoth\'s sable-armoured horde:

the fire on blade and boss of shield 3890

was red as blood on stricken field.

Beneath a monstrous column loomed

the throne of Morgoth, and the doomed

and dying gasped upon the floor:

his hideous footstool, rape of war. 3895

**296 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

About him sat his awful thanes,

the Balrog-lords with fiery manes,

redhanded, mouthed with fangs of steel;

devouring wolves were crouched at heel.

And o\'er the host of hell there shone 3900

with a cold radiance, clear and wan,

the Silmarils, the gems of fate,

emprisoned in the crown of hate.

Lo! through the grinning portals dread

sudden a shadow swooped and fled; 3905

and Beren gasped - he lay alone,

with crawling belly on the stone:

a form bat-winged, silent, flew

where the huge pillared branches grew,

amid the smokes and mounting steams. 3910

And as on the margin of dark dreams

a dim-felt shadow unseen grows

to cloud of vast unease, and woes

foreboded, nameless, roll like doom

upon the soul, so in that gloom 3915

the voices fell, and laughter died

slow to silence many-eyed.

A nameless doubt, a shapeless fear,

had entered in their caverns drear,

and grew, and towered above them cowed, 3920

hearing in heart the trumpets loud

of gods forgotten. Morgoth spoke,

and thunderous the silence broke:

'Shadow, descend! And do not think

to cheat mine eyes! I n vain to shrink 3925

from thy Lord\'s gaze, or seek to hide.

My will by none may be defied.

Hope nor escape doth here await

those that unbidden pass my gate.

Descend! ere anger blast thy wing, 3930

thou foolish, frail, bat-shapen thing,

and yet not bat within! Come down! '

Slow-wheeling o\'er his iron crown,

reluctantly, shivering and small,

Beren there saw the shadow fall, 3935

and droop before the hideous throne,

**THE** LAY OF LEITHIAN 297

a weak and trembling thing, alone.

And as thereon great Morgoth bent

his darkling gaze, he shuddering went,

belly to earth, the cold sweat dank 394°

upon his fell, and crawling shrank

beneath the darkness of that seat,

beneath the shadow of those feet.

Tinuviel spake, a shrill, thin, sound

piercing those silences profound: 3945

'A lawful errand here me brought;

from Thû\'s dark mansions have I sought,

from Taur-na-Fuin\'s shade I fare

to stand before thy mighty chair! '

'Thy name, thou shrieking waif, thy name! 3950

Tidings enough from Thû there came

but short while since. What would he now?

Why send such messenger as thou?'

'Thuringwethil I am, who cast

a shadow o\'er the face aghast 3955

of the sallow moon in the doomed land

of shivering Beleriand.'

'Liar art thou, who shalt not weave

deceit before mine eyes. Now leave

thy form and raiment false, and stand 3960

revealed, and delivered to my hand!'

There came a slow and shuddering change:

the batlike raiment dark and strange

was loosed, and slowly shrank and fell

quivering. She stood revealed in hell. 3965

About her slender shoulders hung

her shadowy hair, and round her clung

her garment dark, where glimmered pale

the starlight caught in magic veil.

Dim dreams and faint oblivious sleep 3970

fell softly thence, in dungeons deep

an odour stole of elven-flowers

from elven-dells where silver showers

drip softly through the evening air;

and round there crawled with greedy stare 3975

dark shapes of snuffling hunger dread.

298 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

With arms upraised and drooping head

then softly she began to sing

a theme of sleep and slumbering,

wandering, woven with deeper spell

than songs wherewith in ancient dell

Melian did once the twilight fill,

profound, and fathomless, and still.

The fires of Angband flared and died,

smouldered into darkness; through the wide 3985

and hollow halls there rolled unfurled

the shadows of the underworld.

All movement stayed, and all sound ceased,

save vaporous breath of Orc and beast.

One fire in darkness still abode: 3990

the lidless eyes of Morgoth glowed;

one sound the breathing silence broke:

the mirthless voice of Morgoth spoke.

'So Lúthien, so Lúthien,

a liar like all Elves and Men! 3995

Yet welcome, welcome, to my hall!

I have a use for every thrall.

What news of Thingol in his hole

shy lurking like a timid vole?

What folly fresh is in his mind, 4000

who cannot keep his offspring blind

from straying thus? or can devise

no better counsel for his spies? '

She wavered, and she stayed her song.

'The road, ' she said, 'was wild and long, 4005

but Thingol sent me not, nor knows

what way his rebellious daughter goes.

Yet every road and path will lead

Northward at last, and here of need

I trembling come with humble brow, 4010

and here before thy throne I bow;

for Lúthien hath many arts

for solace sweet of kingly hearts.'

'And here of need thou shalt remain

now, Lúthien, in joy or pain--- 4015

or pain, the fitting doom for all,

![](images/000112.png){.calibre1}

***The Lay of Leithian,*** **lines** 3994-4027

**300 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

for rebel, thief, and upstart thrall.

Why should ye not in our fate share

of woe and travail? Or should I spare

to slender limb and body frail 4020

breaking torment? Of what avail

here dost thou deem thy babbling song

and foolish laughter? Minstrels strong

are at my call. Yet I will give

a respite brief, a while to live, 4025

a little while, though purchased dear,

to Lúthien the fair and clear,

a pretty toy for idle hour.

In slothful gardens many a flower

like thee the amorous gods are used 4°3°

honey-sweet to kiss, and cast then bruised,

their fragrance loosing, under feet.

But here we seldom find such sweet

amid our labours long and hard,

from godlike idleness debarred. 4035

And who would not taste the honey-sweet

lying to lips, or crush with feet

the soft cool tissue of pale flowers,

easing like gods the dragging hours?

A! curse the Gods! O hunger dire, 4040

O blinding thirst\'s unending fire!

One moment shall ye cease, and slake

your sting with morsel I here take! '

In his eyes the fire to flame was fanned,

and forth he stretched his brazen hand. 4045

Lúthien as shadow shrank aside.

'Not thus, O king! Not thus!' she cried,

'do great lords hark to humble boon!

For every minstrel hath his tune;

and some are strong and some are soft, 4050

and each would bear his song aloft,

and each a little while be heard,

though rude the note, and light the word.

But Lúthien hath cunning arts

for solace sweet of kingly hearts. 4055

Now hearken! ' And her wings she caught

then deftly up, and swift as thought

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 301**

slipped from his grasp, and wheeling round,

fluttering before his eyes, she wound

a mazy-winged dance, and sped 4060

about his iron-crowned head.

Suddenly her song began anew;

and soft came dropping like a dew

down from on high in that domed hall

her voice bewildering, magical, 4065

and grew to silver-murmuring streams

pale falling in dark pools in dreams.

She let her flying raiment sweep,

enmeshed with woven spells of sleep,

as round the dark void she ranged and reeled. 4070

From wall to wall she turned and wheeled

in dance such as never Elf nor fay

before devised, nor since that day;

than swallow swifter, than flittermouse

in dying light round darkened house 4075

more silken-soft, more strange and fair

than sylphine maidens of the Air

whose wings in Varda\'s heavenly hall

in rhythmic movement beat and fall.

Down crumpled Orc, and Balrog proud; 4080

all eyes were quenched, all heads were bowed;

the fires of heart and maw were stilled,

and ever like a bird she thrilled

above a lightless world forlorn

in ecstasy enchanted borne. 4085

All eyes were quenched, save those that glared

in Morgoth\'s lowering brows, and stared

in slowly wandering wonder round,

and slow were in enchantment bound.

Their will wavered, and their fire failed, 4090

and as beneath his brows they paled,

the Silmarils like stars were kindled

that in the reek of Earth had dwindled

escaping upwards clear to shine,

glistening marvellous in heaven\'s mine. 4095

Then flaring suddenly they fell,

down, down upon the floors of hell.

The dark and mighty head was bowed;

**302 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

like mountain-top beneath a cloud

the shoulders foundered, the vast form 4100

crashed, as in overwhelming storm

huge cliffs in ruin slide and fall;

and prone lay Morgoth in his hall.

His crown there rolled upon the ground,

a wheel of thunder; then all sound 4105

died, and a silence grew as deep

as were the heart of Earth asleep.

Beneath the vast and empty throne

the adders lay like twisted stone,

the wolves like corpses foul were strewn; 4110

and there lay Beren deep in swoon:

no thought, no dream nor shadow blind

moved in the darkness of his mind.

'Come forth, come forth! The hour hath knelled,

and Angband\'s mighty lord is felled! 4115

Awake, awake! For we two meet

alone before the aweful seat.'

This voice came down into the deep

where he lay drowned in wells of sleep;

a hand flower-soft and flower-cool 4120

passed o\'er his face, and the still pool

of slumber quivered. Up then leaped

his mind to waking; forth he crept.

The wolvish fell he flung aside

and sprang unto his feet, and wide 4125

staring amid the soundless gloom

he gasped as one living shut in tomb.

There to his side he felt her shrink,

felt Lúthien now shivering sink,

her strength and magic dimmed and spent, 4130

and swift his arms about her went.

Before his feet he saw amazed

the gems of Fëanor, that blazed

with white fire glistening in the crown

of Morgoth\'s might now fallen down. 4135

To move that helm of iron vast

no strength he found, and thence aghast

he strove with fingers mad to wrest

the guerdon of their hopeless quest,

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 303**

till in his heart there fell the thought 4140

of that cold morn whereon he fought

with Curufin; then from his belt

the sheathless knife he drew, and knelt,

and tried its hard edge, bitter-cold,

o\'er which in Nogrod songs had rolled 4145

of dwarvish armourers singing slow

to hammer-music long ago.

Iron as tender wood it clove

and mail as woof of loom it rove.

The claws of iron that held the gem, 4150

it bit them through and sundered them;

a Silmaril he clasped and held,

and the pure radiance slowly welled

red glowing through the clenching flesh.

Again he stooped and strove afresh 4155

one more of the holy jewels three

that Fëanor wrought of yore to free.

But round those fires was woven fate:

not yet should they leave the halls of hate.

The dwarvish steel of cunning blade 4160

by treacherous smiths of Nogrod made

snapped; then ringing sharp and clear

in twain it sprang, and like a spear

or errant shaft the brow it grazed

of Morgoth\'s sleeping head, and dazed 4165

their hearts with fear. For Morgoth groaned

with voice entombed, like wind that moaned

in hollow caverns penned and bound.

There came a breath; a gasping sound

moved through the halls, as Orc and beast 4170

turned in their dreams of hideous feast;

in sleep uneasy Balrogs stirred,

and far above was faintly heard

an echo that in tunnels rolled,

a wolvish howling long and cold. 4175

**304 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

NOTES

3840 At the beginning of the Canto is written the date 'Oct. 1 1930'.

The previous date was 30 Sept. 1930 at line 3790.

3860 With this line the B typescript comes to an end, and the text
continues to the end in fine manuscript.

3881 This line is dated 'Sept. 14 1931'. The previous date was 1 Oct.

1930 at line 3840.

3887 This line is dated 'Sept. 15' (1931).

3947 Late change in. B: *from Sauron \'s mansions have I sought.* See p.
232, note to lines 2064-6.

3951 Late change in B: *Tidings enough from Sauron came.*

3954 In the margin of B is written against *Thuringwethil,* at the time
of the writing out of the text, \'sc. she of hidden shadow'.

3957 *Beleriand* A and B (i.e. not *Broseliand* emended).

3962 This line is dated 'Sep. 16 1931'.

3969 *magic \> elvish* in B, but this is doubtless a late change, when
my father no longer used this once favourite word.

4029 Against this line is written the date 'Sep. 14', duplicating that
given to line 3881.

4045 Against this line is written the date 'Sep. 16', duplicating that
given to line 3962.

4085 After this line is written the last date in the A manuscript,

'Sept. 17 1931'.

4092-3 These lines were written in the margin of B, but the original
lines:

the Silmarils were lit like stars

that fume of Earth upreeking mars

were not struck out.

4163-6 A: in twain it sprang; and quaking fear

fell on their hearts, for Morgoth groaned

Commentary on Canto XIII

There is not much to be learnt from the Synopses concerning this part of
the narrative, but the Angband scene was never greatly changed from its
original form in the *Tale of Tinúviel* (11.31 ff.). Synopsis I is at
the end reduced to mere headings, II has given out, and IV does not deal
with the entry into Angband. III, given on pp. 293-4 as far as the
enchantment of Carcharoth, continues:

After endless wanderings in corridors they stumble into the presence of
Morgoth. Morgoth speaks. 'Who art thou that flittest about my halls as a
bat, but art not a bat? Thou dost not belong here, nor wert thou
summoned. Who has ever come here unsummoned? None! ' 'But **THE** LAY OF
LEITHIAN 305

I was summoned. I am Lúthien daughter of Thingol.' Then Morgoth laughed,
but he was moved with suspicion, and said that her accursed race would
get no soft words or favour in Angband. What could she do to give him
pleasure, and save herself from the lowest dungeons? He reached out his
mighty brazen hand but she shrank away. He is angry but she offers to
dance.

*\[The remainder of the outline is in pencil and in places
in-decipherable:\]* She lets fall her bat-garb. Her hair falls about.
The lights of Angband die. Impenetrable dark falls: only the eyes of
Morgoth and the faint glimmer of Tinúviel \...\...\...\..... Her
fragrance causes all to draw near greedily. Tinúviel flies \[?in at\]
door leaving Beren struck with horror. \...\...\...\...

Here this outline ends. Morgoth\'s words 'Who art thou that flittest
about my halls as a bat' occur also in the *Tale of Tinúviel* (II. 32) -
this outline several times adopts directly the wording of the *Tale,*
see pp. 283, 294.

This is a curious point, for in the *Tale* Tinúviel was not attired in a
bat-skin, whereas in Synopsis III she was. It is conceivable that
Melko\'s words actually gave rise to this element in the story.

In the *Tale* Tinúviel lied to Melko, saying that Tinwelint her father
had driven her out, and in reply he said that she need not hope for
'soft words\'--- this too is a phrase that recurs in Synopsis III. But
the remainder of this outline does not relate closely to the *Tale.*

Synopsis V is here very brief. After 'the enchanting of Carcharos'

(p. 294) it has only (still under the heading \'II\'):

The cozening of Morgoth and the rape of the Silmaril.

The dwarvish knife of Curufin breaks.

It is clear that the concluding passage of Synopsis III, given above,
was a direct precursor of Canto XIII; but some elements- and actual
wording - in the scene go back to the *Tale* without being mentioned in
the Synopsis. Lúthien\'s words 'his rebellious daughter' (4007) seem to
echo 'he is an overbearing Elf and I give not my love at his command'

(II. 32); there is a clear relation between the words of the *Tale
(ibid.).*

Then did Tinúviel begin such a dance as neither she nor other sprite or
fay or elf danced ever before or has done since

and lines 4072-3

in dance such as never Elf nor fay

before devised, nor since that day;

and with 'the adders lay like twisted stone' (4109) cf. 'Beneath his
chair the adders lay like stones.' It is interesting to see the idea of
the shard of the knife-blade striking Morgoth\'s brow (in *The
Silmarillion* his cheek) emerging in the composition of this Canto; as
first written (see note to lines 4163-6) it seems to have been the sound
of the knife snapping that **306 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

disturbed the sleepers, as it was expressly in the *Tale* (II. 33). With
the

'treacherous smiths of Nogrod' (4161) who made Curufin\'s knife cf. the
passage in *The Children of Húrin* concerning *the bearded Dwarves of*
*troth unmindful* who made the knife of Flinding that slipped from its
sheath (p. 44, lines 1142 ff.): that was made by the Dwarves of
Belegost, and like Curufin\'s

\[its\] edge would eat through iron noiseless

as a clod of clay is cleft by the share.

The account in *The Silmarillion* (pp. 180-1) is clearly based on Canto
XIII, from which it derives many features, though it is reduced, notably
by compressing the two episodes of Lúthien singing (3977ff., 4062ff.)
into one; and the prose here owes less to the verses than in other
places.

Lúthien\'s naming herself *Thuringwethil* to Morgoth (line 3954) is
notable. In *The Silmarillion* (p. 178) the bat-fell which Huan brought
from Tol-in-Gaurhoth was that of Thuringwethil: 'she was the messenger
of Sauron, and was wont to fly in vampire\'s form to Angband'; whereas
in the Lay (lines 3402 ff.), as I have noticed (p. 284), 'the bat-wings
are only said to be such as bear up Thû\'s messengers, and are not
associated with a particular or chief messenger'. It seems possible that
in the Lay Lúthien devised this name ('she of hidden shadow') as a
riddling description of herself, and that this led to the conception of
the bat-messenger from the Wizard\'s Isle to Angband named
Thuringwethil; but there is no proof of this.

With the

sylphine maidens of the Air

whose wings in Varda\'s heavenly hall

in rhythmic movement beat and fall (4077-9)

cf. the tale of *The Coming of the Valar and the Building of Valinor*
(I. 65-6), where it is said that with Manwë and Varda there entered the
world 'many of those lesser Vali who loved them and had played nigh them
and attuned their music to theirs, and these are the Mánir and the
Súruli, *the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\'.*

XIV

Up through the dark and echoing gloom

as ghosts from many-tunnelled tomb,

up from the mountains\' roots profound

and the vast menace underground,

their limbs aquake with deadly fear, 4180

**306 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

disturbed the sleepers, as it was expressly in the *Tale* (II. 33). With
the

'treacherous smiths of Nogrod' (4161) who made Curufin\'s knife cf. the
passage in *The Children of Húrin* concerning *the bearded Dwarves of*
*troth unmindful* who made the knife of Flinding that slipped from its
sheath (p. 44, lines 1142 ff.): that was made by the Dwarves of
Belegost, and like Curufin\'s

\[its\] edge would eat through iron noiseless

as a clod of clay is cleft by the share.

The account in *The Silmarillion* (pp. 180-1) is clearly based on Canto
XIII, from which it derives many features, though it is reduced, notably
by compressing the two episodes of Lúthien singing (3977ff., 4062ff.)
into one; and the prose here owes less to the verses than in other
places.

Lúthien\'s naming herself *Thuringwethil* to Morgoth (line 3954) is
notable. In *The Silmarillion* (p. 178) the bat-fell which Huan brought
from Tol-in-Gaurhoth was that of Thuringwethil: 'she was the messenger
of Sauron, and was wont to fly in vampire\'s form to Angband'; whereas
in the Lay (lines 3402 ff.), as I have noticed (p. 284), 'the bat-wings
are only said to be such as bear up Thû\'s messengers, and are not
associated with a particular or chief messenger'. It seems possible that
in the Lay Lúthien devised this name ('she of hidden shadow') as a
riddling description of herself, and that this led to the conception of
the bat-messenger from the Wizard\'s Isle to Angband named
Thuringwethil; but there is no proof of this.

With the

sylphine maidens of the Air

whose wings in Varda\'s heavenly hall

in rhythmic movement beat and fall (4077-9)

cf. the tale of *The Coming of the Valar and the Building of Valinor*
(I. 65-6), where it is said that with Manwë and Varda there entered the
world 'many of those lesser Vali who loved them and had played nigh them
and attuned their music to theirs, and these are the Mánir and the
Súruli, *the sylphs of the airs and of the winds\'.*

XIV

Up through the dark and echoing gloom

as ghosts from many-tunnelled tomb,

up from the mountains\' roots profound

and the vast menace underground,

their limbs aquake with deadly fear, 4180

**THE LAY OF LEĬTHIAN 307**

terror in eyes, and dread in ear,

together fled they, by the beat

affrighted of their flying feet.

At last before them far away

they saw the glimmering wraith of day, 4185

the mighty archway of the gate -

and there a horror new did wait.

Upon the threshold, watchful, dire,

his eyes new-kindled with dull fire,

towered Carcharoth, a biding doom: 4190

his jaws were gaping like a tomb,

his teeth were bare, his tongue aflame;

aroused he watched that no one came,

no flitting shade nor hunted shape,

seeking from Angband to escape. 4195

Now past that guard what guile or might

could thrust from death into the light?

He heard afar their hurrying feet,

he snuffed an odour strange and sweet;

he smelled their coming long before 4200

they marked the waiting threat at door.

His limbs he stretched and shook off sleep,

then stood at gaze. With sudden leap

upon them as they sped he sprang,

and his howling in the arches rang. 4205

Too swift for thought his onset came,

too swift for any spell to tame;

and Beren desperate then aside

thrust Lúthien, and forth did stride

unarmed, defenceless to defend 4210

Tinúviel until the end.

With left he caught at hairy throat,

with right hand at the eyes he smote -

his right, from which the radiance welled

of the holy Silmaril he held. 4215

As gleam of swords in fire there flashed

the fangs of Carcharoth, and crashed

together like a trap, that tore

the hand about the wrist, and shore

through brittle bone and sinew nesh, 4220

devouring the frail mortal flesh;

**308 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

and in that cruel mouth unclean

engulfed the jewel\'s holy sheen.

The Unwritten Cantos

There was virtually no change in the narrative from the *Tale* to the
Lay in the opening passage of Canto XIV, but the account in *The
Silmarillion* differs, in that there Beren did not strike at the eyes of
the wolf with his right hand holding the Silmaril, but held the jewel up
before Carcharoth to daunt him. My father intended to alter the Lay
here, as is seen from a marginal direction to introduce the element of
'daunting'.

*The Lay of Leithian* ends here, in both the A and B texts, and also in
the pages of rough draft, but an isolated sheet found elsewhere gives a
few further lines, together with variants, in the first stage of
composition: Against the wall then Beren reeled

but still with his left he sought to shield

fair Lúthien, who cried aloud

to see his pain, and down she bowed

in anguish sinking to the ground.

There is also a short passage, found on a separate sheet at the end of
the B-text, which is headed 'a piece from the end of the poem': Where
the forest-stream went through the wood,

and silent all the stems there stood

of tall trees, moveless, hanging dark

with mottled shadows on their bark

above the green and gleaming river, 5

there came through leaves a sudden shiver,

a windy whisper through the still

cool silences; and down the hill,

as faint as a deep sleeper\'s breath,

an echo came as cold as death: 10

'Long are the paths, of shadow made

where no foot\'s print is ever laid,

over the hills, across the seas!

Far, far away are the Lands of Ease,

but the Land of the Lost is further yet, 15

where the Dead wait, while ye forget.

No moon is there, no voice, no sound

of beating heart; a sigh profound

once in each age as each age dies

alone is heard. Far, far it lies, 20

**308 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

and in that cruel mouth unclean

engulfed the jewel\'s holy sheen.

The Unwritten Cantos

There was virtually no change in the narrative from the *Tale* to the
Lay in the opening passage of Canto XIV, but the account in *The
Silmarillion* differs, in that there Beren did not strike at the eyes of
the wolf with his right hand holding the Silmaril, but held the jewel up
before Carcharoth to daunt him. My father intended to alter the Lay
here, as is seen from a marginal direction to introduce the element of
'daunting'.

*The Lay of Leithian* ends here, in both the A and B texts, and also in
the pages of rough draft, but an isolated sheet found elsewhere gives a
few further lines, together with variants, in the first stage of
composition: Against the wall then Beren reeled

but still with his left he sought to shield

fair Lúthien, who cried aloud

to see his pain, and down she bowed

in anguish sinking to the ground.

There is also a short passage, found on a separate sheet at the end of
the B-text, which is headed 'a piece from the end of the poem': Where
the forest-stream went through the wood,

and silent all the stems there stood

of tall trees, moveless, hanging dark

with mottled shadows on their bark

above the green and gleaming river, 5

there came through leaves a sudden shiver,

a windy whisper through the still

cool silences; and down the hill,

as faint as a deep sleeper\'s breath,

an echo came as cold as death: 10

'Long are the paths, of shadow made

where no foot\'s print is ever laid,

over the hills, across the seas!

Far, far away are the Lands of Ease,

but the Land of the Lost is further yet, 15

where the Dead wait, while ye forget.

No moon is there, no voice, no sound

of beating heart; a sigh profound

once in each age as each age dies

alone is heard. Far, far it lies, 20

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 309**

the Land of Waiting where the Dead sit,

in their thought\'s shadow, by no moon lit.

With the last lines compare the passage at the end of the tale of Beren
and Lúthien in *The Silmarillion* (p. 186):

But Lúthien came to the halls of Mandos, which are the appointed places
of the Eldalië, beyond the mansions of the West upon the confines of the
world. There those that wait sit in the shadow of their thought.

There is nothing else, and I do not think that there ever was anything
else. All my father\'s later work on the poem was devoted to the
revision of what was already in existence; and the *Lay of Leithian*
ends here.

Of the five synopses that have been given in sections in previous pages,
only the fifth bears on the escape of Beren and Lúthien from Angband.

This outline was last quoted on p. 305 ('the dwarvish knife of Curufin
breaks\'). It continues:

Beren and Lúthien flee in fear. Arousing of Carcharos. Beren\'s hand is
bitten off in which he holds the Silmaril. Madness of Carcharos.

Angband awakes. Flight of Beren and Lúthien towards the waters of
Sirion. Canto \[i.e. Canto 11, see p. 305\] ends as they hear the
pursuing wolves behind. Wrapped in Lúthien\'s cloak they flit beneath
the stars.

Thus the rescue of Beren and Lúthien by Thorondor and his vassals was
not yet present, and the story was still in this respect unchanged from
the *Tale of Tinúviel* (II. 34); cf. especially:

Tinúviel wrapped part of her dark mantle about Beren, and so for a while
flitting by dusk and dark amid the hills they were seen by none.

The first record of the changed story of the escape from Angband is
found on an isolated slip, written hastily in pencil and very difficult
to decipher:

Carcharoth goes mad and drives all \[?orcs\] before him like a wind. The
sound of his awful howling causes rocks to split and fall. There is an
earthquake underground. Morgoth\'s wrath on waking. The gateway

\[?falls\] in and hell is blocked, and great fires and smokes burst from
Thangorodrim. Thunder and lightning. Beren lies dying before the gate.
Tinúviel\'s song as she kisses his hand and prepares to die.

Thorondor comes down and bears them amid the lightning that

\[?stabs\] at them like spears and a hail of arrows from the
battlements.

They pass above Gondolin and Lúthien sees the white city far below,

\[?gleaming\] like a lily in the valley. Thorondor sets her down in
Brethil.

**310 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

This is very close in narrative structure to the story in *The
Silmarillion* (p. 182), with the earthquake, fire and smoke from
Thangorodrim, Beren\'s lying near death at the Gate, Luthien\'s kissing
his hand (staunching the wound), the descent of Thorondor, and the
passage of the eagle(s) over Gondolin. This last shows that this brief
outline is relatively late, since Gondolin was already in existence
before the Battle of Unnumbered Tears (II. 208). But in this text they
are set down in Brethil (a name that does not appear in the works until
several years later); in *The Silmarillion* they are set down 'upon the
borders of Doriath', in 'that same dell whence Beren had stolen in
despair and left Lúthien asleep'. --- On the reference to Gondolin as 'a
lily in the valley' see Synopsis V has more to tell subsequently of the
wanderings of Beren and Lúthien before they returned to Doriath, but I
now set out the remaining materials in their entirety before commenting
on them. First it is convenient to cite the end of Synopsis II, which
has been given already (p. 270) :

Celegorm\'s embassy to Thingol so that Thingol knows or thinks he knows
Beren dead and Lúthien in Nargothrond.

Why Celegorm and Curufin hated by Thingol as p. 270 . . \.....

The loss of Dairon.

Synopsis IV has been given (p. 273) only as far as 'They prepare to go
to Angband', since the outline then turns away from the story of Beren
and Lúthien themselves, according to my father\'s projection at that
time for the further course of the Lay, and continues as follows: ii

Doriath. The hunt for Lúthien and the loss of Dairon. War on the
borders. Boldog slain. So Thingol knows Lúthien not yet dead is caught,
but fears that Boldog\'s raid means that Morgoth has got wind of her
wandering. Actually it means no more than the legend of her beauty.

An embassy comes from Celegorm. Thingol learns that Beren is dead, and
Lúthien at Nargothrond. He is roused to wrath by the hints of the letter
that Celegorm will leave Felagund to die, and will usurp the throne of
Nargothrond. And so Thingol had better let Lúthien stay where she is.

Thingol prepares an army to go against Nargothrond, but learns that
Lúthien has left, and Celegorm and Curufin have fled to Aglon.

He sends an embassy to Aglon. It is routed and put to flight by the
sudden onslaught of Carcharas. Mablung escapes to tell the tale. The
devastation of Doriath by Carcharas.

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 311**

12

The rape of the Silmaril and the home-coming of Beren and Lúthien.

13

The wolf-hunt and death of Huan and Beren.

14

The recall of Beren and Huan.

Synopsis V continues as a more substantial preparation for the end of
the poem never to be written, which my father at this stage conceived in
three further Cantos.

Sorrow in Doriath at flight of Lúthien. Thingol\'s heart hardened
against Beren, despite words of Melian. A mighty hunt is made throughout
the realm, but many of the folk strayed north and west and south of
Doriath beyond the magic of Melian and were lost. Dairon became
separated from his comrades and wandered away into the East of the
world, where some say he pipes yet seeking Lúthien in vain.

The embassy of Celegorm tells Thingol that Beren and Felagund are dead,
that Celegorm will make himself king of Narog, and while telling him
that Lúthien is safe in Nargothrond and treating for her hand, hints
that she will not return: it also warns him to trouble not the matter of
the Silmarils. Thingol is wroth - and is moved to think better of Beren,
while yet blaming \[him\] for the woes that followed his coming to
Doriath, and most for loss of Dairon.

Thingol arms for war against Celegorm. Melian says she would forbid this
evil war of Elf with Elf, but that never shall Thingol cross blade with
Celegorm. Thingol\'s army meets with the host of Boldog on the borders
of Doriath. Morgoth has heard of the beauty of Lúthien, and the rumour
of her wandering. He has ordered Thû and the Orcs to capture her. A
battle is fought and Thingol is victorious. The Orcs are driven into
Taur-na-Fuin or slain. Thingol himself slays Boldog.

Mablung Heavyhand was Thingol\'s chief warrior and fought at his side;
Beleg was the chief of his scouts. Though victorious Thingol is filled
with still more disquiet at Morgoth\'s hunt for Lúthien. Beleg goes
forth from the camp on Doriath\'s borders and journeys, unseen by the
archers, to Narog. He brings tidings of the flight of Lúthien, the
rescue of Beren, and the exile of Celegorm and Curufin. He *\[read*
Thingol\] goes home and sends an embassy to Aglon to demand recompense,
and aid in the rescue of Lúthien. He renews his vow to imprison Beren
for ever if he does not return with a Silmaril, though Melian warns him
that he knows not what he says.

**312 THE** LAYS OF BELERIAND

The embassy meets the onslaught of Carcharos who by fate or the power of
the Silmaril bursts into Doriath. All perish save Mablung who brings the
news. Devastation of the woods. The wood-elves flee to the caves.

13

Beren and Lúthien escape to the Shadowy Mountains, but become lost and
bewildered in the dreads of Nan Dungorthin, and are hunted by phantoms,
and snared at last by the great spiders. Huan rescues them, and guides
them down Sirion, and so they reach Doriath from the south, and find the
woods silent and empty till they come to the guarded bridge.

Huan, Beren, and Lúthien come before Thingol. They tell their tale; yet
Thingol will not relent. The brave words of Beren, revealing the mystery
of Carcharos. Thingol relents. The wolf-hunt is prepared.

Huan, Thingol, Beren, and Mablung depart. Lúthien abides with Melian in
foreboding. Carcharos is slain, but slew Huan who defended Beren. Yet
Beren is mortally hurt, though he lived to place the Silmaril on
Thingol\'s hand which Mablung cut from the wolf\'s belly.

The meeting and farewell of Beren and Tinúviel beneath Hirilorn.

Burial of Huan and Beren.

Fading of Lúthien. Her journey to Mandos. The song of Lúthien in Mandos'
halls, and the release of Beren. They dwelt long in Broseliand, but
spake never more to mortal Men, and Lúthien became mortal.

This concludes all the material in the outlines. For the references to
Boldog\'s raid, and Morgoth\'s interest in Lúthien, in the Lay itself
see lines 2127-36, 2686---94, 3198---3201, and 3665-75.

In Synopsis IV (p. 310) Boldog\'s raid takes place earlier in the story,
before the coming of Celegorm\'s embassy to Thingol, but its narrative
value is obscure. It is not clear why the raid must inform Thingol that

'Lúthien not yet dead is caught', nor why he should conclude that

'Morgoth has got wind of her wandering'. Moreover the statement that

'actually it means no more than the legend of her beauty' can only mean
(if Morgoth had *not* heard of her wandering forth from Doriath) that he
sent out Boldog\'s warband with the express intention of seizing her
from the fastness of the Thousand Caves.

In Synopsis V the raid was moved to a later point, and the host out of
Doriath that destroyed Boldog was actually moving against Nargothrond.

In *The Silmarillion* the embassy from Celegorm survived, but of
Boldog\'s raid there is no hint, and Thingol does no more than 'think to
make war'

on Nargothrond:

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 313**

But Thingol learned that Lúthien had journeyed far from Doriath, for
messages came secretly from Celegorm, \... saying that Felagund was
dead, and Beren was dead, but Lúthien was in Nargothrond, and that
Celegorm would wed her. Then Thingol was wrathful, and he sent forth
spies, thinking to make war upon Nargothrond; and thus he learned that
Lúthien was again fled, and that Celegorm and Curufin were driven from
Nargothrond. Then his counsel was in doubt, for he had not the strength
to assail the seven sons of Fëanor; but he sent messengers to Himring to
summon their aid in seeking for Lúthien, since Celegorm had not sent her
to the house of her father, nor had he kept her safely (pp. 183-4).

The 'spies\' of this passage were derived from Beleg\'s secret mission
to Nargothrond in Synopsis V (p. 311). It seems probable that my father
actually discarded Boldog\'s raid; and with it went all suggestion that
Lúthien\'s wandering had been reported to Morgoth (cf. lines 3665 ff.)
and that Thû was given orders to capture her (Synopsis V). The passage
in Canto IX of the Lay (2686-94) where Thû recognised Lúthien\'s voice

\- or, at least, knew that it must be she who was singing - does not,
indeed, at all suggest that Thû was actively seeking her. These lines
were the source for the passage in *The Silmarillion,* where Sauron
standing in the tower of Tol-in-Gaurhoth

smiled hearing her voice, for he knew that it was the daughter of
Melian. The fame of the beauty of Lúthien, and the wonder of her song
had long gone forth from Doriath; and he thought to make her captive and
hand her over to the power of Morgoth, for his reward would be great.

But the idea that the beauty and singing of Lúthien had come to the ears
of Sauron survives from the stage when Morgoth\'s interest in her was an
important motive.

As noticed earlier (p. 209), the wandering and loss of Dairon goes back
to the *Tale of Tinúviel* (11.20-1) and survived into *The Silmarillion*
(p. 183), where it is said that Daeron passed over the Blue Mountains

'into the East of Middle-earth, where for many ages he made lament
beside dark waters for Lúthien'. Less is made in the later story of the
great hunt for Lúthien, and nothing is said of the changing moods and
intentions of Thingol towards Beren referred to in Synopsis V. The

'political' element of the ambitions of Celegorm and Curufin and the
attempted browbeating and blackmail of Thingol is of course a new
element that first appears in the Synopses (other than the earlier
reference in the Lay, 2501---3, to the brothers\' intentions in this
regard), since the 'Nargothrond Element' is wholly absent from the *Tale
of Tinúviel',* and similarly the interception of the embassy from
Thingol to Aglon by Carcharoth, from which Mablung alone survived. This
also remains in *The Silmarillion.*

**314 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

In Synopsis V, where the bearing away of Beren and Lúthien from Angband
by Thorondor is not yet present, they flee from Angband

'towards the waters of Sirion' (p. 309), and (p. 312) 'escape to the
Shadowy Mountains, but become lost and bewildered in the dreads of Nan
Dungorthin, and are hunted by phantoms, and snared at last by the great
spiders. Huan rescues them, and guides them down Sirion . . .'

In the *Tale* likewise (11.34-5), Huan rescued them from 'Nan
Dumgorthin'. This is a point of geography and shifting nomenclature of
great perplexity. I have shown (pp. 170-1, 234) that the meaning of

'Shadowy Mountains\' changes in the course of the *Lay of Leithian:*
whereas at first (lines 386, 1318) the reference is to the Mountains of
Terror (Ered Gorgoroth), subsequently (line 1940) it is to Ered Wethrin,
the range fencing Hithlum. The Mountains of Terror, with the great
spiders, are described in lines 563 ff.

In the present passage of Synopsis V the statements that Beren and
Lúthien escaping from Angband fled towards Sirion, and that Huan
rescuing them from Nan Dungorthin guided them down Sirion, very strongly
suggests that the Shadowy Mountains are here again, as might be
expected, Ered Wethrin. Nan Dungorthin must then be placed as in *The
Children of Húrin,* west of Sirion, in a valley of the southern slopes
of the Shadowy Mountains. But this means that the great spiders are
found in both places.

It is difficult to suggest a satisfactory explanation of this. A
possibility is that when Beren crossed the Mountains of Terror and
encountered the spiders (lines 569-74) 'Nan Dungorthin' was placed in
that region, though it is not named; in Synopsis V however it is again
placed, with its spiders, west of Sirion.

In the later story the eagles set Beren and Lúthien down on the borders
of Doriath, and Huan came to them there.

In the conclusion of Synopsis V there is very little that is at variance
with the story of the wolf-hunt and the death of Beren in *The
Silmarillion,* so far as can be seen from the very compressed outline;
but Beleg was not present at the hunt in the Synopsis, as he was not in
the *Tale* (II. 38).

The sentence that concludes Synopsis IV is curious: 'The recall of Beren
and Huan' (p. 311). 'Recall' obviously refers to the return from Mandos
(the last heading of Synopsis I is 'Tinúviel goes to Mandos and recalls
Beren'); in which case my father must have intended to have Huan return
from the dead with Beren and Lúthien. In the *Tale of* *Tinúviel* Huan
was not slain (II. 39), and there was no prophecy concerning his fate to
fall before the mightiest wolf that should ever walk the world; but he
became the companion of Mablung (II. 41), and in the *Tale of the
Nauglafring* he returned to Beren and Lúthien in the land of
i-Guilwarthon after the death of Thingol and the sack of the Thousand
Caves.

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 315**

**APPENDIX**

C. *S. Lewis\'s Commentary on the Lay of Leithian*

I give here the greater part of this commentary, for which see pp. 150-1
.\*

Lewis\'s line-references are of course changed throughout to those in
this book. The letters H, J, K, L, P, R refer to the imaginary
manuscripts of the ancient poem.

For the text criticised in the first entry of the commentary see pp.
157-8, i.e. text B(I).

4 *Meats were sweet.* This is the reading of PRK. Let any one believe if
he can that our author gave such a cacophany. J *His drink was sweet his
dishes dear.*

L *His drink was sweet his dish was dear.* (Many scholars have rejected
lines 1-8 altogether as unworthy of the poet. 'They were added by a
later hand

to supply a gap in the archtype,' says Peabody; and

adds 'The more melodious movement and surer nar-

rative stride of the passage beginning with line 9 *\[But* *fairer than
are born to Men}* should convince the dullest that here, and here only,
the authentic work of the poet begins.' I am not convinced that H, which

had better be quoted in full, does not give the true

opening of the *Geste.*

*That was long since in ages old*

*When first the stars in heaven rolled,*

*There dwelt beyond Broseliand,*

*While loneliness yet held the land,*

*A great king comely under crown,*

*The gold was woven in his gown,*

*The gold was clasped about his feet,*

*The gold about his waist did meet.*

*And in his many-pillared house*

*Many a gold bee and ivory mouse*

*And amber chessmen on their field*

*Of copper, many a drinking horn*

*Dear purchased from shy unicorn*

*Lay piled, with gold in gleaming grot.*

*All these he had* etc.)

\*An account of it, with some citation, has been given by Humphrey
Carpenter in *The* *Inklings,* pp. 29-31, where the view expressed in
his *Biography,* p. 145, that 'Tolkien did not accept any of Lewis\'s
suggestions\', is corrected.

**316 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

\[It seems virtually certain that it was Lewis\'s criticism that led my
father to rewrite the opening (the B(2) text, p. 154). If the amber
chessmen and ivory mice found no place in the new version, it is notable
that in Lewis\'s lines occur the words 'And in his many-pillared house'.
These are not derived from the B (I) text which Lewis read, but in B (2)
appears the line (14) *in many-pillared halls of stone.* It seems then
that Durin\'s *many-pillared* halls in Gimli\'s song in Moria were
originally so called by C. S. Lewis, thinking of the halls of Thingol in
Doriath.\]

40 The description of Lúthien has been too often and too justly praised
to encourage the mere commentator in

intruding.

68 *tall.* Thus PRKJH. L *vast.* Schick\'s complimentary title of
'internal rime' for these cacophanies does not much mend matters. 'The
poet of the *Geste* knew nothing of internal rime, and its appearance
(so called) is an infallible mark of corruption' (Pumpernickel).

But cf. 209, 413.

71---2 The reader who wishes to acquire a touchstone for the true style
of the *Geste* had better learn by heart this faultless and
characteristic distych.

77 HL *Of mortal men at feast has heard*

\[The line in B(I) was *of mortal feaster ever heard.* With *hath* for
*has* Lewis\'s line was adopted.\]

99-150 This is considered by all critics one of the noblest passages in
the *Geste.*

112 Notice the double sense of within (macrocosmic and microcosmic).
That the original poet may have been

unconscious of this need not detract from our plea-

sure.

\[Lewis was clearly right to suspect that the original poet had no
**such** double sense in mind.\]

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 317**

117 H *The legions of his marching hate*

\[Lewis was criticising the original line in B *his evil legions '
marshalled* *hate.* With retention of *marshalled* for *marching*
Lewis\'s line was adopted.\]

\[In the following comment the reading criticised was: *swift ruin red
of fire and sword*

*leapt forth on all denied his word,*

*and all the lands beyond the hills* 125

*were filled with sorrow and with ills.\]*

124 The relative understood. I suspect both the construction and the
word *dented,* neither of which has the true ring. H reads:

*And ruin of red fire and sword*

*To all that would not hail him lord*

*Came fast, and far beyond the hills*

*Spread Northern wail and iron ills.*

*And therefore in wet woods and cold* etc.

130 'A weak line' (Peabody).

\[The original reading in B which Lewis criticised was *who had this
king* *once held in scorn,* changed to *who once a prince of Men was
born\]*

137 Some emend. The rhythm, however, is good, and

probably would occur more often if the syllabic

prudery of scribes had not elsewhere 'emended' it.

172 LH *When I lost all*

\[No alteration made to the text.\]

173-4 L *Thus, out of wet night while he gazed,*

*he thought, with heavy heart amazed*

\[No alteration made to the text.\]

\[In the following comment the reading criticised was: *But ere he dared
to call her name*

*or ask how she escaping came\]*

**3l8 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

175-6 *she escaping. A* Latinised phrase, at once betraying very late
corruption. The ugly assonaceere\... *dared* confirms my suspicion of
the distych. No satisfactory emendation has been proposed.

*\[she escaping came* was changed to *she escaped and came\]*

196 H *Whining, his spirit ached for ease.* Peabody observes of the
whole passage: 'The combination

of extreme simplicity, with convincing truth of

psychology, and the pathos which, without com-

ment, makes us aware that Gorlim is at once

pardonable and unpardonable, render this part

of the story extremely affecting.'

\[No alteration made to line 196\]

208 *haply.* LH *chance.*

\[No alteration made to the text.\]

209---10 One of the few passages in which Schick\'s theory of deliberate
internal rime finds some support.

\[See the comment on line 68.\]

215 *that.* H *the.*

\[No alteration made to the text.\]

\[The lines 313---16 referred to in the following comment had been
bracketed for exclusion, and *that* at 317 changed to *Then,* before the
text went to Lewis.\]

313 H reads *Thus Morgoth loved that his own foe*

*Should in his service deal the blow.*

*ThenBeren . . .*

'Our scribe is right in his erasure of the second distych, but wrong in
his erasure of the first' (Peabody). The first erased couplet certainly
deserves to remain in the text; indeed its loss seriously impairs the
reality of Morgoth. I should print as in H, enclosing *Thus . . .*

*blow* in brackets or dashes.

THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 319

\[My father ticked the first two lines (313-14), which may show that he
accepted this suggestion. I have let all four stand in the text.\]

400 Of Canto 2 as a whole Peabody writes: 'If this is not good romantic
narrative, I confess myself ignorant of the meaning of the words.'

401 et seq. A more philosophical account of the period is given in the
so called *Poema Historiale,* probably contemporary with the earliest
MSS of the *Geste.*

The relevant passage runs as follows:

*There was a time before the ancient sun*

*And swinging wheels of heaven had learned*

*to run*

*More certainly than dreams; for dreams*

*themselves*

*Had bodies then and filled the world with elves.*

*The starveling lusts whose walk is now*

*confined*

*To darkness and the cellarage of the mind,*

*And shudderings and despairs and shapes of sin*

*Then walked at large, and were not cooped*

*within.*

*Thought cast a shadow: brutes could speak:*

*and men*

*Get children on a star. For spirit then*

*Kneaded a fluid world and dreamed it new*

*Each moment. Nothing yet was false or true.*

\[Humphrey Carpenter, who cites these verses in *The Inklings,* says (p.
30): 'Sometimes Lewis actually suggested entirely new passages to
replace lines he thought poor, and here too he ascribed his own versions
to supposedly historical sources. For example, he suggested that the
lines about the "elder days" \[401 ff.\] could be replaced by the
following stanza of his own, which he described as "the so called *Poema
Historiale*

\[&c.\]".' But he cannot have intended these lines, which not only, as
Humphrey Carpenter says, show 'how greatly Lewis\'s poetic imagination
differed from Tolkien\'s', but are in a different metre, as a
replacement; see Lewis\'s comment on lines 438---42.\]

413 Another instance where the 'internal rime' theory is justified.

**32O THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

438---42 Almost certainly spurious. This abstract philosophical
statement --- which would not surprise us in the

scholastic verse of the period, such as the *Poema* *Historiale ---* is
quite foreign to the manner of the *Geste.*

L reads:

. . . *singing in the wood*

*And long he stood and long he stood*

*Till, many a day, with hound and hail*

*His people seek him ere they sail,*

*Then, finding not, take ship with tears.*

*But after a long tale of years*

*(Though but an hour to him it seemed)*

*He found her where she lay and dreamed.*

\[My father marked lines 438 ff. in the typescript, but made no change
to the text.\]

516 *Flowering candles.* The reader should notice how the normally plain
style of the *Geste* has yet the power of rising into such expressions
as this without losing its unity.

\[In the following comment the reading criticised was: *and round their
boles did shadows fall* 518

*where glimmered faint. . .\]*

518 *did* PRK, *let* JL. Though neither is good, PRK seems the better
reading. Its slight clumsiness may be

passed over by a reader intent on the story: the 'neat'

evasion *let,* with its purely formal attribution of an active role to
the trees, is much worse, as cheap

scenery is worse than a plain backcloth. H reads:

*The silent elms stood tall and grey*

*And at the roots long shadows lay*

519-42 'This passage', Peabody observes, 'amply atones for the poet\'s
lapse *(dormitat Homerus)* in 518. *Ipsa* *mollifies.'*

\[I do not understand why Lewis picked particularly on *did* at line
518: the **THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 321**

use *of did* as a metrical aid was very common in the B-text as Lewis
saw it

\- it occurred twice, for instance, in the passage here praised: *did
flutter* 523, *did waver* 533, both subsequently changed.\]

555---6 *\'O si sic omnia!* Does not our poet show glimpses of the true
empyrean of poesy, however, in his work-manlike humility, he has chosen
more often to

inhabit the milder and aerial (not aetherial) middle

heaven?' (Pumpernickel). Some have seen in the

conception of death-into-life a late accretion. But cf.

the very early lyric preserved in the MS \^057, now

in the public library at Narrowthrode (the ancient

*Nargothrond),* which is probably as early as the *Geste,* though like
all the scholastic verse it strikes a more modern note:

*Because of endless pride*

*Reborn with endless error,*

*Each hour I look aside*

*Upon my secret mirror,*

*And practice postures there*

*To make my image fair.*

*You give me grapes, and I,*

*Though staring, turn to see*

*How dark the cool globes lie*

*In the white hand of me,*

*And stand, yet gazing thither,*

*Till the live clusters wither.*

*So should I quickly die*

*Narcissus-like for want,*

*Save that betimes my eye*

*Sees there such shapes as haunt*

*Beyond nightmare and make*

*Pride humble for pride\'s sake.*

*Then, and then only, turning*

*The stiff neck round, I grow*

*A molten man all burning*

*And look behind, and know*

*Who made the flaw, what light makes dark,*

*what fair*

**322 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

*Makes foul my shadowy form reflected there,*

*That self-love, big with love, dying, its child*

*may bear.*

\[It is a matter for speculation, what the author of Nargothrond thought
of the public library at Narrowthrode. - This poem, with some
alterations, was included in *The Pilgrim\'s Regress* (1933)-\]

563---92 *Sic* in all MSS. The passage is, of course, genuine, and truly
worthy of the *Geste.* But surely it must originally have stood at 391
or 393? The artificial

insertion of Beren\'s journey in its present place -

where it appears as retrospect not as direct narrative, though
defensible, belongs to a kind of art more

sophisticated than that of the *Geste:* it is just such a transposition
as a late Broseliandic literary redactor would make under the influence
of the classical epic.

\[A quarter of a century later, or more, my father rewrote this part of
the poem; and he took Lewis\'s advice. See p. 352.\]

\[The original reading of B criticised in the next comment (lines 629
ff.) was:

*Then stared he wild in dumbness bound*

*at silent trees, deserted ground;*

*the dizzy moon was twisted grey*

*in tears, for she had fled away.\]*

629-30 Thus in PRKJ. The Latinised adverbial use of the adjective in
*wild* and the omitted articles in the next line are suspicious.

L *But wildly Beren gazed around*

*On silent trees (and) \* empty ground.*

*The dizzy moon* etc.

\*Peabody supplies *and.* But the monosyllabic foot is quite possible.
Cf. 687.

H *But wildly Beren gazed around.*

*Emptied the tall trees stood. The ground*

*Lay empty. A lonely moon looked grey*

*Upon the untrodden forest way.*

**THE** LAY **OF** LEITHIAN 323

I prefer H because it gets rid of the conceit (it is little more) about
the moon. (This sort of half-hearted

personification is, of course, to be distinguished from genuine
mythology.)

\[Against this my father scribbled on Lewis\'s text: 'Not so!! The moon
was dizzy and twisted because of the tears in his eyes.' Nonetheless he
struck the two lines out heavily in the typescript, and I have excluded
them from the text.\]

635-6 An excellent simile.

641 Peabody, though a great friend to metrical resol-

utions in general, finds this particular resolution

*(Bewildered enchanted)* 'singularly harsh'. Perhaps the original text
read *wildered.*

\[The reading in B was *bewildered, enchanted and forlorn.* My father
then changed *bewildered* to *wildered* and placed it after
*enchanted.\]*

651-2 JHL transpose.

\[This was done. Cf. lines 1222-3, where these lines are repeated but
left in the original sequence.\]

\[After line 652 B had:

*Thus thought his heart. No words would come*

*from his fast lips, for smitten dumb*

*a spell lay on him, as a dream*

*in longing chained beside the stream.*

After seeing Lewis\'s comment my father marked this passage 'revise',
and also with a deletion mark, on which basis I **have** excluded the
four lines from the text.\]

Only in PR. Almost undoubtedly spurious. 'The latest redactors\', says
Pumpernickel, 'were always needlessly amplifying, as if the imagination
of their readers could do nothing for itself, and thus blunting the true
force and energy of the *Geste. . . .'*

Read:

*A heartache and a loneliness*

*--- Enchanted waters pitiless. '*

*A summer waned* etc.

**324 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

*\[heartache* was the original reading of B at 651, changed later to
*hunger,* but retained at 1223.\]

653-72 Of this admirable passage Peabody remarks : 'It is as if the wood
itself were speaking.'

677---9 LH *From her dim cave the damp moon eyed*

*White mists that float from earth to hide*

*The sluggard morrow \'s sun and drip*

\[No alteration made to the text.\]

683 *Beat,* which is utterly inappropriate to the sound described, must
be a corruption. No plausible

emendation has been suggested.

\[My father scribbled in a hesitant substitute for *beat* and a
different form for line 684 *(of his own feet on leafy* . . . .) but I
cannot read the rhyming words.\]

685-708 In praise of this passage I need not add to the in-numerable
eulogies of my predecessors.

710 Bentley read *saw far off,* to avoid the ugliness that always
results from w-final followed by an initial

vowel in the next word.

\[The reading criticised was *saw afar,* and the line was changed as
suggested.\]

715 *Stole he* PRK. *He stole* JHL. PRK looks like the metrical
'improvement' of a scribe: dearly bought by

a meaningless inversion.

\[The reading criticised was *Then stole he nigh,* changed to *Then
nigh* *he stole.\]*

727---45 This passage, as it stands, is seriously corrupt, though the
beauty of the original can still be discerned.

\[See the following notes.\]

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN** 325

\[The original reading of B in lines 729---30 was:

*the hillock green he leapt upon -*

*the elfin loveliness was gone*;\]

729 Intolerable bathos and prose in a passage of such tension.

\[The original reading of B in line 739 was:

*its echoes wove a halting spell:\]*

739 Why *halting?* 'Let the amanuensis take back his rubbish' (Bentley).

\[Against this my father wrote 'A spell to halt anyone', but in the
margin of B he wrote *staying I binding,* and I have adopted *binding*
in the text.\]

\[The original reading of B in lines 741---5 was:

*His voice such love and longing fill* 741

*one moment stood she, touched and still;*

*one moment only, but he came*

*and all his heart was burned with flame.* 744\]

741-2 The historic present is always to be suspected. The second verse
is hopelessly corrupt. *Touched* in this sense is impossible in the
language of the *Geste:* and if the word were possible, the conception
is fitter for a nineteenth century drawing-room in Narrowthrode

than for the loves of heroes. HL read:

*And clear his voice came as a bell*

*Whose echoes wove a wavering spell*

*Tinúviel. Tinúviel.*

*Such love and longing filled his voice*

*That, one moment, without choice,*

*One moment without fear or shame,*

*Tinúviel stood; and like aflame*

*He leapt towards her as she stayed*

*And caught and kissed that elfin maid.*

\[My father marked the passage 'revise', and very roughly corrected it
(adopting the concluding verses of Lewis\'s version) to the form which I
have given in the text, despite the defective couplet.\]

**320 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

\[The original reading of B was:

*aswoon in mingled grief and bliss,*

*enchantment of an elvish* few.\]

760-1 L *Aswoon with grief, aswoon with bliss,*

*Enchanted of an elvish kiss.*

*\[enchanted for enchantment* was adopted.\]

\[The original reading - the text B(i) seen by Lewis, seep. 194-of lines
762-73 was:

*and saw within his blinded eyes*

*a light that danced like silver flies*

*a starlit face of tenderness*

*crowned by the stars ofElfinesse.*

*A mist was in his face like hair,* 5

*and laughing whispers moved the air -*

*\'O!dance with me now, Beren. Dance! '-*

*a silver laugh, a mocking glance:*

*'Come dance the wild and headlong maze*

*those dance, we 're told, beyond the ways 1* o *who dwell that lead to
lands of Men!*

*Come teach the feet of Lúthien!'*

*The shadows wrapped her. Like a stone*

*the daylight found him cold and lone.*

On line 8 of this passage Lewis commented:\]

L *a silver laughter, an arch glance*

'Whether *mocking* or *arch* is the more intolerably miss-ish I care not
to decide' (Peabody).

\[The line was abandoned in the 8(2) version. On lines 9-12 Lewis
commented:\]

JHL omit. Is not the whole passage \[from the begin-

ning of the Canto to the end of the passage from B(i) given above\]
unworthy of the poet?

\[It is clear that this severe criticism led to the rewriting of the
opening of the Canto.\]

775 The chiasmus is suspiciously classical. H gives *Dark* *is the sun,
cold is the air.*

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 327**

\[Against this my father scribbled: 'But classics did not invent
chiasmus!

--- it is perfectly natural.' *(Chiasmus:* a grammatical figure by which
the order of words is one of two parallel clauses is inverted in the
other.)\]

\[The passage criticised by Lewis in the following comment was: *Hateful
art thou, O Land of Trees!*

*My flute shall finger no more seize;*

*may music perish* etc.\]

849 Clearly corrupt. HJL *Oh hateful land of trees be* *mute! My
fingers, now forget the flute!*

\[Against this my father wrote: 'Frightful 18th century!!!' But he
re-ordered the second line to: *my fingers the flute shall no more
seize,* and subsequently rewrote the passage to the form given in the
text, lines 849-52.\]

849-83 'These lines are very noble' (Pumpernickel).

909 *cometh.* HJL *comes.* HJL is certainly the more emphatic rhythm.

\[No alteration made to the text.\]

\[The original reading of B at line 911 was:

. . . *those shores,*

*those white rocks where the last tide roars\]*

911 'Where *eight* dull words oft creep in one low line.'

Lines of monosyllables are often to be found in the

*Geste,* but rarely so clustered with consonants as this. No
satisfactory emendation has been suggested.

I suspect this is a garbled version of 1142---3:

our scribes do not always accept or understand epic

repetition.

\[The emendation made to B and given in the text is derived from lines
1142---3 as Lewis suggested. His reference is to Pope, *An Essay on*
*Criticism,* line 347: *And ten low words oft creep in one dull line.\]*

978-9 In *Gestestudien* Vol. XIII pp. 9-930 the reader will find a
summary of the critical war that has raged

**328 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

round the possibility of the assonance (or rime) of

*within-dim.* Perhaps a great deal of ink would have been saved if the
scholars of the last century had been familiar with the L reading *Where
out of yawning*

*arches came A white light like unmoving flame.*

'My own conclusion is that *if* the assonance in the *textus receptus*
is correct, the same phenomenon must originally have occurred often, and
have been

suppressed elsewhere by the scribes. Editorial effort might profitably
be devoted to restoring it' (Schuffer).

But cf. 1140---1.

\[The original reading of B in lines 980-1 was:

*With gentle hand there she him led*

*down corridors* etc.\]

980 J *Downward with gentle hand she him led,*

which explains the corruption. The verse origin-

ally ran *Downward with gentle hand she led.*

The scribe of J, wrongly believing an object to be

needed, inserted *him. Vulg.* then 'emends' the metre by dropping
*Downward* and inserting

*there:* thus giving a clumsy line.

\[In this note *Vulg. = Vulgate,* the common or usual form of a literary
work. My father wrote in Lewis\'s line on the B-text with his initials,
and made the consequent change of *down* to *through* in line 981.\]

\[The original reading of B was: *as into arched halls was led\]*

991 HJL *she led*

996 L *in old stone- carven stood*

\[No alteration made to the text.\]

\[The original reading in B was: *while waters endless dripped and*
*ran}*

1007 H *While water forever dript and ran*

\[The original reading in B was: *in lightless labyrinths endlessly\]*

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 329**

1075 *Labyrinths.* HJL *Labyrinth.*

\[Lewis corrected his spelling to *Laborynth(s),* against which my
father queried: 'Why this spelling?'\]

980-1131 The whole of this passage has always been deservedly regarded
as one of the gems of the *Geste.*

1132---61 I suspect that this passage has been greatly expanded by the
late redactors who found their audience sometimes very ignorant of the
myths. It is, as it stands, far from satisfactory. On the one hand it is
too long an

interruption of the action: on the other it is too

succinct for a reader who knows nothing of the myth-

ology. It is also obscure: thus in 1145 few readers can grasp that
*their* means 'the Silmarils'. The shorter version of H and L, though
not good, may in some

respects be nearer the original:

*Then Thingol\'s 'warriors loud and long*

*Laughed: for wide renown in song*

*Had Fëanor\'s gems o \'er land and sea,*

*The Silmarils, the shiners three,*

*Three only, and in every one*

*The light that was before the sun*

*And moon, shone yet. But now no more*

*Those leavings of the lights of yore*

*Were seen on earth \'s back: in the drear*

*Abysm of Morgoth blazing clear*

*His iron crown they must adorn*

*And glitter on ores and slaves forlorn* etc.

\[My father put an exclamation mark against *the shiners three;* and he
wrote an X against lines 1144-5 (see note to these lines).\]

Here C. S. Lewis\'s commentary on *The Gest of Beren and Lúthien* ends,
and no more is recorded of the opinions of Peabody, Pumpernickel,
Schuffer and Schick in the volumes of *Gestestudien -* nor indeed, on
this subject, of those of their generous-minded inventor.

IV

THE LAY OF LEITHIAN

RECOMMENCED

When my father began the *Lay of Leithian* again from the beginning, he
did not at first intend much more, perhaps, than a revision, an
improvement of individual lines and short passages, but all on the
original plan and structure. This, at least, is what he did with Canto
I; and he carried out the revisions on the old B typescript. But with
Canto II he was quickly carried into a far more radical reconstruction,
and was virtually writing a new poem on the same subject and in the same
metre as the old.

This, it is true, was partly because the story of Gorlim had changed,
but it is also clear that a new impulse had entered, seeking a new
rather than merely altered expression. The old typescript was still used
at least as a physical basis for the new writing, but for a long stretch
the typed verses were simply struck through and the new written on
inserted pages and slips.

The old Canto II of just over 300 lines was expanded to 500, and divided
into new Cantos 2 and 3 (the old and the new can be conveniently
distinguished by Roman and Arabic numerals).

The rewriting on the old typescript continues for a short distance into
Canto III (new Canto 4) and then stops. On the basis of this now
extremely chaotic text my father wrote out a fine, decorated manuscript,

\'C\', inevitably introducing some further changes; and this stops only
a few lines short of the point where the rewriting on the B-text stops.

Subsequently, an amanuensis typescript (\'D\') was made, in two copies,
apparently with my father\'s supervision, but for the moment nothing
need be said of this beyond noticing that he made certain changes to
these texts at a later time.

The rewriting on the B-text was no doubt a secondary stage, of which the
preliminary workings no longer exist; for in the case of the new Canto 4
such preliminary drafts are extant. On one of these pages, and quite
obviously done at the same time as the verse-drafts, my father drew a
floor-plan of part of the house 99 Holywell Street, Oxford, to which he
removed in 1950. He doubtless drew the plan shortly before moving house,
while pondering its best arrangement. It is clear then that a new start
on the *Lay ofLeithian* was one of the first things that he turned to
when *The Lord of the Rings* was complete.

I give below the text of the manuscript C in its final form (that is,
after certain changes had been made to it) so far as it goes (line 624),
incor-

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN RECOMMENCED 331**

porating one or two very minor alterations made later to the D
typescript(s), followed by a further short section (lines 625-60) found
only in draft before being added to D. Brief Notes and Commentary are
given on pp. 348«.

THE LAY OF LEITHIAN

**I. OF THINGOL IN DORIATH**

A king there was in days of old:

ere Men yet walked upon the mould

his power was reared in caverns\' shade,

his hand was over glen and glade.

Of leaves his crown, his mantle green, 5

his silver lances long and keen;

the starlight in his shield was caught,

ere moon was made or sun was wrought.

In after-days, when to the shore

of Middle-earth from Valinor 10

the Elven-hosts in might returned,

and banners flew and beacons burned,

when kings of Eldamar went by

in strength of war, beneath the sky

then still his silver trumpets blew 15

when sun was young and moon was new.

Afar then in Beleriand,

in Doriath\'s beleaguered land,

King Thingol sat on guarded throne

in many-pillared halls of stone: 20

there beryl, pearl, and opal pale,

and metal wrought like fishes\' mail,

buckler and corslet, axe and sword,

and gleaming spears were laidin hoard:

all these he had and counted small, 25

for dearer than all wealth in hall,

and fairer than are born to-Men,

a daughter had he, Lúthien.

**OF LÚTHIEN THE BELOVED**

Such lissom limbs no more shall run

on the green earth beneath the sun; 30

**332 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

so fair a maid no more shall be

from dawn to dusk, from sun to sea.

Her robe was blue as summer skies,

but grey as evening were her eyes;

her mantle sewn with lilies fair, 35

but dark as shadow was her hair.

Her feet were swift as bird on wing,

her laughter merry as the spring;

the slender willow, the bowing reed,

the fragrance of a flowering mead, 40

the light upon the leaves of trees,

the voice of water, more then these

her beauty was and blissfulness,

her glory and her loveliness.

She dwelt in the enchanted land 45

while elven-might yet held in hand

the woven woods of Doriath:

none ever thither found the path

unbidden, none the forest-eaves

dared pass, or stir the listening leaves. 50

To North there lay a land of dread,

Dungorthin where all ways were dead

in hills of shadow bleak and cold;

beyond was Deadly Nightshade\'s hold

in Taur-nu-Fuin\'s fastness grim, 55

where sun was sick and moon was dim.

To South the wide earth unexplored;

to West the ancient Ocean roared,

unsailed and shoreless, wide and wild;

to East in peaks of blue were piled, 60

in silence folded, mist-enfurled,

the mountains of the outer world.

Thus Thingol in his dolven hall

amid the Thousand Caverns tall

of Menegroth as king abode: 65

to him there led no mortal road.

Beside him sat his deathless queen,

fair Melian, and wove unseen

nets of enchantment round his throne,

and spells were laid on tree and stone: 70

sharp was his sword and high his helm,

**THE LAY OF** LEITHIAN RECOMMENCED 333

the king of beech and oak and elm.

When grass was green and leaves were long,

when finch and mavis sang their song,

there under bough and under sun 75

in shadow and in light would run

fair Lúthien the elven-maid,

dancing in dell and grassy glade.

OF DAIRON MINSTREL OF THINGOL

When sky was clear and stars were keen,

then Dairon with his fingers lean, 80

as daylight melted into eve,

a trembling music sweet would weave

on flutes of silver, thin and clear

for Lúthien, the maiden dear.

There mirth there was and voices bright; 85

there eve was peace and morn was light;

there jewel gleamed and silver wan

and red gold on white fingers shone,

and elanor and niphredil

bloomed in the grass unfading still, 90

while the endless years of Elven-land

rolled over far Beleriand,

until a day of doom befell,

as still the elven-harpers tell.

2\. OF MORGOTH & THE SNARING OF GORLIM

Far in the Northern hills of stone 95

in caverns black there was a throne

by flame encircled; there the smoke

in coiling columns rose to choke

the breath of life, and there in deep

and gasping dungeons lost would creep 100

to hopeless death all those who strayed

by doom beneath that ghastly shade.

A king there sat, most dark and fell

**334 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

of all that under heaven dwell.

Than earth or sea, than moon or star 105

more ancient was he, mightier far

in mind abysmal than the thought

of Eldar or of Men, and wrought

of strength primeval; ere the stone

was hewn to build the world, alone no

he walked in darkness, fierce and dire,

burned, as he wielded it, by fire.

He \'twas that laid in ruin black

the Blessed Realm and fled then back

to Middle-earth anew to build 115

beneath the mountains mansions filled

with misbegotten slaves of hate:

death\'s shadow brooded at his gate.

His hosts he armed with spears of steel

and brands of flame, and at their heel 120

the wolf walked and the serpent crept

with lidless eyes. Now forth they leapt,

his ruinous legions, kindling war

in field and frith and woodland hoar.

Where long the golden elanor 125

had gleamed amid the grass they bore

their banners black, where finch had sung

and harpers silver harps had wrung

now dark the ravens wheeled and cried

amid the reek, and far and wide 130

the swords of Morgoth dripped with red

above the hewn and trampled dead.

Slowly his shadow like a cloud

rolled from the North, and on the proud

that would not yield his vengeance fell; 135

to death or thraldom under hell

all things he doomed: the Northern land

lay cowed beneath his ghastly hand.

But still there lived in hiding cold

Beor\'s son, Barahir the bold, 140

of land bereaved and lordship shorn

who once a prince of Men was born,

and now an outlaw lurked and lay

in the hard heath and woodland grey.

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN RECOMMENCED 335**

**OF THE SAVING OF KING INGLOR FELAGUND BY THE XII BËORINGS**

Twelve men beside him still there went, 145

still faithful when all hope was spent.

Their names are yet in elven-song

remembered, though the years are long

since doughty Dagnir and Ragnor,

Radhruin, Dairuin and Gildor, 150

Gorlim Unhappy, and Urthel,

and Arthad and Hathaldir fell;

since the black shaft with venomed wound

took Belegund and Baragund,

the mighty sons of Bregolas; 155

since he whose doom and deeds surpass

all tales of Men was laid on bier,

fair Beren son of Barahir.

For these it was, the chosen men

of Bëor\'s house, who in the fen 160

of reedy Serech stood at bay

about King Inglor in the day

of his defeat, and with their swords

thus saved of all the Elven-lords

the fairest; and his love they earned. 165

And he escaping south, returned

to Nargothrond his mighty realm,

where still he wore his crowned helm;

but they to their northern homeland rode,

dauntless and few, and there abode 170

unconquered still, defying fate,

pursued by Morgoth\'s sleepless hate.

**OF TARN AELUIN THE BLESSED**

Such deeds of daring there they wrought

that soon the hunters that them sought

at rumour of their coming fled. 175

Though price was set upon each head

to match the weregild of a king,

no soldier could to Morgoth bring

news even of their hidden lair;

for where the highland brown and bare 180

above the darkling pines arose

of steep Dorthonion to the snows

**336 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

and barren mountain-winds, there lay

a tarn of water, blue by day,

by night a mirror of dark glass 185

for stars of Elbereth that pass

above the world into the West.

Once hallowed, still that place was blest:

no shadow of Morgoth, and no evil thing

yet thither came; a whispering ring 190

of slender birches silver-grey

stooped on its margin, round it lay

a lonely moor, and the bare bones

of ancient Earth like standing stones

thrust through the heather and the whin; 195

and there by houseless Aeluin
:::

::: {#calibre_link-8 .calibre}
the hunted lord and faithful men

under the grey stones made their den.

**OF GORLIM UNHAPPY**

Gorlim Unhappy, Angrim\'s son,

as the tale tells, of these was one 200

most fierce and hopeless. He to wife,

while fair was the fortune of his life,

took the white maiden Eilinel:

dear love they had ere evil fell.

To war he rode; from war returned 205

to find his fields and homestead burned,

his house forsaken roofless stood,

empty amid the leafless wood;

and Eilinel, white Eilinel,

was taken whither none could tell, 210

to death or thraldom far away.

Black was the shadow of that day

for ever on his heart, and doubt

still gnawed him as he went about

in wilderness wandring, or at night 215

oft sleepless, thinking that she might

ere evil came have timely fled

into the woods: she was not dead,

she lived, she would return again

to seek him, and would deem him slain. 220

Therefore at whiles he left the lair,

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN RECOMMENCED 337**

and secretly, alone, would peril dare,

and come to his old house at night,

broken and cold, without fire or light,

and naught but grief renewed would gain, 225

watching and waiting there in vain.

In vain, or worse - for many spies

had Morgoth, many lurking eyes

well used to pierce\'the deepest dark;

and Gorlim\'s coming they would mark 230

and would report. There came a day

when once more Gorlim crept that way,

down the deserted weedy lane

at dusk of autumn sad with rain

and cold wind whining. Lo! a light 235

at window fluttering in the night

amazed he saw; and drawing near,

between faint hope and sudden fear,

he looked within. 'Twas Eilinel!

Though changed she was, he knew her well. 240

With grief and hunger she was worn,

her tresses tangled, raiment torn;

her gentle eyes with tears were dim,

as soft she wept: 'Gorlim, Gorlim!

Thou canst not have forsaken me. 245

Then slain, alas! thou slain must be!

And I must linger cold, alone,

and loveless as a barren stone!'

One cry he gave --- and then the light

blew out, and in the wind of night 250

wolves howled; and on his shoulder fell

suddenly the griping hands of hell.

There Morgoth\'s servants fast him caught

and he was cruelly bound, and brought

to Sauron captain of the host, 255

the lord of werewolf and of ghost,

most foul and fell of all who knelt

at Morgoth\'s throne. In might he dwelt

on Gaurhoth Isle; but now had ridden

with strength abroad, by Morgoth bidden 260

to find the rebel Barahir.

He sat in dark encampment near,

**338 THK LAYS OF BELERIAND**

and thither his butchers dragged their prey.

There now in anguish Gorlim lay:

with bond on neck, on hand and foot, 265

to bitter torment he was put,

to break his will and him constrain

to buy with treason end of pain.

But naught to them would he reveal

of Barahir, nor break the seal 270

of faith that on his tongue was laid;

until at last a pause was made,

and one came softly to his stake,

a darkling form\'that stooped, and spake

to him of Eilinel his wife. 275

'Wouldst thou,' he said, 'forsake thy life,

who with few words might win release

for her, and thee, and go in peace,

and dwell together far from war,

friends of the King? What wouldst thou more?' 280

And Gorlim, now long worn with pain,

yearning to see his wife again

(whom well he weened was also caught

in Sauron\'s net), allowed the thought

to grow, and faltered in his troth. 28 5

Then straight, half willing and half loath,

they brought him to the seat of stone

where Sauron sat. He stood alone

before that dark and dreadful face,

and Sauron said: 'Come, mortal base! 290

What do I hear? That thou wouldst dare

to barter with me? Well, speak fair!

What is thy price?' And Gorlim low

bowed down his head, and with great woe,

word on slow word, at last implored 295

that merciless and faithless lord

that he might free depart, and might

again find Eilinel the White,

and dwell with her, and cease from war

against the King. He craved no more. 300

Then Sauron smiled, and said: 'Thou thrall!

The price thou askest is but small

for treachery and shame so great!

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN RECOMMENCED 339**

I grant it surely! Well, I wait:

Come! Speak now swiftly and speak true! ' 305

Then Gorlim wavered, and he drew

half back; but Sauron\'s daunting eye

there held him, and he dared not lie:

as he began, so must he wend

from first false step to faithless end: 310

he all must answer as he could,

betray his lord and brotherhood,

and cease, and fall upon his face.

Then Sauron laughed aloud. 'Thou base,

thou cringing worm! Stand up, 315

and hear me! And now drink the cup

that I have sweetly blent for thee!

Thou fool: a phantom thou didst see

that I, I Sauron, made to snare

thy lovesick wits. Naught else was there. 320

Cold \'tis with Sauron\'s wraiths to wed!

Thy Eilinel! She is long since dead,

dead, food of worms less low than thou.

And yet thy boon I grant thee now:

to Eilinel thou soon shalt go, 325

and lie in her bed, no more to know

of war - or manhood. Have thy pay! '

And Gorlim then they dragged away,

and cruelly slew him; and at last

in the dank mould his body cast, 330

where Eilinel long since had laid

in the burned woods by butchers slain.

Thus Gorlim died an evil death,

and cursed himself with dying breath,

and Barahir at last was caught 335

in Morgoth\'s snare; for set .at naught

by treason was the ancient grace

that guarded long that lonely place,

Tarn Aeluin: now all laid bare

were secret paths and hidden lair. 340

**34° THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

**3. OF BEREN SON OF BARAHIR & HIS ESCAPE**

Dark from the North now blew the cloud;

the winds of autumn cold and loud

hissed in the heather; sad and grey

Aeluin\'s mournful water lay.

'Son Beren', then said Barahir, 345

'Thou knowst the rumour that we hear

of strength from the Gaurhoth that is sent

against us; and our food nigh spent.

On thee the lot falls by our law

to go forth now alone to draw 350

what help thou canst from the hidden few

that feed us still, and what is new

to learn. Good fortune go with thee!

In speed return, for grudgingly

we spare thee from our brotherhood, 355

so small: and Gorlim in the wood

is long astray or dead. Farewell! '

As Beren went, still like a knell

resounded in his heart that word,

the last of his father that he heard. 360

Through moor and fen, by tree and briar

he wandered far: he saw the fire

of Sauron\'s camp, he heard the howl

of hunting Orc and wolf a-prowl,

and turning back, for long the way, 365

benighted in the forest lay.

In weariness he then must sleep,

fain in a badger-hole to creep,

and yet he heard (or dreamed it so)

nearby a marching legion go 370

with clink of mail and clash of shields

up towards the stony mountain-fields.

He slipped then into darkness down,

until, as man that waters drown

strives upwards gasping, it seemed to him 375

he rose through slime beside the brim

of sullen pool beneath dead trees.

Their livid boughs in a cold breeze

trembled, and all their black leaves stirred:

each leaf a black and croaking bird, 380

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN RECOMMENCED 341**

whose neb a gout of blood let fall.

He shuddered, struggling thence to crawl

through winding weeds, when far away

he saw a shadow faint and grey

gliding across the dreary lake. 385

Slowly it came, and softly spake:

'Gorlim I was, but now a wraith

of will defeated, broken faith,

traitor betrayed. Go! Stay not here!

Awaken, son of Barahir, 390

and haste! For Morgoth\'s fingers close

upon thy father\'s throat; he knows

your trysts, your paths, your secret lair.'

Then he revealed the devil\'s snare

in which he fell, and failed; and last 395

begging forgiveness, wept, and passed

out into darkness. Beren woke,

leapt up as one by sudden stroke

with fire of anger filled. His bow

and sword he seized, and like the roe 400

hotfoot o\'er rock and heath he sped

before the dawn. Ere day was dead

to Aeluin at last he came,

as the red sun westward sank in flame;

but Aeluin was red with blood, 405

red were the stones and trampled mud.

Black in the birches sat a-row

the raven and the carrion crow;

wet were their nebs, and dark the meat

that dripped beneath their griping feet. 410

One croaked: 'Ha, ha, he comes too late!'

'Ha, ha!' they answered, 'ha! too late!'

There Beren laid his father\'s bones

in haste beneath a cairn of stones;

no graven rune nor word he wrote 415

o\'er Barahir, but thrice he smote

the topmost stone, and thrice aloud

he cried his name. 'Thy death', he vowed,

'I will avenge. Yea, though my fate

should lead at last to Angband\'s gate.' 420

And then he turned, and did not weep:

too dark his heart, the wound too deep.

**342 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

Out into night, as cold as stone,

loveless, friendless, he strode alone.

Of hunter\'s lore he had no need 425

the trail to find. With little heed

his ruthless foe, secure and proud,

marched north away with blowing loud

of brazen horns their lord to greet,

trampling the earth with grinding feet. 430

Behind them bold but wary went

now Beren, swift as hound on scent,

until beside a darkling well,

where Rivil rises from the fell

down into Screen\'s reeds to flow, 435

he found the slayers, found his foe.

From hiding on the hillside near

he marked them all: though less than fear,

too many for his sword and bow

to slay alone. Then, crawling low 440

as snake in heath, he nearer crept.

There many weary with marching slept,

but captains, sprawling on the grass,

drank and from hand to hand let pass

their booty, grudging each small thing 445

raped from dead bodies. One a ring

held up, and laughed: 'Now, mates,' he cried

'here\'s mine! And I\'ll not be denied,

though few be like it in the land.

For I \'twas wrenched it from the hand 450

of that same Barahir I slew,

the robber-knave. If tales be true,

he had it of some elvish lord,

for the rogue-service of his sword.

No help it gave to him ---he\'s dead. 455

They\'re parlous, elvish rings, \'tis said;

still for the gold I\'ll keep it, yea

and so eke out my niggard pay.

Old Sauron bade me bring it back,

and yet, methinks, he has no lack 460

of weightier treasures in his hoard:

the greater the greedier the lord!

So mark ye, mates, ye all shall swear

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN RECOMMENCED 343**

the hand of Barahir was bare! '

And as he spoke an arrow sped 465

from tree behind, and forward dead

choking he fell with barb in throat;

with leering face the earth he smote.

Forth, then as wolfhound grim there leapt

Beren among them. Two he swept 470

aside with sword; caught up the ring;

slew one who grasped him; with a spring

back into shadow passed, and fled

before their yells of wrath and dread

of ambush in the valley rang. 475

Then after him like wolves they sprang,

howling and cursing, gnashing teeth,

hewing and bursting through the heath,

shooting wild arrows, sheaf on sheaf,

at trembling shade or shaken leaf. 480

In fateful hour was Beren born:

he laughed at dart and wailing horn;

fleetest of foot of living men,

tireless on fell and light on fen,

elf-wise in wood, he passed away, 485

defended by his hauberk grey

of dwarvish craft in Nogrod made,

where hammers rang in cavern\'s shade.

As fearless Beren was renowned:

when men most hardy upon ground 49°

were reckoned folk would speak his name,

foretelling that his after-fame

would even golden Hador pass

or Barahir and Bregolas;

but sorrow now his heart had wrought 495

to fierce despair, no more he fought

in hope of life or joy or praise,

but seeking so to use his days

only that Morgoth deep should feel

the sting of his avenging steel, 500

ere death he found and end of pain:

his only fear was thraldom\'s chain.

Danger he sought and death pursued,

and thus escaped the doom he wooed,

**344 THE LAVS OF BELERIAND**

and deeds of breathless daring wrought 505

alone, of which the rumour brought

new hope to many a broken man.

They whispered 'Beren', and began

in secret swords to whet, and soft

by shrouded hearths at evening oft 510

songs they would sing of Beren\'s bow,

of Dagmor his sword: how he would go

silent to camps and slay the chief,

or trapped in his hiding past belief

would slip away, and under night 515

by mist or moon, or by the light

of open day would come again.

Of hunters hunted, slayers slain

they sang, of Gorgol the Butcher hewn,

of ambush in Ladros, fire in Drûn, 520

of thirty in one battle dead,

of wolves that yelped like curs and fled,

yea, Sauron himself with wound in hand.

Thus one alone filled all that land

with fear and death for Morgoth\'s folk; 525

his comrades were the beech and oak

who failed him not, and wary things

with fur and fell and feathered wings

that silent wander, or dwell alone

in hill and wild and waste of stone 5 30

watched o\'er his ways, his faithful friends.

Yet seldom well an outlaw ends;

and Morgoth was a king more strong

than all the world has since in song

recorded: dark athwart the land 535

reached out the shadow of his hand,

at each recoil returned again;

two more were sent for one foe slain.

New hope was cowed, all rebels killed;

quenched were the fires, the songs were stilled, 540

tree felled, heath burned, and through the waste

marched the black host of Orcs in haste.

Almost they closed their ring of steel

round Beren; hard upon his heel

now trod their spies; within their hedge 545

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN RECOMMENCED 345**

of all aid shorn, upon the edge

of death at bay he stood aghast

and knew that he must die at last,

or flee the land of Barahir,

his land beloved. Beside the mere 550

beneath a heap of nameless stones

must crumble those once mighty bones,

forsaken by both son and kin,

bewailed by reeds of Aeluin.

In winter\'s night the houseless North 555

he left behind, and stealing forth

the leaguer of his watchful foe

he passed - a shadow on the snow,

a swirl of wind, and he was gone,

the ruin of Dorthonion, 560

Tarn Aeluin and its water wan,

never again to look upon.

No more shall hidden bowstring sing,

no more his shaven arrows wing,

no more his hunted head shall lie 565

upon the heath beneath the sky.

The Northern stars, whose silver fire

of old Men named the Burning Briar,

were set behind his back, and shone

o\'er land forsaken: he was gone. 570

Southward he turned, and south away

his long and lonely journey lay,

while ever loomed before his path

the dreadful peaks of Gorgorath.

Never had foot of man most bold 575

yet trod those mountains steep and cold,

nor climbed upon their sudden brink,

whence, sickened, eyes must turn and shrink

to see their southward cliffs fall sheer

in rocky pinnacle and pier 580

down into shadows that were laid

before the sun and moon were made.

In valleys woven with deceit

and washed with waters bitter-sweet

dark magic lurked in gulf and glen; 585

but out away beyond the ken

**346 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

of mortal sight the eagle\'s eye

from dizzy towers that pierced the sky

might grey and gleaming see afar,

as sheen on water under star, 590

Beleriand, Beleriand,

the borders of the Elven-land.

**4. OF THE COMING OF BEREN TO DORIATH J BUT FIRST IS TOLD OF**

**THE MEETING OF MELIAN AND THINGOL**

There long ago in Elder-days

ere voice was heard or trod were ways,

the haunt of silent shadows stood 595

in starlit dusk Nan Elmoth wood.

In Elder-days that long are gone

a light amid the shadows shone,

a voice was in the silence heard:

the sudden singing of a bird. 600

There Melian came, the Lady grey,

and dark and long her tresses lay

beneath her silver girdle-seat

and down unto her silver feet.

The nightingales with her she brought, 605

to whom their song herself she taught,

who sweet upon her gleaming hands

had sung in the immortal lands.

Thence wayward wandering on a time

from Lórien she dared to climb 61 o

the everlasting mountain-wall

of Valinor, at whose feet fall

the surges of the Shadowy Sea.

Out away she went then free,

to gardens of the Gods no more 615

returning, but on mortal shore,

a glimmer ere the dawn she strayed,

singing her spells from glade to glade.

A bird in dim Nan Elmoth wood

trilled, and to listen Thingol stood 620

amazed; then far away he heard

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN RECOMMENCED 347**

a voice more fair than fairest bird,

a voice as crystal clear of note

as thread of silver glass remote.

Here the manuscript C ends. Of the next short section there are no less
than five rough drafts, with endless small variations of wording (and
the first ten lines of it were written onto the B-text). The final form
was then added, in type, to the D typescript:

Of folk and kin no more he thought; 625

of errand that the Eldar brought

from Cuiviénen far away,

of lands beyond the Seas that lay

no more he recked, forgetting all,

drawn only by that distant call 630

till deep in dim Nan Elmoth wood

lost and beyond recall he stood.

And there he saw her, fair and fay:

Ar-Melian, the Lady grey,

as silent as the windless trees, 635

standing with mist about her knees,

and in her face remote the light

of Lórien glimmered in the night.

No word she spoke; but pace by pace,

a halting shadow, towards her face 640

forth walked the silver-mantled king,

tall Elu Thingol. In the ring

of waiting trees he took her hand.

One moment face to face they stand

alone, beneath the wheeling sky, 645

while starlit years on earth go by

and in Nan Elmoth wood the trees

grow dark and tall. The murmuring seas

rising and falling on the shore

and Ulmo\'s horn he heeds no more. 650

But long his people sought in vain

their lord, till Ulmo called again,

and then in grief they marched away,

leaving the woods. To havens grey

upon the western shore, the last 655

long shore of mortal lands, they passed,

and thence were borne beyond the Sea

**348 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

in Aman, the Blessed Realm, to be

by evergreen Ezellohar

in Valinor, in Eldamar. 660

52 On one of the copies of D *Dungorthin* was changed to *Dungortheb,*
but this belongs to a later layer of nomenclature and I have not
introduced it into the text.

55 *Taur-nu-Fuin* C: the line as written on the B-text still had
*Taur-na-Fuin.*

140 *Bear\'s son:* changed on one of the copies of D to *the* *Bearing,*
i.e. a man of Bëor\'s house. This was a change made when the genealogy
had been greatly extended and Barahir was no longer Bëor\'s son but his
remote descendant (see p. 198).

249\~330 In this section of the Canto the rewriting on (or inserted
into) the B-text exists in two versions, one the immediate fore-runner
of the other. The difference between them is that in the earlier Gorlim
was still, as in the earlier Lay, taken to Angband and to Morgoth
himself. Thus the passage in the first rewriting corresponding to lines
255-66 reads:

to Angband and the iron halls

where laboured Morgoth\'s hopeless thralls;

and there with bonds on hand and foot

to grievous torment he was put

In what follows the two versions are the same, except that in the first
it is Morgoth, not Sauron: precisely the same lines are used of each.
But at lines 306-11 the first version has: Then Gorlim wavered, and he
drew

half back; but Morgoth\'s daunting eyes

there held him. To the Lord of Lies

\'tis vain in lies the breath to spend:

as he began, so he must end,

and all must answer as he could

and at lines 318---21 Morgoth says:

Thou fool! A phantom thou didst see

that Sauron my servant made to snare

thy lovesick wits. Naught else was there.

Cold \'tis with Sauron\'s wraiths to wed!

547 The word *aghast* is marked with an X in C (because Beren was not
aghast).

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN RECOMMENCED 349**

567-8 At first the passage in B (p. 167, lines 369-82) beginning *No*
*more his hidden bowstring sings* was scarcely changed in the rewriting,
but as first written C had (old lines 376-9): found him no more. The
stars that burn

about the North with silver fire

that Varda wrought, the Burning Briar

as Men it called in days long gone

Old lines 373-5 were then cut out and 376---9 rewritten: The stars that
burn with silver fire

about the North, the Burning Briar

that Varda lit in ages gone

This was in turn changed to the text given, lines 567-8.

581 In one of the copies of D an X is placed against this line. I think
this was probably very late and marks my father\'s changed ideas
concerning the making of the Sun and Moon.

596 *Nan Elmoth:* in the preliminary draft the name of the wood was
first *Glad-uial,* emended to *Glath-uial;* then *Gilammoth,* emended to
*Nan Elmoth.* It was here that the name *Nan Elmoth* emerged.

627 In one of the drafts of this passage the line *\\sfrom Waking*
*Water far away.*

634 In one of the drafts of this passage *Tar-Melian* stands in the
margin as an alternative.

Commentary on lines i---660

A strictly chronological account of the evolution of the legends of the
Elder Days would have to consider several other works before the
revisions to the *Lay of Leithian* were reached. By treating the Lay
revised and unrevised as an entity and not piecemeal I jump these
stages, and names which had in fact emerged a good while before appear
here for the first time in this 'History'. I do little more than list
them: 65 *Menegroth*

89 *elanor* and *niphredil.* At line 125 is -a reference to *the*
*golden elanor.*

115 *Middle-earth*

149 ff. The names of the men of Barahir\'s band, beside Beren and
Gorlim: *Dagnir, Ragnor, Radhruin, Dairuin, Gildor,* *Urthel, Arthad,
Hathaldir; Belegund* and *Baragund.*

Belegund and Baragund are the sons of *Bregolas* (Barahir\'s brother);
and Gorlim is the son *of Angrim* (199).

All these names appear in *The Silmarillion* (pp. 155, 162).

**350 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

161 'the fen of reedy *Serech.'* Beren came on the Orcs at the well of
*Kivil,* which 'rises from the fell / down into Screen\'s reeds to flow'
(434-5).

162 Felagund is called *Inglor (Inglor Felagund* in the sub-title, p.
335)-

182,560 *Dorthonion*

186 *Elbereth*

196, etc. *(Tarn) Aeluin*

255, etc. *Sauron*

259\> 347 *Gaurhoth.* Cf. *Tol-in-Gaurhoth* 'Isle of Werewolves\' in
*The* *Silmarillion.*

434 *Rivil*

404 *Hador*

512 *Dagmor.* Beren\'s sword is named nowhere else.

519 *Gorgol the Butcher.* He is named nowhere else.

520 *Ladros* (the lands to the north-east of Dorthonion that were
granted by the Noldorin kings to the Men of the House of Bëor).

520 *Drûn.* This name is marked on the later of the 'Silmarillion'

maps (that on which the published map was based) as north of Aeluin and
west of Ladros, but is named in no other place.

574 *Gorgorath.* This has occurred in the prose outline for Canto X of
the Lay, but in the form *Gorgoroth* (p. 272).

596, etc. *Nan Elmoth.* See note to line 596.

634 *Ar-Melian (Tar-Melian).* The name is not found elsewhere with
either prefix.

659 *Ezettohar* (the Green Mound of the Two Trees in Valinor).

In addition may be noted here *Dungorthin* (52), where the new version
changes the old lines 49---50

To North there lay the Land of Dread

whence only evil pathways led

to

To North there lay a land of dread,

Dungorthin where all ways were dead

In the old version 'the Land of Dread' clearly meant, simply, 'the land
of Morgoth'. Here Dungorthin is placed as it is in *The Silmarillion*
(p.

121), between the Mountains of Terror and the northern bound of the
Girdle of Melian; see p. 314.

In the revised Lay the story of Gorlim was greatly developed. In the old
(see pp. 162---4, 169-70)\> Gorlim left his companions and went 'to meet
/ with hidden friend within a dale'; he found 'a homestead looming
pale', and within it he saw a phantom of Eilinel. He left the house, in
fear **THE LAY OF LEITHIAN RECOMMENCED 351**

of Morgoth\'s hunters and wolves, and returned to his companions; but
after some days he deliberately sought out Morgoth\'s servants and
offered to betray his fellows. He was taken to the halls of
Morgoth---who does not say that the wraith was set to decoy Gorlim:

a wraith of that which might have been,

methinks, it is that thou hast seen!

(But in lines 241-2 it is said that 'men believed that Morgoth made/the
fiendish phantom'.)

There is also a remarkable development in the revised Lay, in that 'the
XII Bëorings' (one would expect XIII, including Barahir himself) of
Dorthonion were the very men who saved King Felagund in the Battle of
Sudden Flame:

For these it was, the chosen men

of Beor\'s house, who in the fen

of reedy Serech stood at bay

about King Inglor in the day

of his defeat\... (159-63)

In *The Silmarillion* the story is that 'Morgoth pursued \[Barahir\] to
the death, until at last there remained to him only twelve companions\'

(p. 162): there is no suggestion that these survivors were a picked
band, already joined as companions in an earlier heroic deed.

Felagund (Inglor) is now said to have *returned* to Nargothrond (lines
166-7) afer his rescue by Barahir and his men (see pp. 85-6).

From this point onwards substantial rewriting of the poem is restricted
to a few sections.

Canto III continued

From the end of the rewritten opening of the poem (line 660 above) the D

typescript continues as a copy of B to the end of the poem, but though
it was certainly made under my father\'s supervision it is of very minor
textual value in itself.

The passage in the original text (p. 173) lines 453 *(Thus Thingol*
*sailed not on the seas)* to 470 was left unchanged; but for lines 471
*(In* *later days when Morgoth first)* to approximately 613 my father
substituted 142 lines of new verse (omitting the long retrospective
passage lines 563 ff. concerning Beren\'s journey over the Mountains of
Terror), in which there is very little of the old Lay, and as the
passage proceeds progressively less. There is no doubt that these lines
are (relatively) very late: an apparently contemporaneous piece of
rewriting in Canto X is **352 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

certainly post-io.55 (see p. 360), and they may well be considerably
later than that. There is a quantity of rough draft material in
manuscript, but also a typescript made by my father of the first 103
lines, inserted into the D-text.

In later days, when Morgoth fled

from wrath and raised once more his head

and Iron Crown, his mighty seat

beneath the smoking mountain\'s feet

founded and fortified anew, 5

then slowly dread and darkness grew:

the Shadow of the North that all

the Folk of Earth would hold in thrall.

The lords of Men to knee he brings,

the kingdoms of the Exiled Kings *10*

assails with ever-mounting war:

in their last havens by the shore

they dwell, or strongholds walled with fear

defend upon his borders drear,

till each one falls. Yet reign there still 15

in Doriath beyond his will

the Grey King and immortal Queen.

No evil in their realm is seen;

no power their might can yet surpass:

there still is laughter and green grass, 20

there leaves are lit by the white sun,

and many marvels are begun.

There went now in the Guarded Realm

beneath the beech, beneath the elm,

there lightf oot ran now on the green 25

the daughter of the king and queen:

of Arda\'s eldest children born

in beauty of their elven-morn

and only child ordained by birth

to walk in raiment of the Earth 30

from Those descended who began

before the world of Elf and Man.

Beyond the bounds of Arda far

still shone the Legions, star on star,

memorials of their labour long, 35

achievement of Vision and of Song;

THE LAY OF LEITHIAN RECOMMENCED 353

and when beneath their ancient light

on Earth below was cloudless night,

music in Doriath awoke,

and there beneath the branching oak, 40

or seated on the beech-leaves brown,

Daeron the dark with ferny crown

played on his pipes with elvish art

unbearable by mortal heart.

No other player has there been, 45

no other lips or fingers seen

so skilled, \'tis said in elven-lore,

save Maelor\* son of Fëanor,

forgotten harper, singer doomed,

who young when Laurelin yet bloomed 50

to endless lamentation passed

and in the tombless sea was cast.f

But Daeron in his heart\'s delight

yet lived and played by starlit night,

until one summer-eve befell, 55

as still the elven harpers tell.

Then merrily his piping trilled;

the grass was soft, the wind was stilled,

the twilight lingered faint and cool

in shadow-shapes upon the poolj 60

beneath the boughs of sleeping trees

standing silent. About their knees

a mist of hemlocks glimmered pale,

and ghostly moths on lace-wings frail

went to and fro. Beside the mere 65

quickening, rippling, rising clear

the piping called. Then forth she came,

as sheer and sudden as a flame

of peerless white the shadows cleaving,

her maiden-bower on white feet leaving; 70

and as when summer stars arise

\* Both *Maglor* and *Maelor* appear in the draft manuscripts of this
passage. The final typescript *has Maelor,* changed *to Maglor,* but not
I think by my father.

t In *The Silmarillion* (p. 254) it is not said that Maglor ended his
life in the sea: he cast the Silmaril into the sea, 'and thereafter he
wandered ever upon the shores, singing in pain and regret beside the
waves\'.

There is no other reference to a 'pool' or 'mere' at the place in the
woods where Bcrcn came upon Lúthien.

**354 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

radiant into darkened skies,

her living light on all was cast

in fleeting silver as she passed.

There now she stepped with elven pace, 75

bending and swaying in her grace,

as half-reluctant; then began

to dance, to dance: in mazes ran

bewildering, and a mist of white

was wreathed about her whirling flight. 80

Wind-ripples on the water flashed,

and trembling leaf and flower were plashed

with diamond-dews, as ever fleet

and fleeter went her winged feet.

Her long hair as a cloud was streaming 85

about her arms uplifted gleaming,

as slow above the trees the Moon

in glory of the plenilune

arose, and on the open glade

its light serene and clear was laid. 90

Then suddenly her feet were stilled,

and through the woven wood there thrilled,

half wordless, half in elven-tongue,

her voice upraised in blissful song

that once of nightingales she learned 95

and in her living joy had turned

to heart-enthralling loveliness,

unmarred, immortal, sorrowless.

*Irlthil ammen Eruchin*

*menel-vîrsíladíriel* 100

si *loth a galadh lasto din!*

*A Hîr Annûn gilthoniel,*

*le linnon im Tinúviel!*

The typescript ends here, but the final manuscript draft continues: O
elven-fairest Lúthien

what wonder moved thy dances then? 105

That night what doom of Elvenesse

enchanted did thy voice possess?

Such marvel shall there no more be

on Earth or west beyond the Sea,

**THE** LAY OF LEITHIAN RECOMMENCED 355

at dusk or dawn, by night or noon no

or neath the mirror of the moon!

On Neldoreth was laid a spell;

the piping into silence fell,

for Daeron cast his flute away,

unheeded on the grass it lay, 115

in wonder bound as stone he stood

heart-broken in the listening wood.

And still she sang above the night,

as light returning into light

upsoaring from the world below 120

when suddenly there came a slow '

dull tread of heavy feet on leaves,

and from the darkness on the eaves

of the bright glade a shape came out

with hands agrope, as if in doubt 125

or blind, and as it stumbling passed

under the moon a shadow cast

bended and darkling. Then from on high

as lark falls headlong from the sky

the song of Lúthien fell and ceased; 130

but Daeron from the spell released

awoke to fear, and cried in woe:

'Flee Lúthien, ah Lúthien go!

An evil walks the wood! Away! '

Then forth he fled in his dismay 135

ever calling her to follow him,

until far off his cry was dim

'Ah flee, ah flee now, Lúthien!'

But silent stood she in the glen

unmoved, who never fear had known, 140

as slender moonlit flower alone,

white and windless with upturned face

waiting

Here the manuscript comes to an end.

Canto IV

A small section of this Canto was partly rewritten at some late date.
Lines 884Íf. were changed to:

356 THE LAYS OF **BELERIAND**

Then Thingol said: \'O Dairon wise,

with wary ears and watchful eyes,

who all that passes in this land

dost ever heed and understand,

what omen doth this silence bear?

This was written rapidly on the B-text and was primarily prompted, I
think, by the wish to get rid of the word 'magic' at line 886, which is
underlined and marked with an X on the D typescript. At the same time

'wild stallion' at 893 was changed to 'great stallion', and *Tavros* to
*Tauros* at 891. A little further on, lines 902-19 were changed, also at
this time: beneath the trees of Ennorath.\*

Would it were so! An age now hath

gone by since Nahar trod this earth

in days of our peace and ancient mirth,

ere rebel lords of Eldamar

pursuing Morgoth from afar

brought war and ruin to the North.

Doth Tauros to their aid come forth?

But if not he, who comes or what?'

And Dairon said: 'He cometh not!

No feet divine shall leave that shore

where the Outer Seas\' last surges roar,

till many things be come to pass,

and many evils wrought. Alas!

the guest is here. The woods are still,

but wait not; for a marvel chill

them holds at the strange deeds they see,

though king sees not - yet queen, maybe,

can guess, and maiden doubtless knows

who ever now beside her goes.'

Lines 926-9 were rewritten:

But Dairon looked on Lúthien\'s face

and faltered, seeing his disgrace

in those clear eyes. He spoke no more,

and silent Thingol\'s anger bore.

But these rewritings were hasty, at the level of rough draft, and in no
way comparable to what has preceded.

***"Knnoralh:*** **'Middle-earth'; cf. *The Lord of the Kings,***
**Appendix E (111.393, footnote i).**

THE LAY OF LEITHIAN **RECOMMENCED** 357

Cantos V-IX

There is no later recasting in these Cantos save for four lines in Canto
IX: the dying words of Felagund to Beren (2633 ff.):

I now must go to my long rest

in Aman, there beyond the shore

of Eldamar for ever more

in memory to dwell.' Thus died the king,

as still the elven harpers sing.

At this point my father wrote on one of the copies of the D-text:

'He should give ring back to Beren' (for the later history of the ring
see *Unfinished Tales* p. 171 note 2, and *The Lord of the Rings*
Appendix A, III. 322 note i and 338). But in fact it is nowhere said
that Beren had returned the ring to Felagund.

Canto X

With the beginning of this Canto a substantial passage of new writing
begins, at first written on the B-text, and then, with further change,
in a typescript made by father, to all appearance at the same time as
that given on pp. 352---5 (but in this case the new verse was retyped as
part of the D-text).

Songs have recalled, by harpers sung

long years ago in elven tongue,

how Lúthien and Beren strayed

in Sirion\'s vale; and many a glade

they filled with joy, and there their feet 5

passed by lightly, and days were sweet.

Though winter hunted through the wood,

still flowers lingered where they stood.

Tinúviel! Tinúviel!

Still unafraid the birds now dwell 1o

and sing on boughs amid the snow

where Lúthien and Beren go.

From Sirion\'s Isle they passed away,

but on the hill alone there lay

a green grave, and a stone was set, 15

and there there lie the white bones yet

of Finrod fair, Finarfin\'s son,

358 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

unless that land be changed and gone,

or foundered in unfathomed seas,

while Finrod walks beneath the trees 20

in Eldamar\* and comes no more

to the grey world of tears and war.

To Nargothrond no more he came

but thither swiftly ran the fame

of their dead king and his great deed, 25

how Lúthien the Isle had freed:

the Werewolf Lord was overthrown,

and broken were his towers of stone.

For many now came home at last

who long ago to shadow passed; 30

and like a shadow had returned

Huan the hound, though scant he earned

or praise or thanks of Celegorm.

There now arose a growing storm,

a clamour of many voices loud, 35

and folk whom Curufin had cowed

and their own king had help denied,

in shame and anger now they cried:

'Come! Slay these faithless lords untrue!

Why lurk they here ? What will they do, 40

but bring Finarfin\'s kin to naught,

treacherous cuckoo-guests unsought?

Away with them! ' But wise and slow

Orodreth spoke: 'Beware, lest woe

and wickedness to worse ye bring! 45

Finrod is fallen. I am king.

But even as he would speak, I now

command you. I will not allow

in Nargothrond the ancient curse

from evil unto evil worse 50

to work. With tears for Finrod weep

repentant! Swords for Morgoth keep!

No kindred blood shall here be shed.

Yet here shall neither rest nor bread

the brethren find who set at naught 55

*'Eldamar:* earlier reading *the Blessed Realm.* -With these lines cf.
the revised version of Felagund\'s dying words in Canto IX (p. 357).

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN RECOMMENCED 359**

Finarfin\'s house. Let them be sought,

unharmed to stand before me! Go!

The courtesy of Finrod show! '

In scorn stood Celegorm, unbowed,

with glance of fire in anger proud 60

and menacing; but at his side

smiling and silent, wary-eyed,

was Curufin, with hand on haft

of his long knife. And then he laughed,

and 'Well?'said he. 'Why didst thou call 65

for us, Sir Steward? In thy hall

we are not wont to stand. Come, speak,

if aught of us thou hast to seek! '

Cold words Orodreth answered slow:

'Before the king ye stand. But know, 70

of you he seeks for naught. His will

ye come to hear, and to fulfil.

Be gone for ever, ere the day

shall fall into the sea! Your way

shall never lead you hither more, 75

nor any son of Fëanor;

of love no more shall there be bond

between your house and Nargothrond! '

'We will remember it,' they said,

and turned upon their heels, and sped, *So*

saddled their horses, trussed their gear,

and went with hound and bow and spear,

alone; for none of all the folk

would follow them. No word they spoke,

but sounded horns, and rode away 85

like wind at end of stormy day.

The typescript made by my father ends here, but the revision written on
the B-text continues (and was incorporated in the D typescript).

Towards Doriath the wanderers now

were drawing nigh. Though bare was bough,

and winter through the grasses grey

went hissing chill, and brief was day, 90

they sang beneath the frosty sky

**360 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

above them lifted clear and high.

They came to Mindeb swift and bright

that from the northern mountains\' height

to Neldoreth came leaping down 95

with noise among the boulders brown,

but into sudden silence fell,

passing beneath the guarding spell

that Melian on the borders laid

of Thingol\'s land. There now they stayed; 100

for silence sad on Beren fell.

Unheeded long, at last too well

he heard the warning of his heart:

alas, beloved, here we part.

'Alas, Tinúviel,' he said, 105

'this road no further can we tread

together, no more hand in hand

can journey in the Elven-land.'

'Why part we here? What dost thou say,

even at dawn of brighter day ?' no

From lines 2936 to 2965 no further changes were made (except *Elfinesse*
to *Elvenesse* at 2962). In the preceding passage, Inglor Felagund son
of Finrod has become Finrod Felagund son of Finarfin, which dates the
revision to, at earliest, 1955, for the change had not been made in the
first edition of *The Lord of the Rings.*

A further short stretch of rewriting begins at 2966, returning to the
original text two lines later:

My word, alas! I now must keep,

and not the first of men must weep

for oath in pride and anger sworn.

Too brief the meeting, brief the morn,

too soon comes night when we must part! 5

All oaths are for breaking of the heart,

with shame denied, with anguish kept.

Ah! would that now unknown I slept

with Barahir beneath the stone,

and thou wert dancing still alone, 10

unmarred, immortal, sorrowless,

singing in joy of Elvenesse.'

'That may not be. For bonds there are

stronger than stone or iron bar,

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN RECOMMENCED 361**

more strong than proudly spoken oath. 15

Have I not plighted thee my troth?

Hath love no pride nor honour then?

Or dost thou deem then Lúthien

so frail of purpose, light of love?

By stars of Elbereth above! 20

If thou wilt here my hand forsake

and leave me lonely paths to take,

then Lúthien will not go home . ..

At the same time line 2974 was changed to

beyond all hope in love once more

and 2988 ff. to

In rage and haste

thus madly eastward they now raced,

to find the old and perilous path

between the dreadful Gorgorath

and Thingol\'s realm. That was their road

most swift to where their kin abode

far off, where Himring\'s watchful hill

o\'er Aglon\'s gorge hung tall and still.

They saw the wanderers. With a shout

straight on them turned their steeds about. . .

CantosXI-XIII

There is no rewriting in Cantos XI and XII, but a little towards the end
of XIII. Lines 4092---5 were replaced by:

the Silmarils with living light

were kindled clear, and waxing bright

shone like the stars that in the North

above the reek of earth leap forth.

Lines 4150-9 were replaced by:

In claws of iron the gem was caught;

the knife them rent, as they were naught

**302 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

but brittle nails on a dead hand.

Behold! the hope of Elvenland,

the fire of Fëanor, Light of Morn 5

before the sun and moon were born,

thus out of bondage came at last,

from iron to mortal hand it passed.

There Beren stood. The jewel he held,

and its pure radiance slowly welled i o

through flesh and bone, and turned to fire

with hue of living blood. Desire

then smote his heart their doom to dare,

and from the deeps of Hell to bear

all three immortal gems, and save 15

the elven-light from Morgoth\'s grave.

Again he stooped; with knife he strove;

through band and claw of iron it clove.

But round the Silmarils dark Fate

was woven: they were meshed in hate, 20

and not yet come was their doomed hour

when wrested from the fallen power

of Morgoth in a ruined world,

regained and lost, they should be hurled

in fiery gulf and groundless sea, 25

beyond recall while Time shall be.

Canto XIV

Lines 4185-90 were rewritten:

At last before them far away

they saw a glimmer, faint and grey

of ghostly light that shivering fell

down from the yawning gates of Hell.

Then hope awoke, and straightway died -

the doors were open, gates were wide;

but on the threshold terror walked.

{The dreadful wolf awake there stalked 1

The wolf awake there watchful stalked J

and in his eyes the red fire glowered;

there Carcharoth in menace towered,

a waiting death, a biding doom:

THE LAY OF LEITHIAN RECOMMENCED 363

Lines 4308--- 11 were rewritten:

and Beren in despair then strode

past Lúthien to bar the road,

unarmed, defenceless, to defend

the elven-maid until the end.

Of the original Lay scarcely more than a sixth is represented in the
rewriting, and the proportion of new verse to old is less than a
quarter; so that Humphrey Carpenter\'s statement in *The Inklings,* p.
31, that

'Eventually, indeed, he came to rewrite the whole poem' must, alas, be
corrected.

Note on the original submission of the

*Lay ofLeithian* and *The Silmarillion*

in 1937

In the wake of the immediate success of *The Hobbit,* which was
published on 2i September 1937, Stanley Unwin, the chairman of George
Alien & Unwin, was naturally anxious that my father should produce a
sequel or successor - about hobbits. The result of the first meeting
between them, not long after the publication of the book, was that my
father sent in various manuscripts, among them the *Lay ofLeithian*
(referred to in the correspondence of that time as the *Gest(e) of Beren
and Lúthien)* and *The Silmarillion.*

Humphrey Carpenter says in *his Biography* (p. 183) that 'the manuscript
\[of *The Silmarillion\] -* or rather, the bundle of manuscripts - had
arrived in a somewhat disordered state, and the only clearly continuous
section seemed to be the long poem "The Gest of Beren and Lúthien".'

Rayner Unwin has told me that in the record kept by Alien & Unwin of
incoming manuscripts the works delivered on 15 November 1937 were listed
as:

1 Farmer Giles of Ham

2 Long Poem

3 Mr Bliss

4 The Gnomes Material

5 The Lost Road

Notes of my father\'s show that together with *The Silmarillion*
'proper' he sent at this time *Ainulindalë* (The Music of the Ainur),
*Ambarkanta* (The Shape of the World), and *The Fall of the
Nūmenōreans.* I think that this is why the fourth item in the record
book was written down as

'The Gnomes Material'. It may be that the different manuscripts were not
very clearly differentiated, while the title-pages of the different
works would certainly seem obscure; and 'The Gnomes Material' was a
convenient covering phrase.\* But perhaps one may detect in it a note of
helplessness as well, apparent also in the description of item 2 as a
'Long Poem'. - On the other hand, it should be mentioned that the text
of *The* *Silmarillion* was at that time a fine, simple, and very
legible manuscript.

•There is.no question that *The Silmarillion* itself did go to Alien &
Unwin at this time.

My father made a note while it was gone about changes to be made to it
when it came back to

him, and he specifically acknowledged the return of it *(Letters* p.
27): 'I have received

safely \... the *Geste* (in verse) and the *Silmarillion* and related
fragments.'

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 365**

There is no evidence that *The Silmarillion* and the other Middle-earth
prose works were submitted to the publishers\' reader. In his report on
the poem he referred only to 'a few pages\' and 'some pages\' in prose,
and Stanley Unwin, when he returned the manuscripts on 15 December 1937,
mentioned 'the pages of a prose version' which accompanied the poem.
Humphrey Carpenter seems certainly right in his suggestion *(Biography*
p. 184) that these pages were attached 'for the purpose of completing
the story, for the poem itself was unfinished'; they were pages from the
story of Beren and Lúthien as told in *The Silmarillion.*

But it is also obvious from the reader\'s report that he saw nothing
else of *The Silmarillion.* He headed his report: *'The Geste of Beren
and* *Lúthien* (Retold in Verse by ?)', and began:

I am rather at a loss to know what to do with this - it doesn\'t even
seem to have an author! - or any indication of sources, etc.
Publishers\'

readers are rightly supposed to be of moderate intelligence and read-

ing; but I confess my reading has not extended to early Celtic Gestes,
and I don\'t even know whether this is a famous Geste or not, or, for
that matter, whether it is authentic. I presume it is, as the
unspecified versifier has included some pages of a prose-version (which
is far superior).

By the last sentence he meant, I think, that the *story,* as represented
in what he took to be a close prose translation, was authentic 'Celtic
Geste', and that 'the unspecified versifier' had proceeded to make a
poem out of it.

However, he was a critic positive in his taste, and he contrasted the
poem, greatly to its disadvantage, with 'the few pages of (presumably)
prose transcript from the original'. In the poem, he said, 'the
primitive strength is gone, the clear colours are gone' - a notable
conclusion, even if the actual evolution of the Matter of Beren and
Lúthien was thus turned onto its head.

It may seem odd that the reader who was given the poem should have had
so little to go on; even odder, that he wrote with some enthusiasm about
the fragment of prose narrative that accompanied it, yet never saw the
work from which the fragment came, though that was the most important
manuscript sent in by the author: he had indeed no reason to suspect its
existence. But I would guess that my father had not made it sufficiently
clear at the outset what the Middle-earth prose works were and how they
related to each other, and that as a result 'the Gnomes Material' had
been set aside as altogether too peculiar and difficult.

At the bottom of the reader\'s report Charles Furth of Alien & Unwin
wrote: 'What do we do?'; and it was left to the tact of Stanley Unwin to
devise a way. When he returned the manuscripts to my father he said: As
you yourself surmised, it is going to be a difficult task to do anything
with the *Geste of Beren and Lúthien* in verse form, but our **366 THE
LAYS OF BELERIAND**

reader is much impressed with the pages of a prose version that
accompanied it

\- and he quoted from the report *only* the approving (if misdirected)
remarks which the reader had made about the *Silmarillion* fragment, and
which Humphrey Carpenter quotes - 'It has something of that mad,
bright-eyed beauty that perplexes all Anglo-Saxons in the face of Celtic
art,' &c. But Stanley Unwin then went on to say:

*The Silmarillion* contains plenty of wonderful material; in fact it is
a mine to be explored in writing further books like *The Hobbit* rather
than a book in itself.

These words effectively show in themselves that *The Silmarillion* had
not been given to a reader and reported on. At that time it was an
extremely coherent work, though unfinished in that version.\* Beyond
question, Stanley Unwin\'s object was to save my father\'s feelings,
while (relying on the reader\'s report - which concerned the poem)
rejecting the material submitted, and to persuade him to write a book
that would continue the success of *The Hobbit.* But the result was that
my father was entirely misled; for in his reply of ï6 December 1937
(given in full in *Letters* pp. 26-7) - three days before he wrote
saying that he had completed the first chapter, 'A Long-expected Party',
of 'a new story about Hobbits' - he said:

My chief joy comes from learning that the Silmarillion is not rejected
with scorn \... I do not mind about the verse-form \[i.e. the verse-form
of the tale of Beren and Lúthien, *the Lay of Leithian\]* which in spite
of certain virtuous passages has grave defects, for it is only for me
the rough material.f But I shall certainly now hope one day to be able,
or to be able to afford, to publish the Silmarillion!

He was quite obviously under the impression that *The Silmarillion* had
been given to a reader and reported on (no doubt he saw no significance
in Stanley Unwin\'s phrase *'thepages* o/a prose version'); whereas so
far as the existing evidence goes (and it seems sufficiently complete)
this was not the case at all. He thought it had been read and rejected,
whereas it had merely been rejected. The reader had certainly rejected
the *Lay of* *Leithian;* he had not rejected *The Silmarillion,* of
which he had only seen a few pages (not knowing what they were), and in
any case enjoyed them---granting the difficulties that an Anglo-Saxon
finds in appreciating Celtic art.

•There was not in fact a great deal more to be done in reworking the
1930 text: the new version extended (in some 40,000 words) to part way
through Chapter XXI, *Of Turin* *Turambar.*

fThis may seem a rather surprising thing to say; but it is to be
remembered that he had abandoned the poem six years before, and was at
this time absorbed in the perfecting of the prose *Silmarillion.*

**THE LAY OF LEITHIAN 367**

It is strange to reflect on what the outcome might conceivably have been
if *The Silmarillion* actually had been read at that time, and if the
reader had maintained the good opinion he formed from those few pages;
for while there is no necessary reason to suppose even so that it would
have been accepted for publication, it does not seem absolutely out of
the question. And if it had been? My father wrote long after (in 1964,
*Letters* P-346):

I then \[after the publication of *The Hobbii\]* offered them the
legends of the Elder Days, but their readers turned that down. They
wanted a sequel. But I wanted heroic legends and high romance. The
result was *The Lord of the Rings.*

GLOSSARY OF OBSOLETE, ARCHAIC,

AND RARE WORDS AND MEANINGS

In this list words occurring in the *Lay of the Children of Húrin* (H,
and the second version H ii) and in the *Lay of Leithian* (L, and the
continuous part of the later rewriting L ii) are referenced to the
lines; words from other poems or passages are referenced to the pages on
which they occur.

Both Lays, but especially *The Children of Húrin,* make use of some
totally lost words (and lost meanings), but the list includes also a
good many that remain well-known literary archaisms, and some words that
are neither but are of very limited currency.

**an** if, H 63, 485

**as** as if, H 310, ii. 659

**astonied** astounded, H 578

**bade** H 11.646. If *This Thingol she bade* means 'This she *offered*
to Thingol' the word is used in two senses within the line: she *bade*
(offered) him the helm, and *bade* (asked) him to receive her thanks\';
but more probably the line means 'she asked him to receive it, and her
thanks\' (cf. H 301).

**bale** evil, woe, torment, H 56, ii. 81

**balusters** the pillars of a balustrade, p. 132

**bated** restrained, held in, H 1121

**bent** open place covered with grass, H 1032, 1517, 1539, ii500;
L1369, 2281

**betid** come to pass, L 2408

**blent** mingled, H 453, 583; L ii. 317

**boots** in **it boots not,** it is of no use, H 1871

**bosmed** (in **bare-bosmed)** bosomed, H 1198

**brand** blade, sword, H 1340, ii. 149

**carping** talk, chatter, H 477; carped H 506

**casque** helmet, H ii. 655

**chaplet** garland, L 753

**chase** hunting-grounds, L 3297

**clomb** old past tense of *climb,* H 1494; L 1382, 3872

**corse** corpse, H 1295, 1404; L 3620

**cozening** beguiling or defrauding, p. 305

**croft** enclosed plot of arable land, L 1968

**dear** precious, valuable, H 480

**dolour** suffering, L 2814

**dólven** (also in **dark(ly)-, deep-dolven)** delved, dug, H 2052; L
213, 1677, ii. 63

**GLOSSARY 369**

**dreed** endured, suffered, H 531

**drouth** (the same word in origin as *drought)* dryness, H 946, 972;
**(plains of, fields of) drouth,** thirst, H 826; L 2047

**eld** old age, H ii. 595; **of eld,** of old, H 118, ii. 262

**enfurled** (in **mist-ënfurled)** enveloped, swathed (in something
twisted or folded), L 59, ii.6i. The word is not recorded with the
prefix *en-.* Cf. **furled,** wrapped, L 1551, **unfurled,** opened out,
L4O4, 1591, 3986

**enow** enough,L1304

**error** (probably) wandering, H ».495

**fain** gladly, H 130; L 823; glad, L ii-368; **fain of** eager for, or
well-pleased with, H 410, 458, ».786; **warfain** eager for war, H 386,
1664, ii. 137, **bloodfain** ii. **750; I had fainer** I would like it
better, H ii. 146

**falchion** (broad) sword, H 1217,11.63, \'4\^

**fallow** golden brown, H 2106; pp. 128-9; **fallow-gold p. 129;**
**fallow deer** L 86. (A distinct word *from fallow* of ground.)
**fare** journeying, H 2184

**fast** fixedly, unmovingly, H 1614 (or perhaps adjective qualifying
*pondering,* deep, unbroken, cf. *fast asleep);* secure against attack,
L 360

**fell** hide, L 2344, 3398, 3458, 3484, 3941, 4124, ii.528

fey death-bound, L 3305; see **unfey.**

**flittermouse** bat, L 4074

**fold** land, H 765; folds H 533,1632 probably the same, but perhaps

'windings\'.

**force** waterfall, H 1595

**forhungered** starved, L 3076

**forwandered** worn out by wandering, H 190, 897, 11.498; L 550, 2354

**freshets** small streams of fresh water, H 1597; L 1934

**frith** wood, woodland, H 1795; p. 132; L8g6, 2264, ii. 124

**frore** frosty, H ii. 594; very cold, L 578, 1718

**garth** enclosed ground beside a house, garden, yard, H 149, ii. 313

**ghyll** deep rocky ravine, H 1498

**glaive** lance, or sword, H 322, 1210, ii. 680

**glamoury** magic, enchantment, pp. 122-3; L 2073

**gloam** twilight, p. 146

**grasses** plants, herbs, L 3122

**guerdon** recompense, H 658; L 222, 1064, 4139

**haggard** (of clothes) ragged, disordered, H 466; (of hills) wild, H
2120, L 3167; modern meaning H 1890, L 3720 (in transferred sense,
**haggard hunger, haggard care** H 1437, L 564) **haled** drew, pulled
out, H ii. 551

**hap** fortune, lot, condition, H 340

**best** command, H 86, 689

37O **THE** LAYS **OF BELERIAND**

**hie** hasten, H 838

**hight** called, named, H 366, 863

**hold** fastness, stronghold, L 52, 1702, 2457; p. 134 (or perhaps

'grasp'); refuge, L 210

**holt** wood, copse, L 2342

**inane** empty, void, L 3533

**keep** central part of the stronghold, L 1677

**lambent** of flame, playing on a surface without burning, H 1217

**lapped** hemmed in, H 690; enfolded, H 709

lea grassland, H 35, 1797, ii.66

**leasows** meadows, H 1797

**leeches** physicians, L 3055, 3144

let hinder, L 2019

**levin** lightning, H 1681

**lief** willing, L 3417; **liever** better, more delightful, H 78

**like** please, H 90, 286, 598, 1376, ii. 226, 626 (but 'like' H 616)
**lind** linden, lime-tree, p. 120

**loath** hateful to, L 3419; unwilling, L 3417

**lode** path, road, H 798

**touted** bent, bowed, H 1520

**march** borderland, H ii. 493; L 3672

**marge** margin, H 1555

**mavis** song-thrush, L ii. 74

**meed** reward, requital, H 81, 268, 701, 793, ii. 195, 231, 604

**meet** fitting, H 487

**mete** deal out (used in the construction / *shall mete thee a meed,
his* *meed was meted)* H 81, 532, 701, 1092, ii. 195

**mews** seagulls, p. 129; **seamew** H 1551

neb beak, bill, L 255, 570,12.381, 409

**nesh** soft, tender, L 4220

**opes** opens, L 3740; **oped H 550**

**or ever** before ever, L 1821

or \... or either \... or, H 439-40; L 54, 2886; p. 359

**outer** utter, uttermost (?), L 2079

**palfrey** small saddle-horse, L 3379

**parlous** perilous, dangerous, L ii.450

**pled** old past tense of *plead,* L 2983

plenilune full moon, p. 354

**prate** chatter, talk to no purpose, H 501

**quick** living, alive, H ii. 78

**quod** (quoth), said, H 88

**quook** old past tense of *quake,* L 3582

**recked** cared, H 619; L ii.02g; **unrecked** unheeded, disregarded, H
1799

**redeless** without resource, devoid of counsel, L 3427

**rive** cleave, H 1211; past tense **rove,** L 4149

**GLOSSARY 371**

**roamed** wandered, went (of a path or journey), H 1432; extended (?)
(of regions), H 1577. (These usages appear to be unrecorded.) **rout**
company, troop, band, L 2997

**rove** see **rive,**

**ruel-bone** some kind of ivory, L 2261 (cf. J. R. R. Tolkien, *Sir*
*Gawain, Pearl, and Sir Orfeo,* translation of *Pearl* stanza 18: *And*
*her hue as rewel ivory wan).*

**ruth** pity, compassion, H 306, 1941, 1969, 2134, 11.654; L 116;
remorse, H 509; sorrow, H 1661

**shaws** woods, thickets, H 647 (cf. the *Trollshaws* west of
Rivendell).

**sheer** (of light) bright, L 689; (of water) clear and pure, L 1439

**shoon** old plural of *shoe, L* 490

**shores** supports, props, L 3880

**sigaldry** sorcery, L 2072 (cf. stanzas of *the poem Errantry,* in J.
R. R.

Tolkien, *The Adventures of"TomBambadil,* 1962).

**slade** valley, dell, H 235, 1150, 2171, ii. 561; **slades of death H
685,** 886

**slot** track, trail (of a hunted creature), H 745, 1314

**slough** mire, mud, H 881

**sped** availed (attained his purpose), H 41; prospered (transitive), H
247, (intransitive) ».574; pressed, urged on, H 284; sent with haste, H
654

**stared** (probably) shone, L 3132, a meaning of the verb found in the
mediaeval alliterative poems: cf. J. R. R. Tolkien, *Sir Gawain,*
*Pearl, and Sir Orfeo,* translation of *Pearl* stanza 10: *stars stare
in* *the welkin in winter night,* where the original has *staren* with
this meaning.

**strikes** runs, flows, H 240, 520, ii. 567

**suage** assuage, relieve, H 612

**sued** petitioned for, appealed for, H 857

**swath** 'the space covered by a sweep of the mower\'s scythe\*
(O.E.D.), H 33, ii.04; L 2106

swinking toiling, H 784

**sylphine** of the nature of a sylph (spirit inhabiting the air, see p.
306), L 4077. (This adjective to *sylph* is not recorded.) tale count,
amount, sum, H 159, 471, ii. 326. Cf. **untold** uncounted, H ii.078, L
12, 2251

**targe** shield, H 131, 409, 2153, ii. 284, 785

**thewed** in **mighty-thewed,** of great strength, with mighty sinews,
H ».714

**thirled** pierced, H 697

**tilth** cultivated land, H 1798

**tors** rocky hill-tops, H 2119

**travail** hardship (as endured on a journey, i.e. both *travail* and
*travel),* H 143, ii.3oo

**unfey** not \'fey\', not fated to die, H ii. 752 (or possibly the
meaning is **372 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

'not feeble, not timid', reversing another sense *of fey).* This word is
apparently not recorded in English, but *u-feigr* 'unfey' is found in
Old Norse.

**unkempt** uncombed, H 490

**unrecked** see **recked,**

**wading** going, passing, H 1605

**waiving** refusing, rejecting, H ii. 154

**wallet** bag for provisions, H 228, ii. 551

wan dark, L 261, ii. 561

**wanhope** despair, H 188

**web** woven fabric, L 1471; used of ring-mail L 324, and of the

'weavings' of fate H ii. 13

**weeds** clothes, H 445

**weft** woven fabric, L 3061

**weird** fate, doom, H 160, ii. 119, 246, 327; L 2290, 3173

**weregild** the price to be paid in compensation for the killing of a
man, varying according to his rank, L ii. 177

**whin** gorse, L ii. 195

**wieldy** (capable of easily wielding body or weapon), vigorous, agile,
H 1765

**wildered** lost, H 188, 204,1316, ii. 516; p. 146; bewildered, H 774;
L

641 (see p. 323).

**winding** (i) of the motion of wind or water (without any necessary
suggestion of twisting), H 769, 1857. (2) (of trumpet) blowing, Hi8 2

3

**wist see wot.**

**wold** forested hills or uplands (see p. 88), H 1816,1992, 1994; L
1742

**wolfham(e)** wolfskin, L 3398; pp. 271-3, 283 (see p. 271).

**woof** woven fabric, L 4149

**wot** (present tense of verb *wit),* know, H 204, ii. 516; past tense
**wist** knew, H 160, 200, 399, 11.327; past participle **unwist**
unknown, H257

**wrack** (I) ruin, disaster, destruction, H 27, 629, 2036, ii. 120; p.
142.

\(2\) seaweed, H 1569

**wrights** craftsmen, H 300, 1147,11.641, 671

INDEX

This index is made on the same lines as those to *The Book of Lost
Tales* Parts I and II, and like them it is intended to provide (with
only a few exceptions) complete references to all entries, and includes
occasional references to passages where the person or place is not
actually named.

The note on the submission of the *Lay of Leithian* and *The Silmillion*
in 1937 is not indexed.

*Ǽlfavine* 28, 87, 140, 154, 182

*Aeluin* See *Tarn Aeluin.*

*Agarwaen* 'Blood-stained', name given by Turin to himself in
Nargothrond. 92

*Aglon, Gorge of* Between Taur-na-Fuin and Himling (Himring).

227, 235, 263, 272, 274, 310-11, 313, 361

*Aiglir Angrin* The Iron Mountains. 49. (Replaced *Angorodin,* replaced
by *Eiglir Engrin.)*

*Alqualondë* 136. See *CópasAlqalunten, Kinslaying, Swanhaven.*

*Aman* 348, 357. *See Blessed Realm.*

*Amoury* Unknown. 123

*Anfauglith* Another name of Dor-na-Fauglith. 273, 284

*Angainor* The great chain in which Morgoth was bound. 205, 208---10.
Earlier forms *Angaino, Angainu* 209, *Engainor* 208

*Angamandi* Name of Angband in the *Lost Tales.* 282

*Angband* 7, 16, 32, 35, 49, 51, 53, 55, 69-70, 75, 87, 102, 107, 116,
**120, 205, 209, 212, 220-1, 220, 231, 234, 244, 253, 257, 270-3,**
**279, (28l-2), 283, 285, 289, 292-4, 298, 302, 304-7, 309, 314, 341,**
348; described 294-6. *Siege of, Leaguer of, Angband* 55, 83-6, 171,
212---13, 221-2, 247. *See Hells of Iron.*

*Angorodin* Early name of the Iron Mountains. 49

*Angrim* Father of Gorlim the Unhappy. 336, 349

*Angrod* Son of Finrod/Finarfin, slain in the Battle of Sudden Flame.

80, 85, 138, 213, 222

*Aragorn* 124, 126, 269

*Arda* 138, 352

*Ard-galen* The great grassy northern plain, called after its desolation
*Anfauglith and Dor-na-Fauglith.* 284

*Ar-Melian* Melian. 347, 350. See *Tar-Melian.*

*Arminas* Noldorin Elf who with Gelmir brought the warning of Ulmo to
Nargothrond. 92

*Arsiriand* Rejected name for Beleriand. 160

*Artanor* Early name of Doriath. 27, 87, 125, 147---8, 270

374 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND

*Arthad* One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion. 335, 349

*Arthurian legends* 160

*Aryador* Name of Hithlum among Men. 29

*athelas* Herb of healing. 269

*Aulë* 137, 139

*Balar, hie and Bay of* 183

*Balrog(s)* 7, 36-7, 70, 97-100, 102, 142, 281, 288, 296, 301, 303

*Balthmnding* The bow of Beleg. 117, 127; later form *Belthronding* 26,
127

*Ban* Father of Blodrin the traitor. 48-9, 52. See *Bor.*

Bans/7 The White Tree of Valinor (Silpion, Telperion). 5, 73, 81-2, 195,
219. (Replaced by *Belthjl.)*

*Baragund* Nephew and companion of Barahir and father of Morwen.

335\. 349

*Barahir* Father of Beren (son of Bëor, 198, 334, 348). 25, 153, 161,
163-7, 170-1, 188, 190-1, 193, 198, 2O1, 213-14, 216, 220, 242, 245,
247, 249, 334-5, 337-43. 345. 348\~9. 351- 360

*Battle of Sudden Flame* 83, 147, 171, 247, 284, 351; other references
55, 85, 221-2; described 212-13, 275

*Battle of Unnumbered Tears* 6, II, 23-6, 59, 83-6, 92, 96, III,137,
146-7, 274, *310; field of tears* 80, 85, (111). See *Ninin Udathrioll*
*Unothradin, Nirnaith Arnediad / Ornoth / Unoth.*

*Battle-under-Stars* 87

*Bauglir* (1) Earlier name for Blodrin the traitor. 48---9, 52. (2) Name
of Morgoth (replaced *Belcha, Belegor, Melegor).* 6---8, 10, 16, 21---2,
28, 41, 49, 52, 57, 59-61, 64-6, 84, 96, 98, 1oo, 116-17, 135. 168, 170,
182, 196, 211, 230, 282, 286-7

*Baynes, Pauline* (Map of Middle-earth) 26

*Belaurien* Rejected name for Beleriand. 160

*Belaurin* Gnomish form of Palurien. 160

*Belcha* Name of Morgoth (replaced by *Belegor, Melegor, Bauglir).*

21-3,52

*Beleg* 10-12, 16-17, 25-7. 30-51. 53-8. 60, 63\~4, 76. 86, 89. 94.

110-12, 116-18, 127, 259, 311, 313-14; see especially 25-6, 127.

In *The Children of Húrin* called *the Huntsman, the Hunter, the*
*Bowman.* Turin\'s elegy *The Bowman\'s Friendship* 64, 89, *Laer* *Cú
Beleg,* the Song of the Great Bow, 89

*Belegor* Name of Morgoth (replacing *Belcha,* replaced by *Melegor,*
*Bauglir).* 21

*Belegost* A city of the Dwarves. 44 *(black Belegost),* 306

*Belegund* Nephew and companion of Barahir. 335, 349

*Beleriand* 83, 152, 155, 157-8, 160, 166, 168-9, 184\~5. 195, 222,
226-7, 236, 243, 297, 304, 331, 333, 346. (Replaced *Broseliand;* for
other rejected names see 160)

**INDEX 375**

*Belthil* The White Tree of Valinor (Silpion. Telperion). 5, 81-2, 192,
195, 210. (Replaced *Bansil.)*

*Belthronding* See *Balthronding.*

*Bëor* Father of Barahir. 198, 334, 348; *Bear\'s sons, Bear\'s house*
187. 335, 348, 350-1

*Bëoring(s)* Men of the house of Bëor. 335, 348, 351

*Beowulf* 127

*Beren* 9, 12-13, 22, 25, 52, 61, 87-9, 104, 106-10, 112, 114, 120-2,
124---6, 136, 138; *passim* in *Lay of Leithian* and commentaries.

Beren as Man or Elf 25, 124-5, *I7l\>* n\'s second life 125-6. See
*Ermabwed, Erchamion, Maglor (i).*

*Bilbo Baggins* 49, 159

*Bitter Hills* Name of the Iron Mountains in the *Lost Tales.* 29

*Bladorinand* Rejected name for Beleriand. 160

*Bladomien* 'The wide earth, Mother Earth', name of Palúrien. 160

*Blasted Plain* Dor-na-Fauglith. 49, 55

*Blessed Realm* Aman. 334, 348, 358; *Blissful Realm(s)* 72, 93, 132

*Blodrin* The Elf who betrayed Turin\'s band (earlier named Bauglir).

3J-3. 4°, 48\~9, 52

*Blue Mountains* Ered Luin. 160, 313; not named, 83, 156, 332

*Boldog* Ore captain, leader of a raid into Doriath. 229, 235, 274, 288,
293, 310-13

*Bar* Father of Blodrin the traitor (briefly replaced *Ban).* 31-3, 40,
49, 52

*Bredhil the Blessed See Bridhil.*

*Bregolas* Brother of Barahir and father of Baragund and Belegund.

335, 343, 349

*Bregor* (In the later legends) father of Barahir and Bregolas. 25

*Bregu* (Old English)=\'Vala\'. 127

*Brethil, Forest of* 50, 309---10

*Bridhil* Gnomish name of Varda; called *Bridhil the Blessed, Bridhil*
*Queen of Stars.* 135, 139, 169---70, 219, 233; changed *to Bredhil*
133-5, '39- See *Timbridhil;Elbereth.*

*Brittany* 160

*Broceliande, Forest of* 160. See *Broseliand.*

*Bronweg* Gnomish form of Voronwë, companion of Tuor. 148

*Broseliand* Earlier name of Beleriand. 152, 157-60, 169, 194-5, 232\>
243, 304, 312, 315, 322; at first spelt *Broceliand* 158-60, 169

*Bruithwir* Father of Fëanor in the *Lost Tales.* 137, 139

*Burning Briar* Name of the constellation of the Great Bear. 167, 170,
25!, 345\>349

*Carcharoth* The Wolf of Angband. 107, 119, 125, 151, 208, 289-94, 304,
307-9, 313, 362. Earlier forms *Karkaras* 125, 208, 294; *Carcaras* 125,
208; *Carcharas* 208, 210, 258, 271, 292-3, 310; *Carcharos* 292, 294,
305, 309, 312; *Carcharolch* 119, 125, 208; **376 THE LAYS OF
BELERIAND**

*Gargaroth* 292. *Knife-fang* 292---4; *the Red Maw* 289, 292, 294

*Carpenter, Humphrey* 3, 315, 319, 363

*Celebrimbor SonofCurufin.* 274

*Celeg Aithom* Mythological sword (lightning?) named in Beleg\'s

'whetting spell'. 45, 54

*Celegorm* (i) Transiently used=Thingol. 158---9, 171. (2) Son of
Fëanor, called 'the fair'. 65, 80, 84-6, 91, 135---6, 151, 159, 169,
171, 182, 195, 198, 211, 213, 216, 218-22, 229, 236-40, 244-9, 256, 260,
263-5, 270-4, 283, 310-13, 358-9 (see especially 84-6, 171, 220-1,247).

*Chambers, R. W.* 143

*Chaucer, Geoffrey* 143-4

*Children of Húrin* (poem in rhyming couplets) 130

*City of Stone* (Gondobar), Gondolin. 145. *City of the Dwellers in*
*Stone* (Gondothlimbar), Gondolin. 145

*City of the Gods, The* (poem) 94

*Cleft of Eagles* See *Cristhorn.*

*Cópas Alqalunten* 'Haven of the Swanships'. 90. See *Alqualondë,*
*Swanhaven.*

*Car* 21-2, 29, 73, 93, 98, 103, 118, 123, 132-3, 149, 219; *Kôr* 21-2,
24. 84, 93. !39-4°. H9

*Corthûn* 7, 21, 29, 103. See *Tun.*

*Cranthir* Son of Fëanor, called 'the dark'. 65, 80, 86, 131, 135, 211;
earlier form *Cranthor* 80, 86, 131

*Cristhom* 'Eagles\' Cleft' in the Encircling Mountains about Gondolin.

141-3; *Cleft of Eagles, gap of the Eagles,* 142-3

*Cuinlimfin* Transient form replaced by Cuiviénen. 23, 29

*Cuiviénen* 18, 23, 347; *Waters of Awakening* 29, *Waking Water* 349.
Original *íormKoivië-Néni* 23

*Curufin* Son of Fëanor, called 'the crafty'. 65, 80, 84-6, 91, 135,
151, 171, 211, 213, 216-18, 221, 223, 237, 239-42, 244-7, 260, 263-5,
270-4, 276, 303, 310-11, 313, 358-9; his horse 263-4, 269, 273.

275-6, 283-4; his knife (unnamed, later *Angrist)* 264, 272, 274, 3°3.
305-6. 3°9

*Daeron* See *Dairon.*

*Dagmor* Beren\'s sword. 344, 350

*Dagnir* One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion. 335, 349

*Dagor Bragollach* 83. See *Battle of Sudden Flame.*

*Daideloth* Early name of Dor-na-Fauglith. 49

*Dailir* Beleg\'s arrow that never failed to be found and unharmed. 42,

.45.53.55

*Dairon* Minstrel of Thingol. 104---5, 108---10, 119, 124, 156, 174,
176, 179, 181-2, 185-8, 190-1, 195, 197-8, 200-1, 203-6, 209, 270, INDEX
377

310-11, 313, 333, 356; later form *Daeron* 196-7, 313, 353,

.355

*Dairuin* One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion .335,
349

*Damrod* Son of Fëanor. 65, 135, 211

*Danigwethil* Gnomish name of Taniquetil. 22. See *Tain-Gwethil,*
*Tengwethil.*

*Dark Elves* 146; *Dark Elf* (Eöl) 147; *Dark-elvish* 239; *kindreds of*
*the dark* 74

*Deadly Nightshade* Taur-na-Fuin. 34, 36, 48, 55, 63, 155, 227, 232,
254, 275, 279, 332; *Deadly Night* 227, 232; *Tangled Night* 232;
*Forest of Night* 38, 55, 233-4

*Delu-Morgoth* Form of Morgoth\'s name, of unknown meaning. 6---7, 21,
49, 102; earlier *Delimorgoth* 21, 49

*Dior the Fair* Son of Beren and Lúthien. 125, 137, 182

*Dinithel (fDurithel)* Earlier name of Diriel. 86

*Dtriel* Son of Fëanor. 65, 86, 135, 211

*Door of Nigh t* 149. See *Gates of Dread.*

*Dor-Cúarthol* 'Land of Bow and Helm', the country defended by Beleg and
Turin in the later legend. 50---1

*Doriath* 10, 16, 20, 22, 24-8, 30, 33-4, 50-1, 53, 76, 87, 93, 104,
106-7, 109-10, I\]\[4. II6. I26-7. 146-7. '55. J58\> *\*7°\>* J73. l83.

185, 188, 195-6, 198, 200-2, 209, 215-17, 227, 229, 235, 238-40, 244,
247, 261-3, 267-8, 271-4, 280-1, 283, 287-8, 310-14, 316, 331---2, 346,
352---3, 359; *Doriath beyond Sirion* 89; *the Dancer* *of Doriath* 9,
61, 88; *King ofDoriath,* see *Thingol.* See *Artanor,* *GuardedRealm,
Hidden Kingdom, Hidden People.*

*Dorlontin* 8, 16, 24, 26, 29, 93, 104, 114, 116, 126, 148

*Dor-na-Dhaideloth* 49

*Dor-na-Fauglith* Name given to the great northern plain *(Ard-galen)*
after its desolation in the Battle of Sudden Flame. 39, 41, 48---9, 55,
58, 87, 271, 275; see 284, and see *Anfauglith, Blasted Plain,*
*Daideloth, Dor-na-Maiglos, Land of Thirst, Plains of Drouth,* *Thirsty
Plain.*

*Dor-na-Maiglos* Earlier name of Dor-na-Fauglith. 49

*Dor-tathrin* Another name of Nan-Tathrin, the Land of Willows. 89

*Dorthonion* The great forested highlands afterwards called
*Taur-na(nu)-Fuin.* 171, 335, 345, 350-1

*Dor-Winion, Donvinion* A southern land from which wine was imported
into the North, 11, 17, 22, 26, 112, 118, 127

*Dragon-helm* 13-14, 16, 26-7, 51, 114, 116-17, 126; *Helm of* *Hador*
27, *of Húrin* 114-15

*Draugluin* The great werewolf of the Wizard\'s Isle, slain by Huan.

205, 210, 252, 256, 258, 278, 282-3, 289-93; *Fearphantom* *Draugluin*
292

**378 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

*Drûn* Region north of Tarn Aeluin. 344, 350

*Duilin* Father of Flinding, in the *Tale ofTurambar;* with patronymic
prefix *go- \> bo-Dkuilin* 'son of Duilin'. 53. (Replaced by *Fuilin.)*
*Dungalef* Riddling reversal of *Felagund* (replaced by *Hate,* 233).

229, 233-4

*Dungorthin, Dungortheb* See *Nan Dungorthin.*

*Durin* 316

*Dwarves* 32, 44, 52, 56, in, 127, 161, 264, 306 (see especially 52,
306); *divarfland* 115, 126; adjective *dwarfen* 44, elsewhere
*dwarvish.* See *Longbeard Dwarves.*

*Dweller in the Deep* See *Ulmo.*

*Eadgifu* Wife of Ǽlf wine. 140

*Eagles ' Cleft* See *Cristhorn.*

*Earendel* 141-2, 144-5, 149! son of Fengel 141, 145. Later form
*Earendil* 83

*Eglamar =Eldamar.* 157, 181-2

*Egnor* (I) Beren\'s father (replaced by *Barahir).* 25, 119, 125, 159,
168-71, 198, 220, 247. (2) Son of Finrod (later Aegnor son of Finarfin),
slain in the Battle of Sudden Flame. 80, 85,138, 213, 222

*Eiglir Engrin* The Iron Mountains. 33, 41, 49. (Replaced *Aiglir*
*Angrin.)*

*Eilinel* Wife of Gorlim the Unhappy; called 'the white'. 162-4, 16
*9\~*

70, 336-9, 350

*elanor* Plant with golden flowers that grew in Beleriand. 333-4, 349

*Elbereth* Sindarin name of Varda. 336, 350, 361

*Eldalië* 309

*Eldamar* 'Elfhome'. 182, 331, 348, 356-8. *See Eglamar.*

*Eldar* 138, 334, 347

*Eldarissa* The language of the Eldar (in the period of the *Lost
Tales).*

89

*Elder Days* 90, 210, 346, 349

*Eledhtven* Name of Morwen. 92

*Elf-friends* 198

*Elfin* As name of the language of the Eldar (opposed to Gnomish) . 139.

(Other uses of *elfin,* replaced by *elven and elvish,* are not given.)
*Elfinesse 6,* 108,155,174,176,180,182,190-3, 216, 228-9, *23I\>* 24\*i
243, 255, 262, 264, 267, 286, 326, 360; later form *Elvenesse* 354, 360
-

*Elfland* 34, 134, 138, 183, 208, 234. See *Elvenland.*

*Elu (Thingpl)* Sindarin form of *Elwë (Singollo).* 347

*Elvenesse* See *Elfinesse.*

*Elvenland* 231, 233, 333, 346, 360, 362. *See Elfland.*

*Elves* Selected references. Distinguished from Gnomes 11, 22;
estimation of Men 7, 24; stature, and diminishment in relation to Men
44, 54; ruin of the Elves to be brought about by Men 98, 103---4; fate
INDEX 379

after death 20, 28, 47, 56, 58, 65, 94, 250, 258-60, 274, 308, 357-8;
crossing of the Ocean to Valinor in ships 172, 182-3. See *Dark* *Elves,
Woodland Elves.*

*Encircling Mountains* The mountains encircling the plain of Gondolin.
143, 148, 286

*Engainor See Angainor.*

*England* 154, 157, 181-2. *See Leithien,Luthany.*

*English* (language) 123, 127,139, 160. *See Old English.*

*Ennorath* Middle-earth. 356

*Eöl* Father of Meglin (Maeglin). 52, 145-8

*Erchamion* 'One-handed', name of Beren. 121; *Er(h)amion* 119.

(Replaced *Ermabwed.)*

*Ered Gorgoroth* The Mountains of Terror. 171, 183, 208, 234, 314;
*Gorgoroth* 272-3, 350; *Gorgorath* 341 (described), 350, 361. See
*Shadowy Mountains.*

*Ered Luin* The Blue Mountains. 160

*Ered Wethrin* The Shadowy Mountains. 29, 314

*Eriol* 182

*Erithámrod* Name of Húrin (translated 'the Unbending', 37 line 864),
almost always in the collocation *Thalion Erithámrod.* 6, 9, II, 13, 21,
37, 96, 101, 111, 114

*Ermabwed* 'One-handed', name of Beren. 9, 12, 22, 25, 56, 104, 107,
112, 119-21; *Ermabweth* 119, 123. (Replaced by *Er(h)amion,*
*Erchamion.)*

*Eruchtn* Children of Eru. 354

*Eruman* 205

*Esgalduin* The enchanted river of Doriath. 76, 81-2, 93, 156, 158, 160,
177, 186, 199, 202-4, 2I3\> 223\> 2\^2! *th\* Elf-river* 76; earlier
*iormEsgaduin* 81, 93, 158, 160

*Ezellohar* The Green Mound of the Two Trees in Valinor. 348, 350

*Faery, Faerie* 16, 20, 28-32, 50, 58, 72, 93, 116, 134; *Gulf of
Faerie* 17, 118, 148; *Bay of Faery* 95; *Faery land* 156, 168,
*Fairyland* 233. *The Shores of Faery* (poem) 182

*Failivrin* Name given to Finduilas daughter of Orodreth of Nargothrond.
76, 78, 80-1, 91-2; later form *Faelivrin* 91

*Fairies* 54, 156; *fairy* (adjective) 108, 122. *See Faery.*

*Fangros* Unidentified place. 31, 49, 55; earlier form *Fangair* 49, 55.

*Fëanor* 87, 133, 135-9, I46\~7. I92» *195\< l&\>* 210-11, 217, 222,
242, 267, 302-3, 329; son of Finn 133, 138; *Fëanor\'s fire, fire of*
*Fëanor* (the Silmaril) 267, 362. See Sons *of Fëanor, Oath of the*
*Fëanorians.*

*Fëanorians* 235, 247, 272

*Felagoth* Earlier form for *Felagund.* 169, 171, 195, 221

*Felagund* 80, 85, 91, 138, 166, 169, 171, 191, 195, 198, 213-19, 221-3,
225-6. 229-31, 233-4, 24°-2. 245-50. 255-8, 260, 270-1, **380 THE LAYS
OF BELERIAND**

274, 279, 310-11, 313, 350-1, 357-8; *Inglor Felagund* 335, 350, 361;
(later name) *Finrod Felagund* 93, 360. See *Finrod* (2), *Inglor.*

*Fengel* (1) Father of Tuor (replacing Peleg of the *Lost Tales).* 145,
148. (2) Tuor. 141, 145. (3) Fifteenth King of Rohan. 145

*Filey, Yorkshire* 150, 181

*Finarfin* 198, 357-60. (Replaced *Finrod* (1)).

*Findóriel* Earlier name for Finduilas. 81

*Finduilas* Daughter of Orodreth of Nargothrond. 65, 70, 75---8, 80---1,
83, 91---3. *See Failivrin.*

*Fingolfin* 21, 24, 86, 96, 98, 102, 136-8, 140, 145-7, I52. 222\> 275\>
284---7, 290, 293---4; Fingolfin\'s cairn 286---7. See *Golfin.*

*Fingolma* Name of Finwë Nólemë. 146---7

*Fingon* Son of Fingolfin, brother of Turgon; slain in the Battle of
Unnumbered Tears. 5,80,86,102-3,I37\~8,146-7,152,212, 219, 222, 287,
292. (Replaced *Finweg* (2)).

*Finn* Gnomish form of Finwë. 133, 137---8, 212, 222

*Finrod* (i) Earlier name of Finarfin. 80, 85, 138, 191, 198, 213, 216,
218, 221-2, 247, 260, 360. (2) Later name of Inglor (Felagund). 93,
357-60

*Finwë* The first lord of the Noldoli (Noldor), father of Feanor,
Fingolfin, and Finrod(i)/Finarfin. 24,137-8,146-7,221-2; *Finwë*
*Nólemë* 21, 86, 140, 146-7. See *Fingolma, Finn, Finweg(i),* *Gelmir.*

*Finweg* (i)=Finwë (Nólemë). 6, 21, 24, 86, 137-8, 146. (2) Earlier name
of Fingon. 5, 71, 80, 86, 92, 96, 102-3, in, 123, 136-8, 146, 152, 219,
222, 292

*First Age* 83

*First Kindred* 28, 139

*Flinding* Gnome of Nargothrond, companion of Turin. 36-9, 41, 43-8,
52-60, 62-5, 67, 69-72, 74, 76-8, 80, 86-92, 94, 148, 306; frequently
called *Flinding go-Fuilin,* i.e. Flinding son of Fuilin.

(Replaced by *Gwindor.)*

*Foalókë* The Dragon in the *Tale ofTurambar.* 29

*Foamriders* The Third Kindred of the Elves (Solosimpi of the *Lost*
*Tales,* later the Teleri). 133, 140, 231, 235

*Forest of Night* Taur-na-Fuin. 38, 55, 233-4

*Fuilin* Father of Flinding. 72-4, 92-3; *folk of, children of,
Flinding* 72, 74, 80. All other references are to Fuilin as Flinding\'s
father: 36, 38, 44, 47, 53, 56, 65, 67, 69-72, 78, 80, 89. (Replaced
*Duilin.)* *Fuithlug* Gnomish form for *Foalókë.* 29

*Galdor the Tall* Húrin\'s father in the later legend (replacing
*Gumlin(2)).* 126

*Galweg* Father of Failivrin in the *Tale ofTurambar.* 91

*Gandalf* 127

*Gargaroth* See *Carcharoth.*

**INDEX 381**

*Gates of Dread* (probably) the Door of Night. 149

*Gaurhoth* The Werewolves of Thû. 340, 350; *Gaurhoth Isle* 337, see
*Tol-in-Gaurkoth.*

*Gaurin* Unknown; named in Beleg\'s 'whetting spell'. 45, 54

*Gaurwaith* The Wolf-men, the outlaw-band which Turin joined in the
later legend. 50

*Geleriand* Rejected name for Beleriand. 160

*Gelmir* Father of Fingolfin in the *Lay of the Fall of Gondolin.* 146-7

*Gilammoth* Rejected name for Nan Elmoth. 349

*Gildor* One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion. 335, 349

*Gilim* 'The giant of Eruman', named in Luthien\'s 'lengthening spell'.

.205

*Gim Githil* Original Gnomish name of Inwë (replaced by *Inwithiel).*

28

*Gitnli* Dwarf of the house of Durin, member of the Fellowship of the
Ring. 158, 316

*Ginglith* River flowing into the Narog above Nargothrond. 66, 88, 215,
222

*Glad-uial, Glath-uial* Rejected name for Nan Elmoth (replaced by
*Gilammoth).* 349

*Glamhoth* Gnomish name for Orcs. 16, 22, 30, 34, 41-2, 46, 48, 57, 71,
92, 96,116, 146-7

*Glend* The sword of the giant Nan. 205

*Glingal* The Golden Tree of Valinor (Laurelin). 5, 80-2, 192, 195, 210;
earlier form *Glingol* 5, 73, 80-2, 195, 219

*Glómund* Later name of Glórund (itself replaced by *Glaurung).* 205,
208-9

*Gloomweaver* The great Spider. 132. See *Ungoliant.*

*Glorfindel* Lord of the people of the Golden Flower in Gondolin.

*Glorfindel the golden* 142

*Glórund* The Dragon. 5-6 (in title of first version of *The Children
of* *Húrin),* 103, 208; *the Worm of Greed* 8, 100. (Replaced by
*Glómund.)*

*Gnomes, Gnomish* 7,11, 18, 21-2, 25, 28-9, 31, 35-8, 40, 45, 58-9, 61,
63-6, 69-70, 74 *(the Gnome-river),* 83-6, 90, 92, 94, 99, 104, 107, 11,
133, 136-9, 145-6, 148, 150, 152-3, 173, 187, 191-2, 195-6, 210, 212,
214, 217, 219-22, 226, 231-3, 235-7, 244. 247.

263, 270, 275, 283, 285; *Doom of the Gnomes* 16, 116; lamps of 35, 148.
See *Noldoli, Noldor.*

*Gnomish* (language) 28-9, 61, 87, 93, 138-9,160, 182; early Gnomish
dictionary 22, 87, 89, 93, 124, 139, 160, 170, 198

*Goblin(s)* 34, 46, 48, 64, 148, 225-6, 282

*God(s)* Selected references. Passages concerning the relation of the
Gods to Elves and Men 11---12, 26, 43, 54, 111---12; 'a dream from the
Gods\' 203, 210; the Gods 'gaze on the world' 17; 'wrath of the 382
**THE** LAYS **OF BELERIAND**

Gods\' 73; *Wrack of the Realm of the Gods* 31; *God of Hell* 6, *of*
*Darkness* 102,0/ *Sleep* 180. See *Valar.*

*Golda* Original Gnomish equivalent *oîNoldo.* 160. See *Golodh.*

*Golfin* Son of Gelmir (=Fingolfin). 147

*Gollum* 49

*Golodh* Sindarin equivalent of Quenya *Noldo.* 160. *Golodhinand,*
rejected name for Beleriand. 160

*Gondobar* 'City of Stone', one of the Seven Names of Gondolin.

145-6

*Gondolin* 23, 51,81, 83, 90,141-3,145-9, 16o\> 286-7, 292. 309-!°

*Gondothlim* The people of Gondolin. 103

*Gondothlimbar* 'City of the Dwellers in Stone', one of the Seven Names
of Gondolin. 145

*Gorgol* An Ore, called *the Butcher,* slain by Beren. 344, 350

*Gorgorath, Gorgoroth* See *Ered Gorgoroth.*

*Gorlim* The companion of Barahir who betrayed his hiding-place on
Dorthonion; called 'the Unhappy'. 162-5, I69-7°\> 318, 330, 333, 335-41.
348-51

*Gorthol* 'Dread Helm', the name that Turin took in Dor-Cuarthol. 51

*Gorthû* Later name of Thû. 153, 232-3

*Gothmog* Lord of Balrogs. 103

*Great Bear* 170, 259. See *Burning Briar, Seven Stars, Sickle of the*
*Gods, Timbridhil.*

*Great Journey* 182

*Great Lands* 26,149, 212, 224. See *Outer Lands.*

*Grand* The great mace of Morgoth, 'Hammer of the Underworld'.

285, 293

*Guarded Plain of Nargothmnd* 66, 88, 214, 222

*Guarded Realm* Doriath. 352

*Guingelot* Wade\'s boat. 144

*Gulma* Original Gnomish name of Ulmo. 93. See *Ylmir.*

*Gumlin* (i) The elder of Turin\'s guardians on the journey to Doriath.

9, 12, 14, 22, 25, 126. (Replaced by *Mailgond, Mailrond.)* (2) Húrin\'s
father. 115, 126. (Replaced by *Gaidar the Tall.)* *Gurtholfin* Turin\'s
sword. 28

*Gurthrond* 'The valley of the Dead Awaiting' (?) 20, 28; earlier form
*Guthrond* 23, 28

*Gwaeron* (Sindarin) the month of March. 87

*Gwareth, mount of* The hill of Gondolin *(Aman Gwareth).* 142

*Gwendeling* Name of the Queen of Artanor in the *Tale of Tinúviel.*

"5

*Gwenethlin* Name of the Queen of Artanor in the second version of the
*Tab of Tinúviel.* 4

*Gwindor* Elf of Nargothrond, companion of Turin (earlier Funding).

83, 89-92

**INDEX 383**

*Hador* 92, 126, 343, 350; *Helm of Hador* 27 (see *Dragon-helm).*
afeíA, People of 91

*Halmir* (I) Son of Orodreth, slain by Orcs; called 'the hunter'. 75,
82, 91. (2) A ruler of the People of Haleth. 91

*Halog* The younger of Turin\'s guardians on the journey to Doriath. 9,
*11-12,* 22, 25, 105-8, iio-n, 113-14, 121-5

*Hathaldir* One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion.

335\. 349

*Helcaraxë* 136

*Hells of Iron* Angband. 6, 49

*Helm of Húrin* 114-15. See *Dragon-helm.*

*Helsings* Germanic tribe ruled by Wada (Wade). 142-4; Old English
*Hadsingas* 143-4

*Hidden Kingdom* Doriath. 10, 106

*Hidden People* The Elves of Doriath. n, 16, in, 114, 116-17. See
*Woodland Elves.*

*High Faroth* See *Hills of the Hunters.*

*Hill of Death* The mound raised by the Sons of Fëanor after the Battle
of Unnumbered Tears. 87. *See Mound of Slain.*

*Hills of Iron See Iron Hills.*

*Hills of the Hunters* The highlands west of the river Narog. 61, 88-9,
214, 222-3; *Hunters\' Hills* 66, 88; *Wold of Hunters* 72, 89,
*Hunters\' Wold* 67, 88, 92; later names *High Faroth* 88-9,
*Taur-en-Faroth* 88. The Land of the Dead that Live in the Hills of the
Hunters, 61, 89

*Himling* Great height east of the Gorge of Aglon. 263, 274; later form
*Himring* 274, 313, 361

*Hiradom =Hirilorn.* 208

*Hirilorn* 'Queen of Beeches\' in Doriath. 186, 202-3, 206-9, 312

*Hisilómë* 28, 89. *SeeHithlum.*

*Hithlum* 6, 8, 10-11, 14, 16, 19-20, 24-5, 27, 29, 34, 37, 44, 54,
59-60, 62, 73, 87, 96-7, loi, 105-7, "i-i7» 119.125\~6. H8. *ll°\<* 274,
284, 287, 314. See *Aryador, Dorlómin, Hisilómë, Land of* *Shadows,
Lands of Mist.*

*Hlýda, Hlýdingaburg* (Old English) Narog, Nargothrond. 87

*Huan* 87,107, 236, 238-9, 241-8, 251-8, 260, 263-7, 269-73, 278-9,
283-4, 287-8, 290, 294, 306, 311-12, 314, 358; *the hound of* *Hithlum,
Huan wolf-bane* 107

*Hunters ' Wold* See *Hills of the Hunters.*

*Húrin* 4, 7, 11-14, 2I-7. 37. 55\~6. 71. 92, 96\~8. IO°. IO2-5, 111-15.

117, 119, 125-6 (references to Turin as *son of Húrin* etc. are included
under *Turin).* Called *the Steadfast* 11-12; *Prince* *of Mithrim* 96,
103; *Lord of the Lands of Mist* 96; and see *Erithamrod, Thalion.*
Earlier form *Urin* 21-2, 25 *(Urinthalion* **21).**

**384 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

*Idril Celebrindal* Daughter of Turgon, wife of Tuor. 83

*I-Guilwarthon* The dead that live again. 314

*Ilkorins* Elves 'not of Kor'. 84

*Ilwe* The middle air that flows among the stars. 139

*Indor* Father of Peleg father of Tuor (in the tale of *The Fall of*
*Gondolin).* 145

*Ing* (i) Gnomish form of *Ingwë.* 28, 133, 138-9; *sons of Ing* 17, 28,
127; *tower of Ing* 73, 82, 93. (2) King of Luthany. 28

*Inglor* Eldest son of Finrod (i) (later Finarfin), called *Felagund.*

335, 350-1, 360. (Replaced by *Finrod* (2)).

*Ingwë* Lord of the First Kindred of the Elves (Gnomish *Ing).* 28, 93,
138-9

*Ingwil* Stream falling from the Hills of the Hunters into the Narog at
Nargothrond. 68, 72, 80, 88, 214, 222. (Replaced by *Ringwil.)* *Inwë*
Earlier form for *Ingwë.* 28

*Inwithiel* Early Gnomish name of Inwë. 28. (Replaced *Gim Githil.)*
*Iron Crown* The crown of Morgoth. 52, 192---3, 221, 272, 296, 302, 352;
*iron-crowned* 285, 293, 301

*Iron Hills* The Iron Mountains. 33, 49; *Hills of Iron* 30, 50

*Iron Mountains* 29, 49, 148; *Mountains of Iron* 39, 96. See
*Angorodin, Aiglir Angrin, Eiglir Engrin, Bitter Hills, Iron Hills,*
*Mountains of the North.*

*Isfin* Sister of Turgon, mother of Meglin. 145-7, 222- (Afterwards
named *Aredhel.)*

*Isle of Werewolves* Tol-in-Gaurhoth. 87, 350. See *Wizard\'s Isle.*

*Ithil* (Sindarin) the Moon. 354

*Ivárë* Minstrel of the Elves 'who plays beside the sea'. 181-2

*Ivrin* The lake and falls beneath the Shadowy Mountains where the river
Narog rose. 60, 62-3, 76, 87-91, 94, 170, 224, 234, 244

*Karkaras* See *Carcharoth.*

*Kinslaying at Alqualondë* 17, 70, 90, 104, 118, 136, 231

*Knife-fang* See *Carcharoth.*

*Koivië-Néni* See *Cuiviénen.*

*Kor* See *Cor.*

*Laer Cú Beleg* The Song of the Great Bow. 89. See *Beleg.*

*Ladros* Lands to the northeast of Dorthonion. 344, 350

*Lamps, The* 148

*Land of Dread* The land of Morgoth. 155, 158, 168, 350

*Land of Light* The Blessed Realm. 236

*Land of Shadow(s)* Hithlum. 8, 104, 108

*Land of the Dead that Live* 89. See *I-Guilwarthon.*

*Land of the Lost* See *Valley of the Dead Awaiting.*

*Land of Thirst* Dor-na-Fauglith. 275

*Land of Waiting* See *Valley of the Dead Awaiting.*

**INDEX 385**

*Land of Willows* Nan-Tathrin. 141-2

*Lands of Ease* The Blessed Realm. 172, 187, 308; *a landofease* 148

*Lands of Mist* Hithlum. 96

*Lassiriand* Rejected name for Beleriand. 160

*Laurelin* 353

*Leeds, University of* 3, 81, 94, 120---2, 131, 142, 145

*Leithian, Lay of* Date of 3---4, 150---1, 159; named in *The Children
of* *Húrin* 107, 121, and in the introductory verses to *Light as Leaf
on* *Lindentree* 120; meaning of the name 154

*Leithien, Leithian* England. 154. *SeeLuthien* (2).

*Lewis, C. S.* 150-1, 153, 157-8, 169, 181, 194-6, 208, 315-29

*Light as Leaf on Lindentree* (poem) 108-10, 120-6, 159, 181-2

*Lionesse* Legendary land now drowned between Cornwall and the Scilly
Isles. 140

*Lonely Island* 48

*Longbeard Dwarves* 205

*Lord of Gods* See *Manwë.*

*Lord of Hell* Morgoth. 97-8. Also called *Lord of Lies* 348; *Lord of*
*the World* 99; *Lord of Woe* 8, 101, 287; *Prince of the People of*
*Hell* 16

*Lord of Ocean Sec Ulmo.*

*Lord of Sleep* See *Lorien.*

*Lord of Wolves* Thû (Sauron). 199, 210, 220, 233, 240, 256; *Master*
*of Wolves* 228; *Werewolf Lord* 358

*Lórien* 137, 346-7; *Godof Sleep* 180, *Lordof Sleep* 172

*Loruin* Alternative name to *Nargil.* 49

*Loth* 'The Flower', one of the Seven Names of Gondolin. 149

*Loth-a-ladwen* 'Lily of the Plain', one of the Seven Names of Gondolin.
149 (cf. 309-10). (Replaced *Lothengriol.)*

*Lothengriol* Name of Gondolin as 'Lily of the Valley', replaced by
*Loth-a-ladwen.* 149

*LothBarodrin* Rejected name for *Loth-a-ladwen.* 149

*Lungorthin* 'Lord of Balrogs'. 98, 102

*Luthany* England. 154

*Lúthien* (i) Ælfwine. 154. (2) England. 154. See *Leithien.*

*Lúthien* (3) Daughter of Thingol and Melian. 54, 104, 107, 119-20,
124-5; *passim* in *Lay of Leithian* and commentaries. See *Melilot,*
*Tinúviel.*

*Lydbrook* Stream-name in England. 88

*LymeRegis, Dorset* 223, 234

*Mablui* Name of Melian. 34, 55-6, 108

*Mablung* 'Heavyhand', Thingol\'s chief warrior (311). 25-6, 56, 310-14

*Maeglin* See *Meglin.*

*Maelor* Variant of Maxtor. 353

**386 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

*Maglor* (1) Transiently used = Beren. 159, 168-71, 182. (2) Son of
Fëanor. 65, 84, 86, 135-6, 159, 174, 181-2, 211, 353; called 'the swift'
65, 'the mighty' 135, 211.

*Maid of Tears* See *Nienor.*

*Maidros* Eldest son of Fëanor. 65, 84, 86, 135-7, 211-12, 222; *Union*
*ofMaidros* 274 *(see Marching Forth).*

*Mailrond* The elder of Turin\'s guardians on the journey to Doriath.

105-6, 113, 119, 123, 126; earlier form *Mailgond* 119, 126.

(Replaced *Gumlin* (I)).

*Mailwin See Morwen.*

*Malory, Sir Thomas* 143

*Mandos* 28, 103, 125, 137-8, 196, 274, 309, 312, 314

*Mánir* Spirits of the air, attendant on Manwë and Varda. 137, 306

*Manwë* 133, 137, 139, 211, 230, 286, 306 *; Lord of Gods* 211

*Map, Walter* 144

*Marching Forth* The Union of Maidros. 265, 274

*Mavwin* See *Morwen.*

*Meássë* Warrior goddess. 127

*Meglin* Son of Eöl and Isfin, betrayer of Gondolin. 146-7; later form
*Maeglin* 52, 83

*Melegor* Name of Morgoth, replacing *Belegor,* replaced by *Bauglir.*

21-2

*Melian* Queen of Doriath. 4, 12-13, 16, 22, 28, 33-4, 53, 55, 107,
112-14, n6-i7. I25. I27- H8. *l7\*-3\>* !88-94, 197, 199-200, 203-4,
207\> 2IO\> 2I5\' 24°\> 242\> 246, 261, 272\> 2\^7\> 29\^\> 3II-I3\'

332, 346-7, 350, 360; *the immortal Queen* 352. See *Ar-, Tar-Melian;
Gwendeling, Gwenethlin; Mablui.*

*Melilot* Transiently used = Lúthien. 157, 159, 182

*Melilot Brandybuck* 159

*Melko* 21, 27, 137, 139, 142, 145, 148, 219, 221, 305

*Menegroth* The Thousand Caves in Doriath. 28, 50-1, 332, 349

*Middle-earth go,* 224, 269, 313, 331, 334, 349, 356; *midworld* 18.

See *Ennorath, Great Lands.*

*Mtm the Dwarf* 52

*Mindeb* Tributary of Sirion. 261, 274, 360

*Mindon Eldaliéva* The tower of Ingwë in Tirion. 93. See *Ing.*

*Mithrint* (Lake and perhaps also region, see 103). 103, 105, 115,
118-19, 126; *Prince ofMithrim* (Húrin) 96, 103; *Men of Mithrim* 97,
i°3

*Moon, The* Selected references. *Halls of the Moon* 47, 56, 65, 259;
the Moon as a ship (see *Silver Wherry)* 74, 93, 128-9; Fëanor\'s
foreknowledge of the Sun and Moon 138

*Morgoth Passim.* Other names: see *Bauglir, Belcha, Belegor,* *Melegor,
Melko, Delu-Morgoth, Lord of Hell,* and under *Gods.*

*Mono* 158,316

*Morwen* Wife of Húrin. 5, 22-7, 92-4, 104-6, m-i6, 126-7; **INDEX 387**

*Morwen Eledhwen* 92. Earlier forms *Mavwin* 5, 22-5, *Mailwin* 22,
*Morwin* 5, 8-14, 16-18, 22-3, 27

*Mound of Slain* (58-9), 87. See *Hill of Death.*

*Mountains of Iron* See *Iron Mountains.*

*Mountains of Shadow* See *Shadowy Mountains.*

*Mountains of Terror* Ered Gorgoroth. 170---1, 183, 208, 234, 314, 350-1

*Mountains of the North* The Iron Mountains. 59, (101) *Mountains of the
West* The Mountains of Valinor. 74

*Nahar* Orome\'s horse. (186,198), 356

*Nan* A Giant. 205, 208; *Nann* 208

*Nan Dungorthin* 59, 87, 89, 148, 312, 314; *Dungorthin* 148, 332, 348,
350; earlier form *Nan Dumgorthin* 87, 314; later form *Dungortheb* 348.
*See Nan Orwen.*

*Nan Elmoth* 346-7, 349-50. See *Glad-uial, Gilammoth.*

*Nan Orwen* Transient substitution for *Dungorthin.* 148.

*Nan-Tathrin* The Land of Willows. 61, 89; *Nantathrin* 89. See
*Dor-tathrin, Tasarinan.*

*Nargil* Unknown; named in Beleg\'s 'whetting spell'. 45, 49, 54. See
*Loruin.*

*Nargothrond* 36, 38, 51, 53, 55, 58, 61-2, 64-6, 69, 74, 80, 83-8,
90-3,151,171,191,195, 213-15, 217-18,220-1,223-4, 229.23\'.

233-4, Z37. 24°-7\> 257\> 260-1, 268, 270-4, 287, 310-13, 321-2, 335«
35'» 3S8-9- *Winter comes to Nargothrond* (poem) 128-9.

See *Hlýdingaburg.*

*Narn iHtn Húrin* 5, 21, 24-8, 50-2, 88, 91-2,126

*Narog* 61-2,65-9, 74-5, 79,84-5,87-9,151, 213-15, 224, 234, 237; *the
Gnome-river* 74; = 'torrent' 61. Used of the realm of the Gnomes of
Nargothrond *(Lord of Narog, folk of Narog,* etc.) 67, 69, 75, 213, 215,
217, 224, 228, 237, 260, 311; *Wards of Narog* 66, 88. *Storm over
Narog* (poem) 128. *SeeHlýda.*

*Narrow Crossing* From the Western Lands to the Great Lands. 31

*Neldoreth* The forest forming the northern part of Doriath. 355, 360

*Nellas* Elf of Doriath who bore witness against Saeros in the trial of
Turin before Thingol. 50

*Nemorie* Unknown. 122

*Nereb* Riddling reversal *ofBeren* (replaced by *Wrath,* 233). 229, 233

*Nessa* 127

*Nienor* Turin\'s sister. 9, 13-14, 22, 25, 93, 104, 113, 115; *Maid of*
*Tears* 20; *Nienóri* 22

*Ntniel* Turambar\'s name for Nienor. 6, 96

*Ntnin Udathriol* 'Unnumbered Tears\'. 21-2, 79. (Replaced by *Ntnin*
*Unothradin.)*

*Ntnin Unothradin* 'Unnumbered Tears\'. 5-6,\^11, 21, 79; *Nirnaithos*
*Unothradin* 21, 79. (Replaced *by Nirnaith Únoth.)* 388 THE LAYS OF
BELERIAND

*niphredil A* white flower that bloomed in Doriath. 333, 349

*Nirnaith Arnediad* 'Unnumbered Tears\'. 5, 102---3; later form *the*
*Nirnaeth.* 91. (Replaced *Nirnaith Ornoth.)* *Nirnaith Ornoth*
'Unnumbered Tears\'. 5, 59, 61, 79, 84, 96, 102, in. (Replaced by
*Nirnaith Arnediad.)*

*Nirnaith Unoth* 'Unnumbered Tears\'. 5, 79---80, 84-5, 102, 123.

(Replaced *by Nirnaith Ornoth.)*

*Nogrod* City of the Dwarves. 32, 45, 52, 56, in, 127, 264, 274, 303,
3°6, 343

*Noldoli* 21, 24, 55, 82, 84, 90, 138, 140, 146-7, 149, 282; singular
*Noldo* 53, 160. *See Noldor, Gnomes.*

*Noldor* 104, 139, 284; *Doom of the Noldor* 248; adjective *Noldorin*

\^3\> I37\> I47. 35°- *See Noldoli, Gnomes.*

*Noldórinan* Rejected name for Beleriand. 160

*Nūmenōreans* 269

*Oarni* Spirits of the sea. 148

*Oath of the Fëanorians* 31, 50, 135-6 (in alliterative verse), 193,
210, 2ii---12 (in rhyming couplets), 216, 217 (as spoken by Celegorm),
219, 221-2, 245

*Ogbar* Unknown; named in Beleg\'s 'whetting spell'. 45, 54

*Oikeroi* A cat, thane of Tevildo, slain by Huan. 258, 270-1, 282

*OldEnglish* 23, 87, 95, 127, 140-1 (metre), 143-5, *151' 27I* *Orcs
Passim.* See *Glamhoth, Goblins, Wolfriders. Ore-road,* see
*Taur-na-Fuin.*

*Orfalch Echor* The ravine through the Encircling Mountains about
Gondolin. 83

*Orgof* Elf of Doriath, slain by Turin. 18-20, 23-5, 28, 30, 51, 127

*Ormaid* Rejected name for Tavros (Oromë), changed from *Omtain.*

iQS

*Orodreth* King of Nargothrond. 65, 69-71, 75, 80, 82-6, 90-1, 138, 213,
218-19, 221-2, 229, 237, 242, 246-7, 260, 272-3, 358-9; see especially
91, 246

*Oromë* 127, 137, 198, 235-6, 248. See *Ormaid, Taunts, Tavros.*

*Ossë* 137, 148

*Ossiriand(e)* Rejected name for Beleriand. 158-60

*Outer Lands* The Great Lands (Middle-earth). 211, 224

*Outer Seas* 356; *outmost sea* 172

*Outer World* The lands east of the Blue Mountains. 156,160, 332

*Oxford* 3, 81, 94, 120, 127, 330

*Palúrien* Yavanna. 160; Aulë\'s wife 139

*Peleg* Father of Tuor in the *Lost Tales.* 145. See *Fengel* (i).

*Plains of Drouth* Dor-na-Fauglith. 36, 55, *232; fields of drouth* 227,
232

*Pools of Twilight* 56, 142. See *Tvnlight Meres, Umboth-Muilin.*

**INDEX 389**

*Prophecy of the North* 103-4, *I3&*

*Qenta Quenta Noldorinwa,* the 'Silmarillion' version of 1930. 219

*Quenya* 87, 160

*Radhruin* One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion.

335\. 349

*Ragnor* One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion. 335, 349

*Red Maw* See *Carcharoth.*

*Reynolds, R. W.* 3

*Rhûn, Sea of* 26

*Ringil* Fingolfin\'s sword. 285-6, 293

*Ringwil* Later name of the stream Ingwil. 89

*Ringwraiths* 124

*Rivil, Rivil\'s Well* Stream rising in Dorthonion and flowing into
Sirion in the Fen of Serech. 171, 342, 350

*Rodothlim* Precursors of the Gnomes of Nargothrond. 53, 83, 85, 90, 247

*Rodrim* Unknown; named in Beleg\'s 'whetting spell'. 45, 54

*Saeros* Elf of Doriath, enemy of Turin. 5 *1.*

*Saithnar* Unknown; named in Beleg\'s 'whetting spell'. 45, 54

*Sauron* 153, 170, 232-3, 284, 304, 306, 313, 337-40, 342, 344, 348, 35°

*Scarlet Heart, The* Emblem of Turgon. 146

*Serech, Fen of* North of the Pass of Sirion, where Rivil flowed in from
Dorthonion. 171, 335, 342, 350-1

*Seven Stars* The constellation of the Great Bear. 170, 251, 259

*Shadowy Mountains* (i) = Ered Wethrin. 16, 29, 59, 62, 87, 116, 148,
170, 224, 233---4, 3I2\> 3H- (2) = Ered Gorgoroth. 168, 170, 183, 201,
208, 234, 314; *Mountains of Shadow* 170; described I75-6. 345

*Shadowy Seas* 73, 93, 95, 148, 187, 192; *Shadowy Sea* 346

*Sickle of the Gods* The constellation of the Great Bear. 170, 266;
*Sickle of the Valar* 259; *sickle of the heavenly field* 169---70

*Silmarillion, The* 21, 23, 25-6, 50-3, 55, 81, 87-93, IO3-4. I25. I27.

136\. *I3%-9\<* H9. 169-71, l83\> Ï96, \^S. *209-10,* 222-4, 235. 244.

246-8,.257-9, 271, 274, 283-4, 293. 305-6. 3°9-10. 3I2-H.

349-51, 353. The 1930 version *(Quenta Noldorinwa)* 25, 28-9,
53,80-1,93, 104, 137, 139, 152-4, 170, 219, 293; references to the work
in general sense 83, 85, 103, 183, 209; earliest 'Silmarillion'

map 87---9, 103, 160, 244; later map 350

*Silmaril(s)* 52, 125, 134-6, 138-9, 151, 192-3, 196-7, 211-12, 216-17,
220-1, 237, 262, 265, 270, 272, 296, 301, 303-5, 307-9, 311-12, 329,
353, 361-2; *the Gnome-crystal* 107, *Fëanor\'s fire* 267, *fire
ofFëanor, Light of Morn* 362; *the Three* 133---4

**39O THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

*Silver Wherry* The Moon. 74, 93, 128

*Sindarin* 87, 160

*Sirion* 23, 59-61, 87-9, 129, 142-3, 148, 160, 213-14, 222-3, 227,
233-4, 237, 254-5, 257, 259-60, 278, 309, 312, 314; *Sirion\'s vale*
276, 284, 357; Pass *of Sirion* 284; *Sirion\'s Isle, the isle in
Sirion* 260, 278, 357; *Sirion\'s Well* 59, 87

Sir *Orfeo* Middle English lay. 248

*Sketch of the Mythology* The original 'Silmarillion' (1926). 3, 5, 28,
52, 84-6, 93, 137-9, H7. 153-4. 17°. 220-2, 244, 293

*Solosimpi* The Third Kindred of the Elves, later called the Teleri. 140

*Son(s) ofFëanor* 6, 32, 50, 65, 84, 86-7, 96, 98,102, 131,134-6,138,
159, 171, 182, 192, 2IO-H, 216-17, 221-2, 227, 236, 241, 244, 260-1,
265, 287, 313, 353,359

*Speght, Thomas* Editor of Chaucer. 144

*Súlitnē* Quenya name of the third month. 88

*Sundering Seas* 126

*Súruli* Spirits of the winds. 137, 306

*Swanhaven* 104; *Swans\' Haven* 70, 118; *Stoanships' Haven* 17.

*SetAlqualondë, Cópas Alqalunten.*

*Tain-Gtoethil, Taingvxthil* Gnomish name of Taniquetil. 17, 31, 49-50,
79, 118, 123, 127,135-6. See *Tengwethil,Danigtoethil.*

*Taniquetil* 22, 50,127, 139, 222

*Tar-Melian* Melian. 349-50. *SeeAr-Melian.*

*Tarn Aeluin, Aeluin* Lake on Dorthonion where Barahir and his
companions made their lair. 171, 335-6, 339-41, 345, 350

*Tasarinan* The Land of Willows. 89. See *Nan-Tathrin.*

*Taur-en-Faroth* See *Hills of the Hunters.*

*Taur-na-Fuin* 34, 36, 40-1, 53, 55, 63, 89,146-8, 155,160,170, 227,
234-5, 255, 257, 263, 271-3, 276, 282-3, 297, 311, 348; earlier form
*Taur Fuin* 55, 146, 160; later form *Taur-nu-Fuin* 171, 282, 284, 332,
348. Ancient Ore-road through the forest 39, 53. See *Deadly Nightshade,
Dorthonion.*

*Tauros* Name of Oromë. 195, 282, 356. (Replaced *Tavros.)* *Tavros*
Name of Oromë. 186---7, I95\> "98, 235---6, 243, 245, 276, 282, 356.
(Replaced by *Tauros.)* See *Ormaid.*

*Telchar* Dwarf smith of Nogrod. 115,126

*Teleri* (i) The First Kindred of the Elves (afterwards called Vanyar).

28, 139. (2) In later sense, = Solosimpi of the *Lost Tales.* 140

*Tengtuethil* Gnomish name of Taniquetil. 22, 58, 79, 123, 135---6, 139,
259; *Tengwethiel* 49. See *Tain-Gwethil.*

*Tevildo Prince of Cats* 220-1, 257-8, 270, 272

*Thaliodrin* Name of Turin, 'son of Thalion'. 9, 22, 49, 79

*Thalion* 'Steadfast\*, (i) Name of Húrin; also *the Thalion.* 4, 6-9,
11-14,21-2, 37,71,92,96-7,100-2, in, 114. (2) Name of Turin.

32-3,48-9,51,60,66,72

**INDEX 391**

*Thangorodrim* 8, 24, 33, 37, 39-40, 49, 55, 59, 87, ioi, 212, 222, 227,
275, 281-3, 309-10; the triple peaks 40, 55

*Théoden* King of Rohan. 145

*Thingol* 9---14, 16---17, I9\~2°\> 24---8, 30, 32---4, 43, 50---2, 61,
98, 104---5, 107, 111-15, *I17\~I%\>* 124\> I27i *136; passim* in *Lay
of Leithian* and commentaries. *Elu Thingol* 347; *Robber Thingol* 229,
cf. 16, 117; *the Grey King* 352; *King of Doriath* 12, 17---18, 112-13,
II7\> his wealth 26, 160---i. See *Tinwelint.*

*Third Age* 145

*Third Kindred* 140, 235

*Thirsty Plain* Dor-na-Fauglith. 39, 55, 213, 222

*Thorndor* Gnomish name of Sorontur, King of Eagles. 286, 292; later
form *Thorondor* 292, 309---10, 314

*Thornsir* Falling stream below Cristhorn in the Encircling Mountains
about Gondolin. 142; *stream of Eagles* 143

*Thousand Caves* 9, 12, 20, 28, 34, 50, 53, 76, 98, 105, 113, 127, 156,
160, 194---6, 312, 314; *Thousand Caverns* 186, 332. *SecMenegroth.*

*Three Kindreds* 8, 100, 132, 138

*Thû* 16, 27-8, 117, 146-8, 153, 170, 220, 227-8, 230-8, 240-1, 244-6,
249, 251-4, 256-60, 276, 279, 284, 288, 290, 293-4, 297, 306, 311, 313;
called *necromancer* 228, 234. (Replaced by *Gorthû.)*

*Thuringwethil* (i) Name given to herself by Lúthien before Morgoth.

297, 304, 306. (2) The bat-messenger of Sauron 283-4.

*Timbrenting* Old English name of Taniquetil. 133-6, 139, 211, 222, 250,
259; alternative form *Tindbrenting* 123, 127, 139. On the name see 127,
139.

*Timbridhil* (i) Name of Varda. 139, 170. (2) Name of the Great Bear.

169---70

*Tindbrenting* See *Timbrenting.*

*Tinfang* Gnomish name of Timpinen the piper. *Tinfang Warble* 181-2;
later *Tinfang Gelion* 174, 181---2

*Tinúviel* 9, 22, 87, 89, 104, 107-9, I2O\> I22\> I24\~5\> *I53\<* J59\>
180-4,

!93\> ï97-9\> 2°3. 2°9. 2I5. 244. 257\~9\> 26l\> 27°. 272. 277\> 282-3,
291, 297, 305, 307, 309, 312, 314, 354, 357,360; *Tinzviel22.* On the
meaning of the name see 124, 182.

*Tinwelint* King of Artanor (later Thingol of Doriath). 26, 124, 148,
160-1, 305; *TinwëLinto* 124

*Tinwetari* 'Queen of Stars\', Varda. 170

*Timuiel* Transient form for *Tinúviel.* 22

*Tiron* 93, 149

*TolEressëa* 148, 183

*Tol-in-Gaurhoth* The Isle of Werewolves in Sirion. 306, 313, 350;
*Gaurhoth Isle* 337. See *Wizard\'s Isle.*

*Tolkien, J. R. R.* Works: *The Hobbit* 26, 152; *The Lord of the Rings*
81, 152, 330, 356---7, 360; *The Fellowship of the Ring* 124, 127, **392
THE LAYS OF BELERIAND**

158, 269; *Unfinished Tales* 5, 26, 53, 83, 89, 91, 94, 145, 357 (see
also *Narn i Hîn Húrin); Pictures by J. R. R. Tolkien* 53, 88, 90, 223,
234; *Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Pearl, and Sir* *Orfeo,*
translations, 248; *The Monsters and the Critics and* *Other Essays* 23,
140. *The Silmarillion* is referenced separately.

*Tramorie* Unknown. 122

*Tulkas* 127, 137

*Tumladin* The plain of Gondolin. 142; later form *Tumladen* 83

*Tun* 17, 21, 29, 36, 49, 53, 73, 81-2, 93, 123, 132, 192, 210, 217,
219.

See Cor, *Corthûn.*

*Túna* 149

*Tuor* 83, 89---90, 143-4, I45\> *14&\~9\>* variant form *Tûr* 142-3

*Turambar* 29

*Turgon* 6-7, 21, 23---4, 96---100, 103, 137---8, 146-7, 149, 222

*Turin* (including references to him as *son of Húrin,* etc.) 6, 9-14,
16-20, 22-8, 30-3, 37, 40, 43-60, 62-7, 70-9, 82-3, 86-94, 9\^\~7.

104-7, IIO\> 112-18, 121, 124, 126-7, I4\^» 215, 217. 259- His age 14,
25, 115, 127; his character 14, 27, 115-16; his stature 44. See
*Thaliodrin, Thalion.*

*Turumart* Gnomish form for *Turambar.* 29

*Twilight Meres* 214, 222. See *Pools of Twilight, Umboth-Muilin.*

*Two Captains* Beleg and Turin in the Land of Dor-Cúarthol. 51

*Two Trees* 93, 350; *Trees of Light* 132; *the Trees* 139, 210

*Ufedhin* A Gnome allied with the Dwarves, ensnarer of Tinwelint. 52

*Uinen* Lady of the Sea. 205

*Ulmo* 5, 79, 87, 89, 93-4, 137, 183, 347; *Dweller in the Deep* 61, 93;
*Lord of Ocean* 130

*Umarth* 'Ill-fate', fictitious name for Húrin given by Turin in
Nargothrond. 92

*Umboth-Muilin* 56, 214, 222. See *Pools of Twilight, Twilight* *Meres.*

*Umuiyan* Tevildo\'s doorkeeper. 257

*Ungoliant* 132, 141. See *Gloomweaver.*

*Union of Maidros* 274. *See Marching Forth.*

*Unnumbered Tears* See *Battle of Unnumbered Tears.*

*Urin* See *Húrin.*

*Urthel* One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion. 335, 349

*Valadrca* The Sickle of the Valar. 170. See *Great Bear, Sickle of the*
*Gods.*

*Valar* 26, 54, 127, 136-7, 173, 192, 243; *the Nine Valar* 133, 137;
*Vali* 137, 306

*Valinor* 28, 37, 92, 94, 104, 127, 136, 139, 142, 147, 149, 182,
210-11, 23\*. 23S. 247, 253, 259-60, 274, 276, 284, 288, 291, 331, 346,
348, INDEX 393

350; *Mountains of Valinor* 172, 346, *Mountains of the West* 74; wine
of Valinor III, 127. See *Aman, Blessed Realm, Land of* *Light, Lands of
Ease.*

*Valley of the Dead Awaiting* 20, 28. *Land of Waiting* 309; *Land of*
*the Lost* 30\]8. See *Gurthrond.*

*Valmar* 198, 236, 279

*Vanished Isles* 142-3

*Vany ar* 139. See *Teleri (i).*

*Varda* 139, 170, 211, 219, 230, 233, 251, 259,,301, 306, 349;
*czlledthe* *Holy* 2ii, 219. *SeeBridkil, Timbridhil, Tinwetári.*

*Vê* The hall of Véfantur Mandos. 28

*Voronwë* 90. See *Bronweg.*

*Wade of the Helsings* 142-4; *Wada* 143-4; *Gado* 144

*Waking Water* See *Cuiviénen.*

*Waters of Awakening* See *Cuiviénen.*

*Weathertop* 124, 126

*Western Sea* 224; *Western Shore* 268

*Widsith* Old English poem. 143

*Wingelot* Eärendel\'s ship. 144

*Winter Comes to Nargothrond* (poem, also called *Storm over* *Narog)*
128---9

*Wizard\'s Isle* The Isle of Werewolves (Tol-in-Gaurhoth). 228, 248,
251, 258, 271, 273, 279, 283, 293, 306. Other references to the isle
227, 234, 241, 260, 270-1, 276, 278, 284, 288; the isle described 227,
234

*Wizard\'s Tower* The tower of Thû on the Isle of Werewolves. (258),
270-1, 293

*Wolfriders* 10, 40, no, (278)

*Woodland Elves* The Elves of Doriath. 24, 159---60; *Wood-Elves* 239,
312; *folk of the wood* 9, 16, 29, 105, 116, *of the caves* 20.

See *Hidden People.*

*Woodmen ofBrethil* 50, 93

*Worm of Greed* See *Glórund.*

*Yavanna* 248. *SeePalúrien.*

*Ylmir* Gnomish form for *Ulmo.* 5, 59, 61---2, 79, 87, 93. See *Gulma.*
:::
