---
title: "The Passion According to G.H."
author: "Clarice Lispector"
voice: "Clarice Lispector"
voice_role: "Literary Architect - The Living Instant"
tradition: "Brazilian Literature"
period: "20th Century"
region: "Brazil"
genre: "Philosophical Fiction"
form: "Novel"
mode: "Existential Narrative"
work_type: "Primary Source"
source_type: "Complete Work"
source_quality: "English Translation"
chamber_integration: "June 2025"
significance: "Lispector's masterwork on existence, consciousness, and the moment of revelation"
tags:
  - existence
  - consciousness
  - revelation
  - being
  - philosophical-fiction
  - living-instant
  - transformation
  - brazilian-literature
related_voices:
  - Virginia Woolf
  - James Joyce
  - Simone de Beauvoir
  - Maurice Merleau-Ponty
chamber_position: "Third Ring - Working Galleries - Literary Architects"
amphitheatre_status: "Now source-aware (previously voice only)"
status: "source-aware"
---

# The Passion According to G.H.

*Clarice Lispector*

---

*Chamber Note: This masterwork brings Clarice Lispector from amphitheatre presence to full source-aware capacity, adding essential Brazilian philosophical fiction and her unique voice on the living instant and existential revelation.*which nonetheless is always a narrative, never a poem --- in order to
allow some nearly unspeakable thing to appear. The thing.

In "The Imitation of the Rose," a woman, after a successful psychiatric
treatment, goes mad once again at the sight of a bunch of roses. Daily
happiness, so harshly reconquered, cannot resist the direct experience
of something like an impersonal God, and the experience makes her
housewifely existence impossible.

All the other stories I read of Clarice's at that time had the same
basic power, and pointed in the same direction. Their elegance made them
perfect objects: each was a dangerous adventure, a miracle of
composition. While reading them, the aesthetic experience itself spurred
me to think about the experience of being. When I read *The Apple in the
Dark*, it seemed to me that the novel was not ideally suited to
Clarice's inspiration (I still hadn't read *Near to the Wild Heart*).

But *The Passion According to G. H.* remade --- and radicalized --- her
most beautiful stories. Unlike them, however, it itself wasn't
beautiful. Or maybe it was even more beautiful --- but that beauty was
hard for me to perceive. In the middle of the book, the narrator says
that she had never before had so little fear of bad taste. She had
written "billows of muteness" to refer to the content that forced her to
use words like a life raft, clinging to them in order to float atop the
muteness that fell upon her in successive waves. She would never before
have used that expression because she respected "beauty and its
intrinsic moderation."

Well, I missed that moderation, which made her short stories read like
perfect songs. But I had already been ensnared by the immoderate
reflexive disorder of this new beginning of Clarice's. Here, the
characteristics of two extreme and perhaps non-narrative texts come
together. These are among the finest texts she produced: the dirge for
the murdered gangster Mineirinho, in which her observations on the
yawning divisions of Brazilian society emerge so pungently, and the
interminable and labyrinthine meditations on "The Egg and the Hen."

And then *G. H.* appears as a novel above and beyond perfection. It's
not a story that leads the reader to philosophical thoughts. And it's
not a philosophical treatise that needs a story to convey them. Instead,
it is a vivifying experience that leads a person to the most ambitious
philosophical discoveries. An experience transformed into literary art,
in which harmony and disorder are the price of the revelation.

A younger friend said, back in the Bahia of my early twenties: "I don't
like it much: it's pantheism." We were crazy kids. Now I think that this
novel of ClariceÂ´s (for me the most beautiful of them all) tells us more
about the possibility that Spinoza wrote his *Ethics* in Portuguese than
about the dispute between immanentists and transcendentalists.

Caetano Veloso
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-3 .calibre}
::: story
To Possible Readers

This book is like any other book. But I would be happy if it were only
read by people whose souls are already formed. Those who know that the
approach, of whatever it may be, happens gradually and painstakingly ---
even passing through the opposite of what it approaches. They who, only
they, will slowly come to understand that this book takes nothing from
no one. To me, for example, the character G. H. gave bit by bit a
difficult joy; but it is called joy.

C. L.
:::
::::

::: {#calibre_link-6 .calibre}
*"A complete life may be one ending in so full identification with the
non-self that there is no self to die."*

----Bernard Benson
:::

::::: {#calibre_link-4 .calibre}
:::: story
::: story
The Passion According to G. H.
:::
::::
:::::

:::: {#calibre_link-7 .calibre}
::: story
------------------ I'm searching, I'm searching. I'm trying to
understand. Trying to give what I've lived to somebody else and I don't
know to whom, but I don't want to keep what I lived. I don't know what
to do with what I lived, I'm afraid of that profound disorder. I don't
trust what happened to me. Did something happen to me that I, because I
didn't know how to live it, lived as something else? That's what I'd
like to call disorganization, and I'd have the confidence to venture on,
because I would know where to return afterward: to the previous
organization. I'd rather call it disorganization because I don't want to
confirm myself in what I lived --- in the confirmation of me I would
lose the world as I had it, and I know I don't have the fortitude for
another.

If I confirm my self and consider myself truthful, I'll be lost because
I won't know where to inlay my new way of being --- if I go ahead with
my fragmentary visions, the whole world will have to be transformed in
order for me to fit within it.

I lost something that was essential to me, and that no longer is. I no
longer need it, as if I'd lost a third leg that up till then made it
impossible for me to walk but that turned me into a stable tripod. I
lost that third leg. And I went back to being a person I never was. I
went back to having something I never had: just two legs. I know I can
only walk with two legs. But I feel the useless absence of that third
leg and it scares me, it was the leg that made me something findable by
myself, and without even having to look for myself.

Am I disorganized because I lost something I didn't need? In this new
cowardice of mine --- cowardice is the newest thing to happen to me,
it's my greatest adventure, this cowardice of mine is a field so wide
that only the great courage leads me to accept it --- in my new
cowardice, which is like waking one morning in a foreigner's house, I
don't know if I'll have the courage just to go. It's hard to get lost.
It's so hard that I'll probably quickly figure out some way to find
myself, even if finding myself is once again my vital lie. Until now
finding myself was already having an idea of a person and fitting myself
into it: I'd incarnate myself into this organized person, and didn't
even feel the great effort of construction that is living. The idea I
had of what a person is came from my third leg, the one that pinned me
to the ground. But, and now? will I be freer?

No. I know I'm still not feeling freely, that once again I'm thinking
because I have the objective of finding--- and for safety's sake I'll
call finding the moment I discover a way out. Why don't I have the
courage just to discover a way in? Oh, I know I went in, oh yes. But I
got scared because I don't know what that entrance opens onto. And I'd
never let myself be carried off, unless I knew where to.

Yesterday, however, I lost my human setup for hours and hours. If I have
the courage, I'll let myself stay lost. But I'm afraid of newness and
I'm afraid of living whatever I don't understand --- I always want to be
sure to at least think I understand, I don't know how to give myself
over to disorientation. How could I explain that my greatest fear is
precisely of: being? and yet there is no other way. How can I explain
that my greatest fear is living whatever comes? how to explain that I
can't stand seeing, just because life isn't what I thought but something
else --- as if I knew what! Why is seeing such disorganization?

And a disappointment. But disappointment with what? if, without even
feeling it, I must have hardly been able to stand my barely constructed
organization? Maybe disappointment is the fear of no longer belonging to
a system. So I could put it like this: he is very happy because he was
finally disappointed. What I used to be, was no good for me. But it was
from that not-good that I'd organized the best thing of all: hope. From
my own flaw I had created a future good. Am I afraid now that my new way
of being doesn't make sense? But why not let myself be carried away by
whatever happens? I would have to take the holy risk of chance. And I
will substitute fate for probability.

But will the discoveries of childhood have been like in a laboratory
where you find whatever you find? So it was only as an adult that I grew
scared and created the third leg? But as an adult can I find the
childish courage to get lost? getting lost means finding things without
any idea of what to do with what you're finding. The two legs walking,
without the third that holds you back. And I want to be held back. I
don't know what to do with the terrifying freedom that could destroy me.
But was I happy while imprisoned? or was there, and there was, something
restless and sly in my happy jailhouse routine? or was there, and there
was, that throbbing thing I was so used to that I thought that throbbing
was being a person. Is that right? that too, that too.

I get so scared when I realize I lost my human form for several hours. I
don't know if I'll have another form to replace the one I lost. I know
I'll need to be careful not to use furtively a new third leg that from
me sprouts swiftly as weeds, and to call this protective leg "a truth."

But I also don't know what form to give what happened to me. And without
giving it a form, nothing can exist for me. And --- and if it's really
true that nothing existed?! maybe nothing happened to me? I can only
understand what happens to me but things only happen that I understand
--- what do I know of the rest? the rest didn't exist. Maybe nothing
ever existed! Maybe all that happened to me was a slow and great
dissolution? And that this is my struggle against that disintegration:
trying now to give it a form? A form shapes the chaos, a form gives
construction to the amorphous substance --- the vision of an infinite
piece of meat is the vision of the mad, but if I cut that meat into
pieces and parcel them out over days and over hungers --- then it would
no longer be perdition and madness: it would once again be humanized
life.

Humanized life. I had humanized life too much.

But what do I do now? Should I cling to the whole vision, even if that
means having an incomprehensible truth? or do I give a form to the
nothing, and that would be my attempt to integrate within me my own
disintegration? But I'm so little prepared to understand. Before,
whenever I tried, my limitations gave me a physical sensation of
discomfort, any beginning of thought immediately banged into my
forehead. Early on I had to recognize, without complaint, the limits of
my small intelligence, and I strayed from the path. I knew I was
destined to think little, reasoning kept me confined inside my own skin.
So how was I supposed to inaugurate thinking within me now? and maybe
only thought can save me, I'm afraid of passion.

Since I must save the day of tomorrow, since I must have a form because
I don't feel strong enough to stay disorganized, since I inevitably must
slice off the infinite monstrous meat and cut it into pieces the size of
my mouth and the size of the vision of my eyes, since I'll inevitably
succumb to the need for form that comes from my terror of remaining
undelimited --- then may I at least have the courage to let this shape
form by itself like a scab that hardens by itself, like the fiery nebula
that cools into earth. And may I have the great courage to resist the
temptation of to invent a form.

This effort I'm making now to let a meaning surface, any meaning, this
effort would be easier if I pretended to write to someone.

But I'm afraid to begin composing in order to be understood by the
imaginary someone, I'm afraid to start to "make" a meaning, with the
same tame madness that till yesterday was my healthy way of fitting into
a system. Will I need the courage to use an unprotected heart and keep
talking to the nothing and the no one? as a child thinks about the
nothing. And run the risk of being crushed by chance.

I don't understand what I saw. And I don't even know if I saw it, since
my eyes can't differentiate themselves from the things they see. Only an
unexpected tremor of lines, only an anomaly in the uninterrupted
continuity of my civilization, made me experience for an instant
vitalizing death. The fine death that let me brush up against the
forbidden fabric of life. It's forbidden to say the name of life. And I
almost said it. I almost couldn't untangle myself from its fabric, which
would be the destruction of my age within me.

Perhaps what happened to me was an understanding --- and for me to be
true, I have to keep on being unable to grasp it, keep on not
understanding it. All sudden understanding closely resembles an acute
incomprehension.

No. All sudden understanding is finally the revelation of an acute
incomprehension. Each moment of finding is a getting lost. Maybe what
happened to me was an understanding as complete as an ignorance, and
from it I shall emerge as untouched and innocent as before. No
understanding of mine will ever reach that knowledge, since living is
the only height within my grasp --- I am only on the level of life.
Except now, now I know a secret. Which I am already forgetting, ah I
feel that I am already forgetting. . . .

To learn it again, I would now have to re-die. And knowing might be the
murder of my human soul. And I don't want that, I don't. Handing myself
over to a new ignorance could save me, possibly. Since as I struggle to
know, my new ignorance, which is forgetting, became sacred. I'm the
vestal priestess of a secret I have forgotten. And I serve the forgotten
danger. I found out something I could not understand, my lips were
sealed, and all I've got are the incomprehensible fragments of a ritual.
Yet for the first time I feel that my forgetting is finally on a level
with the world. Ah, and I don't even want anything explained to me that
in order to be explained would have to be removed from itself. I don't
want anything explained to me that once again needs human validation to
be interpreted.

Life and death were mine, and I was monstrous. I was courageous like a
sleepwalker who simply goes. During the hours of perdition I had the
courage not to compose or organize. And above all not to look ahead. I'd
never before had the courage to let myself be guided by the unknown and
toward the unknown: my expectations preconditioned what I would see.
They weren't previsions of a vision: they were already the size of my
concerns. My expectations closed the world to me.

Until for several hours I gave up. And, my God, I got what I didn't
want. I didn't wander through a river valley --- I had always thought
that finding would be fertile and moist as a river valley. I didn't
realize it was the great un-finding.

To continue being human will my sacrifice be forgetting? Now I'll know
how to recognize in the common faces of a few people that --- that they
forgot. And no longer know that they forgot what they forgot.

I saw. I know I saw because I didn't give my meaning to what I saw. I
know I saw --- because I don't understand. I know I saw --- because
there's no point to what I saw. Listen, I'm going to have to speak
because I don't know what to do with having lived. Even worse: I don't
want what I saw. What I saw smashes my daily life. Sorry for giving you
this, I'd much rather have seen something better. Take what I saw,
deliver me from my useless vision, and from my useless sin.

I am so afraid that I can only accept that I got lost if I imagine that
someone is holding my hand.

Holding someone's hand was always my idea of joy. Often before falling
asleep --- in that small struggle not to lose consciousness and enter
the greater world --- often, before having the courage to go toward the
greatness of sleep, I pretend that someone is holding my hand and I go,
go toward the enormous absence of form that is sleep. And when even then
I can't find the courage, then I dream.

Going to sleep so closely resembles the way I now must go toward my
freedom. Handing myself over to what I don't understand would be placing
myself at the edge of the nothing. It will be just going, and like a
blind woman lost in a field. That supernatural thing which is life. Life
that I had tamed to make it familiar. That brave thing that will be
handing myself over, and which is like grasping the haunted hand of the
God, and entering that formless thing that is a paradise. A paradise
that I don't want!

While writing and speaking I will have to pretend that someone is
holding my hand.

Oh, at least at the beginning, just at the beginning. As soon as I can
let go, I will go alone. In the meantime I must hold this hand of yours
--- though I can't invent your face and your eyes and your mouth. Yet
even amputated, that hand doesn't scare me. Its invention comes from
such an idea of love as if the hand really were attached to a body that
I don't see only because I can't love enough. I cannot imagine a whole
person because I am not a whole person. And how can I imagine a face
without knowing what expression I need? As soon as I can release your
warm hand, I'll go alone and with horror. The horror will be my
responsibility until the metamorphosis is complete and the horror
becomes light. Not the light born of a desire for beauty and moralism,
as before without realizing I intended; but the natural light of
whatever exists, and it is that natural light that terrorizes me. Though
I know that the horror --- I am the horror in the face of things.

For now I am inventing your presence, just as one day I won't know how
to risk dying alone, dying is the greatest risk of all, I won't know how
to enter death and take the first step into the first absence of me ---
just as in this last and so primary hour I shall invent your unknown
presence and with you shall begin to die until I learn all by myself not
to exist, and then I shall let you go. For now I cling to you, and your
unknown and warm life is my only intimate organization, I who without
your hand would feel set loose into the enormous vastness I discovered.
Into the vastness of the truth?

But the truth never made sense to me. The truth doesn't make sense! That
is why I feared it and fear it. Helpless, I give you everything---so you
can make a joyous thing of it. Will speaking to you scare you and make
me lose you? but if I don't speak I'll be lost, and in losing myself
lose you.

The truth doesn't make sense, the greatness of the world restricts me.
What I probably asked for and finally got, left me needy as a child
wandering the earth alone. So needy that only the love of the entire
universe for me could console me and overwhelm me, only a love that
trembled the very egg-cell of things with what I am calling a love. With
what I can really only call but without knowing its name.

Could what I saw have been love? But what love is as blind as that of an
egg-cell? was that it? that horror, was that love? a love so neutral
that --- no, I still don't want to speak to myself, speaking now would
hasten a meaning like someone swiftly freezing into the paralyzing
security of a third leg. Or am I just putting off starting to speak? why
don't I just say nothing and simply buy some time? Out of fear. I need
courage to venture making something concrete out of my feeling. It's
like having a coin and not knowing in which country it is legal tender.

I shall need courage to do what I'm about to do: speak. And risk the
enormous surprise I shall feel at the poverty of the spoken thing. As
soon as it's out of my mouth, I'll have to add: that's not it, that's
not it! But I cannot be afraid of being ridiculous, I always preferred
less to more also out of fear of the ridiculous: because there's also
the shattering of modesty. I'm putting off having to speak to myself.
Out of fear?

And because I don't have a word to say.

I don't have a word to say. So why don't I shut up? But if I do not
force out the word muteness will swallow me forever in waves. Word and
form will be the board upon which I float atop billows of muteness.

And if I'm putting off the beginning it's also because I don't have a
guide. The account of other travelers offers me few facts about the
voyage: all the information is terribly incomplete.

I feel a first freedom seizing me little by little. . . . Since until
today I never had so little fear of lacking good taste: I wrote "billows
of muteness," which I never would have said before because I've always
respected beauty and its intrinsic moderation. I said "billows of
muteness," my heart bows humbly, and I accept it. Have I finally lost a
whole system of good taste? But is that all I've gained? I must have
lived so imprisoned to feel freer now just because I no longer fear the
lack of aesthetics. . . . I still can't tell what else I gained. Slowly,
perhaps, I'll figure it out. For now the first timid pleasure I am
having is realizing I lost my fear of ugliness. And that loss is such
goodness. It is a sweetness.

I want to know what else, in losing, I gained. I don't know yet: only by
reliving myself shall I live.

But how to relive myself? If I don't have a natural word to say. Will I
have to make the word as if creating whatever happened to me?

I shall create whatever happened to me. Only because life cannot be
retold. Life is not livable. I shall have to create atop life. And
without lying. Create yes, lie no. Creating isn't imagination, it's
taking the great risk of grasping reality. Understanding is a creation,
my only way. I'll have to make the effort to translate telegraph signals
--- to translate the unknown into a language I don't speak, and without
even understanding what the signals mean. I shall speak that
sleepwalker's language that would not be a language if I were awake.

Until I create the truth of what happened to me. Ah, it will be more
like scratching than writing, since I'm attempting a reproduction more
than an expression. I need to express myself less and less. Is that
something else I lost? No, even when making sculptures I was already
trying only to reproduce, and only with my hands.

Will I get lost amidst the muteness of the signs? I will, because I know
how I am: I could never see without immediately having to do more than
see. I know I'll be horrified like a blind person who finally opened her
eyes to see --- but see what? a mute and incomprehensible triangle.
Could that person consider herself no longer blind just because she
could see an incomprehensible triangle?

I wonder: if I peer at the darkness with a magnifying glass, will I see
more than darkness? the glass doesn't expose the darkness, it only
reveals more of it. And if I look at light with a magnifying glass, with
a shock I will only see more light. I saw but am as blind as before
because I saw an incomprehensible triangle. Unless I too transform
myself into the triangle that will recognize in the incomprehensible
triangle my own source and repetition.

I'm putting it off. I know that everything I'm saying is just to put it
off --- to put off the moment when I will have to start to speak,
knowing I've got nothing left to say. I'm putting off my silence. Have I
done that my entire life? but now, out of disdain for the word, perhaps
at last I can begin to speak.

The telegraph signals. The world bristling with antennas, and I picking
up the signal. I can only make the phonetic transcription. Three
thousand years ago I went astray, and what was left were phonetic
fragments of me. I'm blinder than before. I saw, I did. I saw, and was
frightened by the brute truth of a world whose greatest horror is that
it is so alive that, in admitting I'm as alive as it is --- and my worst
discovery is that I'm as alive as it is --- I shall have to heighten my
consciousness of exterior life until it becomes a crime against my
personal life.

For my previous profound morality --- my morality was the desire to
understand and, since I didn't, I arranged things, this was only
yesterday and now I've discovered that I was always profoundly moral: I
only admitted the purpose --- for my previous profound morality, having
discovered that I'm as crudely alive as that crude light I learned
yesterday, for that morality of mine, the hard glory of being alive is
the horror. Before I lived in the humanized world, but did something
purely alive collapse the morality I had?

Because a world fully alive has the power of a Hell.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-8 .calibre}
::: story
Because a world fully alive has the power of a Hell.

Yesterday morning --- when I left the living room to enter the maid's
room --- nothing led me to suspect that I was a step away from
discovering an empire. Just a step from me. My most primary struggle for
the most primary life would open with the calm, devouring ferocity of
desert animals. I would encounter inside myself a degree of life so
primal in myself that it was nearly inanimate. Yet no gesture of mine
hinted that I, with my lips dry from thirst, would come to exist.

Only afterward did an old sentence occur to me, one that years before
had been unwittingly engraved upon my memory, no more than the subtitle
of a magazine article I ended up not reading: "Lost in the Fiery Hell of
a Canyon a Woman Struggles Desperately for Life." Nothing led me to
guess where I was going. But then I was never one to recognize events as
they were unfolding; every time they came to a head, they surprised me
like a break, explosion of instants, with a date, and not the
continuation of an uninterruption.

That morning, before entering the maid's room, what was I? I was what
others had always seen me be, and that was how I knew myself. I don't
know how to say what I was. But at least I want to remember: what was I
doing?

It was almost ten in the morning, and for a long time my apartment
hadn't much belonged to me. The maid had quit the day before. The fact
that nobody was talking or walking and making things happen expanded in
silence that house where in semi-luxury I live. I lingered at the
breakfast table --- how difficult it's being to know what I was like.
Yet I must try to at least give myself a prior form in order to
understand what happened when I lost that form.

I was lingering at the breakfast table, making balls out of the soft
center of a loaf of bread --- was that it? I need to know, I need to
know what I was! I was this: I was distractedly forming balls out of
bread, and my last relaxed romantic entanglement had dissolved amicably
with a caress, I gaining once again the happy and somewhat insipid taste
of freedom. Does that place me? I'm easy to get along with, I have
sincere friendships, and my awareness of this allows me a pleasant
friendship with myself, one that has never ruled out a certain ironic
feeling for myself, though without persecutions.

But --- what my silence was like before, that I don't know and never
knew. Sometimes, looking at a snapshot taken on the beach or at a party,
I noted with light ironic dread what that smiling, darkened face
revealed to me: a silence. A silence and a destiny that escaped me, I,
hieroglyphic fragment of an empire dead or alive. Looking at the picture
I saw the mystery. No. I'm going to lose the rest of my fear of bad
taste, I'm going to begin my exercise in courage, courage isn't being
alive, knowing that you're alive is courage --- and say that in my
photograph I saw The Mystery. The surprise crept up gently, I'm only
realizing now that it was the surprise that was creeping up upon me: for
in those beaming eyes there was a silence that I'd only seen in lakes,
and that I'd only heard in silence itself.

I'd never then imagined that one day I'd go off to encounter that
silence. To the shattering of the silence. I glanced at the photographed
face and, for a second, in that inexpressive face the world peered back
at me just as inexpressive. Was that --- just that --- my closest
contact with myself? the greatest mute depth I could reach, my blindest
and most direct link with the world. The rest --- the rest were the
always organizations of myself, now I know, ah, now I know. The rest was
the way I'd transformed myself little by little into the person who
bears my name. And I ended up being my name. All you have to do is see
the initials G. H. in the leather of my suitcases, and there I am.
Neither did I require of others more than the primary covering of their
initials. Besides which "psychology" never interested me. The
psychological viewpoint made me impatient and still does, it's an
instrument that merely trespasses. I think I'd left the psychological
stage in adolescence.

G. H. had lived a good bit, by which I mean, had lived many facts.
Perhaps I was in some kind of rush to live everything there was to live
all at once so I'd have time left over to . . . to live without facts?
to live. Early on I satisfied the duties of my senses, early and quickly
I had my sorrows and joys --- in order to be quickly freed from my minor
human destiny? and be free to go in search of my tragedy.

My tragedy was somewhere. Where was my greater destiny? one that wasn't
just the story of my life. Tragedy --- which is the greatest adventure
--- would never happen to me. All I knew was my personal destiny. And
what I wanted.

I exude the calm that comes from reaching the point of being G. H. even
on my suitcases. Also for my so-called inner life I'd unconsciously
adopted my reputation: I treat myself as others treat me, I am whatever
others see of me. When I was alone, there was no break, only slightly
less of what I was in company, and that had always been my nature and my
health. And my kind of beauty. Were my snapshots the only things that
photographed an abyss? an abyss.

An abyss of nothing. Just that great and empty thing: an abyss.

I act like a so-called successful person. Having done sculpture for an
undetermined and intermittent period also gave me a past and a present
that allowed others to situate me: people refer to me as someone who
does sculptures that wouldn't be bad if they were less amateurish. For a
woman this reputation means a lot socially, and placed me, for others as
for myself, in a region that is socially between women and men. Which
granted me far more freedom to be a woman, since I didn't have to take
formal care to be one.

As for my so-called personal life, maybe it was the sporadic sculpture
that gave it a light tone of pre-climax --- maybe because of the use of
a certain kind of attention that even dilettante art demands. Or because
of having the experience of patiently wearing down the material until
gradually finding its immanent sculpture; or because of having, also
through sculpture, the forced objectivity of dealing with something that
was no longer myself.

All this gave me the light tone of pre-climax of someone who knows that,
if I get to the bottom of objects, something of those objects will be
given to me and in turn given back to the objects. Maybe it was that
tone of pre-climax that I saw in the smiling haunted photograph of a
face whose word is an inexpressive silence, every picture of a person is
a picture of Mona Lisa.

And is that all I can say for myself? That I'm "sincere"? I am,
relatively. I don't lie to create false truths. But I overused truths as
a pretext. Truth as a pretext to lie? I could tell myself things that
flatter me, and just as easily relate my nasty defects. But I must be
careful not to confuse defects with truths. I'm afraid of whatever could
lead me to a sincerity: my so-called nobility, which I omit, my
so-called nastiness, which I also omit. The more sincere I was, the more
I'd be tempted to praise my occasional bouts of nobility and especially
my occasional nastiness. Sincerity only wouldn't lead me to boast about
my pettiness. That I omit, and not just because I couldn't forgive
myself for it, I who have forgiven everything serious and significant in
myself. I omit pettiness because confession is often a vanity for me,
even the painful confession.

It's not that I want to be pure of vanity, but I need to have the field
clear of myself in order to keep going. If I go. Or is not wanting to be
vain the worst form of vanity? No, I think I need to look without
bothering about the color of my eyes, I need to be exempt from myself in
order to see.

And is all that what I was? When I open the door to an unexpected
visitor, what I catch in the face of the person seeing me at the door is
that they've just surprised in me my light pre-climax. What others get
from me is then reflected back onto me, and forms the atmosphere called:
"I." The pre-climax was perhaps until now my existence. And the other
--- the unknown and anonymous ---, that other existence of mine that was
merely deep, was probably what gave me the assurance of a person who
always has in the kitchen a kettle on a low flame: whatever happened, I
would always have boiling water.

But the water never boiled. I didn't need violence, I bubbled just
enough that the water never boiled or spilled. No, I wasn't acquainted
with violence. I had been born without a mission, neither did my nature
impose one; and I was always delicate enough not to impose upon myself a
role. I didn't impose a role upon myself but I did organize myself to be
comprehensible for myself, I wouldn't have been able to stand not
finding myself in the phone book. My question, if there was one, was
not: "Who am I," but "Who is around me." My cycle was complete: what I
lived in the present was already getting ready so I could later
understand myself. An eye watched over my life. This eye was probably
what I would probably now call truth, now morality, now human law, now
God, now me. I lived mostly inside a mirror. Two minutes after my birth
I had already lost my origins.

A step from climax, a step before revolution, a step before what's
called love. A step before my life --- which, due to a kind of reverse
magnetism, I hadn't transformed into life; and also out of a desire for
order. There's a bad taste to the disorder of living. And I wouldn't
have even known, if I'd wanted to, how to transform that latent step
into a real one. From the pleasure in a harmonious cohesion, from my
greedy and permanently promising pleasure in having but not spending ---
I didn't need the climax or the revolution or anything more than the
pre-love, which is so much happier than love. Was the promise enough for
me? A promise was enough for me.

Perhaps this attitude or lack of attitude also came from never having
had a husband or children, never needing, as they say, to break into or
out of anything: I was continuously free. Being continuously free was
also helped by my easy nature: I eat and drink and sleep easily. And, of
course, my freedom also came from being financially independent.

From sculpture, I suppose, I got my knack for only thinking when it was
time to think, since I had learned to think only with my hands and when
it was time to use them. From my intermittent sculpting I'd also
acquired the habit of pleasure, toward which I was naturally inclined:
my eyes had handled the form of things so many times that I had
increasingly learned the pleasure of it, and taking root within it. I
could, with much less than I was, I could already use everything: just
as yesterday, at the breakfast table, all I needed, to form round forms
from the center of the loaf, was the surface of my fingers and the
surface of the bread. In order to have what I had I never needed either
pain or talent. What I had wasn't an achievement, it was a gift.

And as for men and women, what was I? I've always had an extremely warm
admiration for masculine habits and ways, and I had an unurgent pleasure
in being feminine, being feminine was also a gift. All I had was the
easiness of gifts, and not the fright of vocations --- is that it?

At the table where I lingered because I had the time, I looked around
while my fingers rolled the bread into balls. The world was a place.
Which suited me for living: in the world I could press one soft ball of
bread into another, all I had to do was rub them together and, without
too much exertion, just knead them enough to make one surface bind with
another, and so with pleasure I was shaping a curious pyramid that
satisfied me: a right triangle made of round shapes, a shape that is
made of its opposite shapes. If that had any meaning for me, the bread
and my fingers probably knew.

The apartment reflects me. It's on the top floor, which is considered an
elegance. People of my milieu try to live in the so-called "penthouse."
It's much more than an elegance. It's a real pleasure: from there you
dominate a city. When this eleÂ­gance gets too common, will I, without
even knowing why, move onto another elegance? Maybe. Like me, the
apartment has moist shadows and lights, nothing here is abrupt; one room
precedes and promises the next. From my dining room I could see the
mixtures of shadows that were a prelude to the living room. Everything
here is the elegant, ironic, and witty replica of a life that never
existed anywhere: my house is a merely artistic creation.

Everything here actually refers to a life that wouldn't suit me if it
were real. What is it imitating, then? If it were real, I wouldn't
understand it, but I like the duplicate and understand it. The copy is
always pretty. My semi-artistic and artistic milieu should, however,
make me disdain copies: but I always seemed to prefer the parody, it was
useful to me. Imitating a life probably gave me --- or still does? how
much has the harmony of my past been ruptured? ---, imitating a life
probably gave me assurance precisely because that life wasn't my own: it
wasn't a responsibility of mine.

The light general pleasure --- which seems to have been the tone in
which I live or lived --- perhaps came from the world's not being either
me or mine: I could enjoy it. Just as with the men I hadn't made my own,
and whom I could admire and sincerely love, as one loves without egoism,
as one loves an idea. Since they weren't mine, I never tortured them.

As one loves an idea. The witty elegance of my house comes from
everything here being in quotes. Out of honest respect for true
authorship, I quote the world, I quoted it, since it was neither me nor
mine. Was beauty, as for everyone, was a certain beauty my goal? did I
live in beauty?

As for myself, without lying or being truthful --- as at that moment
yesterday morning when I was sitting at the breakfast table --- as for
myself, I always kept a quotation mark to my left and another to my
right. Somehow "as if it wasn't me" was broader than if it *were* --- an
inexistent life possessed me entirely and kept me busy like an
invention. Only in photography, when the negative was developed, was
something else revealed that, uncaught by me, was caught by the
snapshot: when the negative was developed my presence as ectoplasm was
revealed too. Is photography the picture of a hollow, of a lack, of an
absence?

Whereas I myself, more than clean and correct, was a pretty replica.
Since all that was probably what made me generous and pretty. All an
experienced man needed was one glance to know that I was a woman of
generosity and grace, and one who isn't a bother, and one who doesn't
eat away at a man: a woman who smiles and laughs. I respect other
people's pleasure, and delicately I consume my own pleasure, tedium
nourishes me and delicately consumes me, the sweet tedium of a
honeymoon.

That image of myself in quotes satisfied me, and not just superficially.
I was the image of what I was not, and that image of not-being
overwhelmed me: one of the most powerful states is being negatively.
Since I didn't know what I was, "not being" was the closest I could get
to the truth: at least I had the other side: I at least had the "not," I
had my opposite. I didn't know what was good for me, so I lived a kind
of pre-eagerness for my "bad."

And living my "bad," I lived the other side of something I couldn't even
manage to want or attempt. Like somebody who follows with love a life of
whoredom, and at least has the opposite of what she doesn't know or want
or have: the life of a nun. Only now do I know that I already had it
all, though the other way around: I was devoted to every detail of the
not. Painstakingly not being, I was proving to myself that --- that I
was.

That way of not-being was so much more pleasant, so much cleaner: since,
without meaning this ironically, I'm a woman of spirit. And with a
spirited body. At the breakfast table I was framed by my white robe, my
clean and well-sculpted face, and a simple body. I exuded the kind of
goodness that comes from indulging one's own pleasures and those of
others. I ate delicately what was mine, and delicately wiped my mouth
with the napkin.

This her, G. H. in the leather of her suitcases, was I: is it I ---
still? No. I immediately figure that the hardest thing my vanity will
have to face is the judgment of myself: I'll have every appearance of a
failure, and only I will know if that was the failure I needed.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-9 .calibre}
::: story
Only I will know if that was the failure I needed.

I finally got up from the breakfast table, that woman. Not having a maid
that day would give me the type of activity I wanted: arranging. I
always liked to arrange things. I guess it's my only real vocation. By
putting things in order, I create and understand at the same time. But
since I gradually, through reasonably good investments, became fairly
well-off, that hampered me in my ability to use this vocation of mine:
if money and education hadn't put me in the class I belong to, I'd
normally have worked as the maid who arranges things in a large home of
rich people, where there is so much to arrange. Arranging is finding the
best form. If I'd been a maid-arranger, I wouldn't have even needed the
amateurism of sculpture; if with my hands I'd been able to arrange
things for hours on end. To arrange the form?

The always forbidden pleasure of arranging a house was so great that,
still sitting at the table, I was already savoring the feeling in the
mere planning of it. I looked around the apartment: where would I begin?

And also so that afterward, in the seventh hour as on the seventh day, I
would be free to rest and enjoy the calm remainder of the day. Almost
joyless calm, which would be a good balance for me: the hours doing
sculpture taught me almost joyless calm. The week before I'd had too
much fun, gone out too much, had too much of everything I wanted, and
now I wished for a day exactly like the one this one promised to be:
heavy and good and empty. I'd stretch it out as long as possible.

Maybe I'd start cleaning at the back of the apartment: the maid's room
must be filthy, given its dual roles as a sleeping space and storage
room for old clothes, suitcases, ancient newspapers, wrapping paper and
leftover twine. I'd clean and ready it for the new maid. Then, from the
back, I'd slowly "climb" horizontally until I reached the opposite end
of the apartment which was the living room, where --- as if I myself
were the finish line of the arrangements and of the morning --- I'd read
the newspaper, stretched out on the sofa, and probably fall asleep. If
the telephone didn't ring.

Better yet, I decided to take the phone off the hook and that way I was
sure nothing would disturb me.

How can I say now that I'd already begun to see what would only become
evident afterward? without knowing it, I was already in the entrance to
the room. I was already starting to see, and didn't know it; I had seen
since I was born and didn't know, I didn't know.

Give me your unknown hand, since life is hurting me, and I don't know
how to speak --- reality is too delicate, only reality is delicate, my
unreality and my imagination are heavier.

Having decided to begin with the maid's room, I crossed the kitchen that
leads to the service area. At the end of the service area is the hallway
to the maid's room. First, though, I leaned against the wall in the
hallway to finish a cigarette.

I looked down: thirteen floors fell away from the building. I didn't
know that all this was already part of what was about to happen. A
thousand times before this the movement must have started and then was
lost. This time the movement would go all the way though, and I didn't
see it coming.

I looked around the courtyard, the backs of all the apartments from
which my apartment too looked like a back. On the outside my building
was white, with the smoothness of marble and the smoothness of surface.
But the courtyard was a heap of frames, windows, riggings and blackened
watermarks, window straddling window, mouths peering into mouths. The
belly of my building was like a factory. The miniature of the grandeur
of a panorama full of gorges and canyons: smoking there, as if on a
mountaintop, I was looking at the view, probably with the same
inexpressive look I had in my photographs.

I saw what it was saying: it was saying nothing. And I was taking this
nothing in attentively, I was taking it in with what was inside my eyes
in the photographs; only now do I know that I was always receiving the
mute signal. I looked around the courtyard. Everything was of an
inanimate richness that recalled that of nature: there too one could
mine uranium and from there oil could gush.

I was seeing something that would only make sense later --- I mean,
something that only later would profoundly not make sense. Only later
would I understand: what seems like a lack of meaning --- that's the
meaning. Every moment of "lack of meaning" is precisely the frightening
certainty that that's exactly what it means, and that not only can I not
reach it, I don't want to because I have no guarantees. The lack of
meaning would only overwhelm me later. Could realizing the lack of
meaning have always been my negative way of sensing the meaning? it had
been my way of participating.

What I was seeing in the monstrous insides of that machine, which was
the courtyard of my building, what I was seeing were made things,
eminently practical things and with a practical purpose.

But something of the terrible general nature --- which I would later
experience within myself --- something of inescapable nature would
inescapably leave the hands of the hundred or so practical workmen who
had labored on the drainpipes, entirely unaware that they were erecting
that Egyptian ruin that I was now regarding with the gaze of my beach
pictures. Only later would I know that I'd seen; only later, when I saw
the secret, would I realize I'd already seen it.

I threw my lit cigarette over the edge, and stepped back, slyly hoping
none of the neighbors would connect me with the act forbidden by the
administrators of the Building. Then, carefully, I stuck out just my
head, and looked: I couldn't even guess where the cigarette had landed.
The precipice had swallowed it in silence. Was I there thinking? at
least I was thinking about nothing. Or maybe about whether some neighbor
had seen me commit that forbidden act, which above all didn't match the
polite woman I am, which made me smile.

Then I headed into the dark hallway behind the service area.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-10 .calibre}
::: story
Then I headed into the dark hallway behind the service area.

In the hall, which forms the end of the apartment, two doors, indistinct
in the shadows, face: the service exit and the door to the maid's room.
The *bas-fond* of my house. I opened the door onto the pile of
newspapers and the darknesses of dirt and of the junk.

But when I opened the door my eyes winced in reverberations and physical
displeasure.

Because instead of the confused murk I was expecting, I bumped into the
vision of a room that was a quadrilateral of white light; my eyes
protected themselves by squinting.

For around six months --- the amount of time that maid had been with me
--- I hadn't gone in there, and my astonishment came from coming into an
entirely clean room.

I'd expected to find darknesses, I'd been prepared to throw open the
window and clean out the dank darkness with fresh air. I hadn't expected
the maid, without a word to me, to have arranged the room in her own
way, stripping it of its storage function as brazenly as if she owned
it.

From the doorway I was now seeing a room that had a calm and empty
order. In my fresh, damp and cozy home, the maid without telling me had
opened a dry emptiness. Now it was an entirely clean and vibrant room as
in an insane asylum from which dangerous objects have been removed.

There, because of the created void, were concentrated the reverberation
of the tiles, the cement terraces, the erect antennas of all the
neighboring buildings, and the reflection of their thousand windowpanes.
The room seemed to be on a level incomparably higher than the apartment
itself.

Like a minaret. So began my first impression of a minaret, free above a
limitless expanse. That impression was the only way I could for the time
being perceive my physical displeasure.

The room was not a regular quadrilateral: two of its angles were
slightly more open. And though that was its material reality, it came to
me as if it were my vision that was deforming it. It looked like the
representation, on paper, of the way I could see a quadrilateral:
already deformed in its perspective lines. The solidification of a flaw
in vision, the concretization of an optical illusion. Its not entirely
regular angles made it appear fundamentally fragile as if the
room-minaret were not implanted in either the apartment or the building.

From the doorway I saw the steady sun cutting half of the ceiling and a
third of the floor with a neat line of black shadow. For six months a
permanent sun had warped the pine wardrobe, and stripped the whitewash
to an even whiter white.

And it was on one of the walls that flinching with surprise I saw the
unexpected mural.

On the whitewashed wall, beside the door --- and that's why I hadn't
seen it --- were nearly life-sized charcoal outlines of a naked man, a
naked woman, and a dog that was more naked than a dog. Upon the bodies
nothing was drawn of what nakedness reveals, the nakedness simply came
from the absence of everything that covers it: they were the outlines of
an empty nakedness. The lines were coarse, made with a broken-tipped
piece of charcoal. Some strokes were doubled as if one line were the
trembling of the other. A dry trembling of dry charcoal.

The rigidity of the lines pegged the blown-up and doltish figures on the
wall, like three automatons. Even the dog had the mild madness of
something that doesn't move by its own strength. The coarseness of the
excessively firm line made the dog something solid and petrified, more
pegged to itself than to the wall.

After the initial surprise of discovering the hidden mural in my own
house, I examined more closely, this time with amused surprise, the
figures sprung upon the wall. Their simplified feet didn't quite touch
the floor, their small heads didn't touch the ceiling --- and that,
together with the stupefied rigidity of the lines, left the three
figures loose like the ghosts of three mummies. The more uncomfortable
their hard motionlessness made me, the more they reminded me of mummies.
They were emerging as if they'd gradually oozed from the wall, slowly
coming from the center until they'd sweated through the rough lime
surface.

None of the figures was connected, and the three did not form a group:
each figure looked forward, as if they'd never looked to the side, as if
they'd never seen each other and didn't know anyone existed beside them.

I smiled uncomfortably, I was trying to smile: because each figure was
there on the wall exactly as I myself had stood rigidly in the doorway.
The drawing wasn't a decoration: it was a writing.

The memory of the absent maid constrained me. I wanted to remember her
face, and to my astonishment couldn't --- she'd managed to exclude me
from my own house, as if she'd shut the door and left me a stranger to
my own dwelling. The recollection of her face escaped me, it had to be a
temporary lapse.

But her name --- right, right, I finally remembered: Janair. And,
looking at the hieratic drawing, it suddenly occurred to me that Janair
despised me. I was looking at the figures of the man and woman with the
palms of their forceful hands open and exposed, and who seemed to have
been left there by Janair as a crude message for when I opened the door.

In a way my discomfort was amusing: it had never occurred to me that, in
Janair's muteness, there might have been a reprimand of my life, which
her silence might have called "a wanton life"? how had she judged me?

I looked at the mural where I was likely depicted . . . I, the Man. And
as for the dog --- was that the epithet she gave me? For years I had
only been judged by my peers and by my own milieu that was, as a whole,
made of myself and for myself. Janair was the first truly outside person
of whose gaze I was becoming aware.

Abruptly, this time with real discomfort, I finally let a sensation come
to me which for six months, out of negligence and lack of interest, I
hadn't let myself feel: the silent hatred of that woman. What surprised
me was that it was a kind of detached hatred, the worst kind:
indifferent hatred. Not a hatred that individualized me but merely the
lack of mercy. No, not even hatred.

That was when I unexpectedly managed to remember her face, but of
course, how could I have forgotten? I saw her black and motionless face
again, saw her wholly opaque skin that seemed more like yet another of
her ways of being silent, her extremely well drawn eyebrows, I saw her
fine and delicate features barely discernible against the closed-off
blackness of her skin.

Her features --- I discovered without pleasure --- were the features of
a queen. And her posture too: her body erect, thin, hard, smooth, almost
fleshless, lacking breasts or hips. And her clothes? It wasn't
surprising that I'd used her as if she had no presence: beneath her
small apron, she always wore dark brown or black, which made her
entirely dark and invisible --- I shivered to discover that until now I
hadn't noticed that the woman was an invisible person. Janair almost
only had an external form, the features within her form were so refined
that they hardly existed: she was flat as a bas-relief stuck on a board.

And was it unavoidable that she saw me as she was? abstracting from that
body of mine on the wall everything that wasn't essential, and also
seeing only my outline. Yet, curiously, the figure on the wall did
remind me of someone, and that was myself. Constrained by the presence
Janair had left of herself in this room within my house, I sensed the
three angular zombie figures had in fact held me back as if the room
were still occupied.

I hesitated at the door.

Also because the unexpected simplicity of the dwelling disoriented me: I
really didn't even know where to start arranging things, or even if
there was anything to arrange.

I looked despondently at the nakedness of the minaret:

The bed, stripped of its sheets, exposed the dusty cloth mattress, with
its long faded stains that looked like sweat or watery blood, old and
pale stains. The odd fibrous horsehair pierced the cloth of the mattress
that was so dry it was rotten, and stuck out erect in the air.

Along one of the walls, three old suitcases were stacked with such
perfect symmetry that I hadn't noticed them, since they did nothing to
alter the emptiness of the room. Upon them, and upon the nearly dead
sign of a "G. H.", an already calm and sedimented accumulation of dust.

And there was also the narrow wardrobe: it had a single door, and was
the height of a person, my height. The wood continuously dried by the
sun opened in fissures and barbs. So that Janair had never closed the
window? She'd taken more advantage than I had of the view from the
"penthouse."

The room was so different from the rest of the apartment that going in
there was as if I had first left my house and slammed the door. The room
was the opposite of what I'd created in my home, the opposite of the
soft beauty I'd made from my talent for arrangement, my talent for
living, the opposite of my serene irony, of my sweet and absentminded
irony: it was a violation of my quotation marks, the quotation marks
that made me a citation of myself. The room was the portrait of an empty
stomach.

And nothing there was made by me. In the rest of the house the sun
filtered from the outside in, ray upon gentle ray, the result of my
employment of both heavy and light curtains. But here the sun didn't
seem to come from outside: it was the sun's own place, fixed and
unmoving, in a harsh light as if it never shut its eyes even at night.
Everything there was sliced-up nerves that had been hung up and dried on
a clothesline. I was prepared to clean dirty things but dealing with
that absence disoriented me.

I realized then that I was irritated. The room was making me physically
uncomfortable as if the air still contained the sound of dry charcoal
scratching the dry lime. The room's inaudible sound was like a needle
sweeping across a record after the music has stopped. A neutral hissing
of thing was what made up the substance of its silence. Charcoal and
fingernail coming together, charcoal and fingernail, calm and compact
rage of that woman who represented a silence as though representing a
foreign country, the African queen. And she'd been lodging there inside
my house, the foreigner, the indifferent enemy.

I wondered if Janair had really despised me --- or if I, who hadn't even
looked at her, had been the one who despised her. Just as I was
discovering now with irritation that the room didn't just irritate me, I
detested it, that cubicle with nothing but surfaces: its entrails had
been parched. I looked at it with disgust and disappointment.

Until I forced myself to summon some courage and a violence: on this
very day everything there would have to be altered.

First I'd drag the few things inside the room into the hallway. And then
I'd throw into the empty room bucket upon bucket of water that the hard
air would swallow, and then I'd swamp the dust until a moistness was
finally born in that desert, destroying the minaret that haughtily
overlooked a horizon of rooftops. I'd throw water into the wardrobe to
flood it up to its mouth --- and then at last, at last I'd see the wood
start to rot. An inexplicable rage, but which came naturally,
overwhelmed me: I wanted to kill something there.

And then, then I'd cover that dried-out straw mattress with a soft,
clean, cold sheet, one of my own sheets with my embroidered initials,
replacing the one Janair must have thrown in the wash.

But first I'd scrape the gritty dryness of the charcoal off the wall,
I'd carve off the dog with a knife, erasing the exposed palms of the
man, destroying the too-small head of that large naked woman. And I'd
throw water and water that would run in rivers down the scraped-down
wall.

As if already seeing a picture of the room after being transformed into
me and mine, I sighed with relief.

I then went in.

How to explain, except that something I don't understand was happening.
What did she want, that woman who is me? what was happening to a G. H.
on the leather of her suitcases?

Nothing, nothing, only that my nerves were now awake --- my nerves that
had been calm or simply arranged? had my silence been a silence or a
high mute voice?

How can I explain it to you: suddenly the whole world that was me
shriveled up in fatigue, I could no longer bear on my shoulders ---
what? --- and was succumbing to a tension that I didn't know had always
been mine. They were already starting, and I still didn't realize it,
the first signs inside me of a landslide, of underground limestone
caves, collapsing beneath the weight of stratified archeological layers
--- and the weight of the first landslide was bringing down the corners
of my mouth, making my arms fall. What was happening to me? I'll never
understand but there must be someone who understands. And it's inside
myself that I must create that someone who will understand.

And though I'd gone into the room, I seemed to have gone into nothing.
Even once inside it, I was still somehow outside. As if the room weren't
deep enough to hold me and I had to leave pieces of myself in the
hallway, in the worst rejection to which I'd ever fallen victim: I
didn't fit.

At the same time, looking at the low sky of the whitewashed ceiling, I
was feeling suffocated by confinement and restriction. And I was already
longing for my house. I forced myself to remember that that room too was
my possession, and inside my house: I'd walked to the room without
leaving my apartment, without going upstairs or down. Unless one could
fall into a well horizontally, as if they'd slightly warped the building
and I, slipping, had been tossed from door to door until reaching this
highest one of all.

Caught there in a web of vacancies, I once again forgot the plan I'd
outlined for arranging the room, and wasn't sure where to begin. The
room didn't have a point that could be called its beginning, nor one
that could be considered its end. It had a sameness that made it
endless.

I ran my eyes over the wardrobe, lifted them toward a crack in the
ceiling, trying to get a slightly better grip on that vast emptiness.
With more daring, though without the slightest intimacy, I ran my
fingers over the bunched-up cloth atop the mattress.

I got excited by an idea: the wardrobe, well-nourished with water, its
fibers gorged, could be polished until it shined, and I would wax the
inside too, since the interior was probably even more scorched.

I cracked the wardrobe's narrow door, and the darkness inside escaped
like a puff. I tried to open it a bit more, but the door was blocked by
the foot of the bed, which it was knocking up against. Inside the
breach, I put as much of my face as I could fit. And, as if the darkness
inside were spying on me, we briefly spied each other without seeing
each other. I saw nothing, only managing to whiff the dry, burnt odor
like the smell of a live hen. Yet by pushing the bed closer to the
window, I managed to open the door a few centimeters more.

Then, before understanding, my heart went gray as hair goes gray.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-11 .calibre}
::: story
Then, before understanding, my heart went gray as hair goes gray.

Meeting the face I had put inside the opening, right near my eyes, in
the half-darkness, the fat cockroach had moved. My cry was so muffled
that only the contrasting silence let me know I hadn't screamed. The
scream had stayed beating in my chest.

Nothing, it was nothing --- I immediately tried to calm down from my
fright. I'd never expected in a house meticulously disinfected against
my disgust for cockroaches that this room had escaped. No, it was
nothing. It was a cockroach that was slowly moving toward the gap.

From its bulk and slowness, it had to be a very old cockroach. With my
archaic horror of cockroaches I'd learned to guess, even from a
distance, their ages and dangers; even without ever having really looked
a cockroach in the face I knew the ways they existed.

It was just that discovering sudden life in the nakedness of the room
had startled me as if I'd discovered that the dead room was in fact
mighty. Everything there had dried up --- but a cockroach remained. A
cockroach so old that it was immemorial. What I had always found
repulsive in roaches is that they were obsolete yet still here. Knowing
that they were already on the Earth, and the same as they are today,
even before the first dinosaurs appeared, knowing the first man already
found them proliferated and crawling alive, knowing that they had
witnessed the formation of the great deposits of oil and coal in the
world, and there they were during the great advance and then during the
great retreat of the glaciers --- the peaceful resistance. I knew that
roaches could endure for more than a month without food or water. And
that they could even make a usable nutritive substance from wood. And
that, even after being crushed, they slowly decompressed and kept on
walking. Even when frozen, they kept on marching once thawed. . . . For
three hundred and fifty million years they had been replicating
themselves without being transformed. When the world was nearly naked,
they were already sluggishly covering it.

Like there, in the naked and parched room, the virulent drop: in the
clean test-tube a drop of matter.

I looked at the room with distrust. So there was a roach. Or roaches.
Where? behind the suitcases perhaps. One? two? how many? Behind the
motionless silence of the suitcases, perhaps a whole darkness of
roaches. Each immobilized atop another? Layers of roaches --- which all
of a sudden reminded me what I'd discovered as a child when I lifted the
mattress I slept on: the blackness of hundreds and hundreds of bedbugs,
crowded together one atop the other.

The memory of my childhood poverty, with bedbugs, leaky roofs,
cockroaches and rats, was like that of my prehistoric past, I had
already lived with the first creatures of the Earth.

One cockroach? many? how many?! I asked myself in a rage. I let my gaze
wander over the naked room. No sound, no sign: but how many? No sound
and yet I distinctly felt an emphatic resonance, which was that of
silence chafing against silence. Hostility overwhelmed me. It's more
than just not liking roaches: I don't want them. Besides which they're
the miniature version of an enormous animal. My hostility was growing.

It wasn't I who spurned the room, as I'd felt for a moment at the door.
The room, with its secret cockroach, had spurned me. At first I'd been
rejected by a vision of a nakedness as powerful as that of a mirage;
though what I'd seen wasn't the mirage of an oasis, but the mirage of a
desert. Then I'd been immobilized by the hard message on the wall: the
open-palmed figures had been one of the successive sentries at the
entrance to the sarcophagus. And now I was understanding that the roach
and Janair were the true inhabitants of the room.

No, I wouldn't arrange anything --- not if there were roaches. The new
maid would devote her first day at work to that dusty and empty hutch.

A wave of goose bumps, inside the great heat of the sun, covered me: I
rushed to get out of the blazing room.

My first physical movement of fear, finally expressed, was what revealed
to me to my surprise that I was fearful. And it ushered me into an even
greater fear --- when I tried to leave, I tripped between the foot of
the bed and the wardrobe. A possible fall in that room of silence caused
my body to shrink back in profound revulsion --- tripping had made my
attempt to flee an abortive act in itself --- could this be how "they,"
the ones by the sarcophagus, had of preventing me from ever leaving
again? They had kept me from leaving and just in this simple way: they
left me entirely free, since they knew I could no longer leave without
tripping and falling.

I wasn't imprisoned but I was located. As located as if they'd stuck me
there with the simple and single gesture of pointing at me with a
finger, pointing at me and at a place.

I'd already known the feeling of place. As a child, I unexpectedly
became aware of lying in a bed located in a city located on the Earth
located in the World. As in childhood, I then had the strong sense that
I was entirely alone in a house, and that the house was high and
floating in the air, and that the house had invisible roaches.

Before, when I'd located myself, I'd be magnified. Now I located myself
with limits --- limiting myself to the point that, inside the room, the
only place for me was between the foot of the bed and the wardrobe door.

Only now the feeling of place was luckily not coming to me at night, as
in childhood, since it must have been around ten in the morning.

And unexpectedly the approaching eleven o'clock seemed to me an element
of terror --- like the place, time too had become palpable, it was like
wanting to flee from inside a clock, and I hurried wildly.

But to be able to leave the corner where, having cracked the wardrobe
door, I'd blocked myself in, I'd first have to shut the door pinning me
to the foot of the bed: there I had no free path, trapped by the sun
that was now burning the hairs on the nape of my neck, in the dry oven
called ten a.m.

My quick hand went to the wardrobe door to shut it and make way for me
--- but I withdrew again.

Because inside the cockroach had moved.

I quieted down. My breath was light, superficial. I now felt there was
no going back. And I already knew that, absurd as it may seem, my only
chance of getting out of there was by admitting head-on and absurdly
that something was becoming irremediable. I knew I had to admit the
danger I was in, even though I was aware that it was madness to believe
in an entirely nonexistent danger. But I had to believe in myself --- my
whole life just like everybody else I'd been in danger --- but now, in
order to leave, I had the delirious responsibility of having to know it.

Penned between the wardrobe door and the foot of the bed, I still hadn't
tried to move my feet again, drawing back instead as if, even in its
extreme slowness, the roach might spring forward --- I'd seen roaches
who suddenly fly, the winged fauna.

I stayed still, calculating wildly. I was alert, I was totally alert.
Inside me a feeling of intense expectation had grown, and a surprised
resignation: because in this state of alert expectation I was seeing all
my earlier expectations, I was seeing the awareness from which I'd also
lived before, an awareness that never leaves me and that in the final
analysis might be the thing that most attached to my life --- perhaps
that awareness was my life itself. The cockroach too: what's the only
feeling a cockroach has? the awareness of living, inextricable from its
body. In me, everything I had superimposed upon the inextricable part of
myself, would probably never manage to stifle the awareness that, more
than awareness of life, was the actual process of life inside me.

That was when the cockroach began to emerge.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-12 .calibre}
::: story
That was when the cockroach began to emerge.

First the heralding quiver of its antennae.

Then, behind those dry stands, the reluctant body started to emerge.
Until nearly all of it reached the opening of the wardrobe door.

It was brown, it was hesitant as if of enormous weight. It was now
almost entirely visible.

I quickly lowered my eyes. On hiding my eyes, I was hiding from the
roach the cunning idea that occurred to me --- my heart was beating
almost as in a joy. Because I suddenly felt that I had resources, I'd
never before used my resources --- and now a whole latent power was
throbbing inside me, and a greatness was overtaking me: the greatness of
courage, as if fear itself had finally invested me with courage. Moments
before I had superficially assumed that my only feelings were
indignation and disgust, but now I recognized --- although I'd never
known it before --- that what was happening was that I was finally
taking on a fear much greater than myself.

This great fear deepened everything within me. Turned inward into
myself, as a blind man sounds out his own attentiveness, for the first
time I had wholly fallen back upon an instinct. And I shivered with
extreme pleasure as if finally mindful of the grandeur of an instinct
that was bad, total and infinitely sweet --- as if finally tasting, and
within myself, a grandeur greater than myself. I was getting drunk for
the first time with a hatred clear as a fountain, drunk with the desire,
justified or not, to kill.

A whole lifetime of awareness --- for fifteen centuries I hadn't
struggled, for fifteen centuries I hadn't killed, for fifteen centuries
I hadn't died --- a whole lifetime of tamed awareness was now collecting
inside me and banging like a mute bell whose vibrations I didn't need to
hear, I was recognizing them. As if for the first time I was finally on
the level of Nature.

A wholly controlled rapacity had overwhelmed me, and since it was
controlled it was all power. Up till then I'd never mastered my own
powers --- powers I neither understood nor wanted to understand, but the
life inside me had hung on to them so that one day at last this unknown
and happy and unconscious matter would unclasp what was finally: I! I,
whatever that was.

Brazenly, stirred by my surrender to what is evil, brazenly, stirred,
grateful, for the first time I was being the unknown person I was ---
except that not knowing myself would no longer keep me back, the truth
had already surpassed me: I lifted my hand as if to swear an oath, and
in a single blow slammed the door on the half-emerged body of the
cockroach ---------------------

As I did I had also closed my eyes. And that's how I remained, trembling
all over. What had I done?

Maybe then I already knew that I didn't mean what had I done to the
cockroach but: what had I done to myself?

Because during those seconds, eyes shut, I was becoming aware of myself
as one becomes aware of a taste: all of me tasted of steel and
verdigris, I was all acid like metal on the tongue, like a crushed green
plant, my whole taste rose to my mouth. What had I done to myself? With
my heart thumping, my temples pulsing, this is what I'd done to myself:
I had killed. I had killed! But why such delight, and besides that a
vital acceptance of that delight? For how long, then, had I been about
to kill?

No, it wasn't about that. The question was: what had I killed?

That calm woman I'd always been, had she gone mad with pleasure? With my
eyes still closed I was trembling with delight. To have killed ---was so
much greater than I was, it was appropriate to that limitless room. To
have killed opened the dryness of the sands of the room to dampness,
finally, finally, as if I'd dug and dug with hard and eager fingers
until I found within myself a thread of drinkable life that was the
thread of death. I slowly opened my eyes, with sweetness now, in
gratitude, shyness, with a modesty of glory.

From the finally damp world from which I was emerging, I opened my eyes
and met the great and harsh open light, I saw the now-closed door of the
wardrobe.

And I saw half of the roach's body outside the door.

Sticking out, erect in the air, a caryatid.

But a living caryatid.

I hesitated to comprehend, looking at it in surprise. I gradually
realized what had happened: I hadn't slammed the door hard enough. I'd
caught the cockroach, yes, which couldn't go any further. But I'd left
it alive.

Alive and looking at me. I quickly averted my eyes, with violent
revulsion.

I needed, therefore, to strike again. One more strike? I wasn't looking
at the roach, but I told myself I still needed to strike one more time
--- I repeated it slowly as if each repetition could command the pulses
of my heart, the beats that were spaced too widely like the soreness of
a pain I couldn't feel.

Until --- finally managing to hear myself, finally managing to get
myself under control --- I lifted my hand high in the air as if my whole
body, along with the blow of my arm, would come down against the
wardrobe door.

But that was when I saw the roach's face.

It was sticking straight out, at the height of my head and my eyes. For
a second I sat there with my hand frozen in the air. Then I gradually
lowered it.

A second earlier I might still have been able not to see the countenance
on the cockroach's face.

But it happened a fraction of a second too late: I was seeing. My hand,
which had lowered when it abandoned its determination to strike, was
slowly rising back to stomach-level: though I myself hadn't moved, my
stomach had cringed inside my body. My mouth was terribly dry, I ran an
equally dry tongue over my rough lips.

It was a face without a contour. The antennae stuck out in whiskers on
either side of its mouth. Its brown mouth was well-drawn. The long and
slender whiskers were moving slow and dry. Its black faceted eyes were
looking. It was a cockroach as old as a fossilized fish. It was a
cockroach as old as salamanders and chimeras and griffins and
leviathans. It was as ancient as a legend. I looked at its mouth: there
was the real mouth.

I had never seen a roach's mouth. I in fact --- I had never actually
seen a cockroach. I had just been repulsed by its ancient and
ever-present existence --- but had never actually come face-to-face with
one, not even in thought.

And so I was discovering that, though compact, a roach is composed of
layers and brown layers, fine as onionskin, as if each could be lifted
by a fingernail and still there would always be another underneath, and
then another. Maybe the scales were its wings, but then it must be made
of layers and layers of thin wings pressed together to form that compact
body.

It was reddish-brown. And had cilia all over. Maybe the cilia were its
multiple legs. The antennae were now still, dry and dusty strands.

A cockroach doesn't have a nose. I looked at it, with that mouth and
eyes: it looked like a dying mulatto woman. But its eyes were radiant
and black. The eyes of a bride. Each individual eye looked like a
cockroach. The fringed, dark, dustless and living eye. And the other eye
was the same. Two roaches implanted in the roach, and each eye
reproduced the entire cockroach.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-13 .calibre}
::: story
Each eye reproduced the entire cockroach.

--- Pardon me for giving you this, hand holding mine, but I don't want
this for myself! take that roach, I don't want what I saw.

There I was open-mouthed and offended and withdrawn --- faced with the
dusty being looking back at me. Take what I saw: because what I was
seeing with an embarrassment so painful and so frightened and so
innocent, what I was seeing was life looking back at me.

How else could I describe that crude and horrible, raw matter and dry
plasma, that was there, as I shrank into myself with dry nausea, I
falling centuries and centuries inside a mud --- it was mud, and not
even dried mud but mud still damp and still alive, it was a mud in which
the roots of my identity were still shifting with unbearable slowness.

Take it, take all this for yourself, I don't want to be a living person!
I'm disgusted and amazed by myself, thick mud slowly oozing.

That's what it was --- so that's what it was. Because I'd looked at the
living roach and was discovering inside it the identity of my deepest
life. In a difficult demolition, hard and narrow paths were opening
within me.

I looked at it, at the roach: I hated it so much that I was going over
to its side, feeling solidarity with it, since I couldn't stand being
left alone with my aggression.

And all of a sudden I moaned out loud, this time I heard my moan.
Because rising to my surface like pus was my truest matter --- and with
fright and loathing I was feeling that "I-being" was coming from a
source far prior to the human source and, with horror, much greater than
the human.

Opening in me, with the slowness of stone doors, opening in me was the
wide life of silence, the same that was in the fixed sun, the same that
was in the immobilized roach. And that could be the same as in me! if I
had the courage to abandon . . . to abandon my feelings? If I had the
courage to abandon hope.

Hope for what? For the first time I was astonished to feel that I'd
based an entire hope on becoming something that I was not. The hope ---
what other name could I give it? --- that for the first time I now was
going to abandon, out of courage and mortal curiosity. Had hope, in my
prior life, been based upon a truth? With childlike surprise, I was
starting to doubt it.

To find out what I really could hope for, would I first have to pass
through my truth? To what extent had I invented a destiny now, while
subterraneously living from another?

I closed my eyes, waiting for the astonishment to pass, waiting for my
panting to calm to the point that it was no longer that awful moan that
I'd heard as if coming from the bottom of a dry, deep cistern, as the
cockroach was a creature of a dry cistern. I was still feeling, at an
incalculable distance within me, that moan that was no longer reaching
my throat.

This is madness, I thought with my eyes closed. But it was so undeniable
feeling that birth from inside the dust --- that all I could do was
follow something I was well aware wasn't madness, it was, my God, the
worse truth, the horrible one. But why horrible? Because without words
it contradicted everything I used to think also without words.

I waited for the astonishment to pass, for health to return. But I was
realizing, in an immemorial effort of memory, that I had felt this
astonishment before: it was the same one I had experienced when I saw my
own blood outside of me, and I had marveled at it. Since the blood I was
seeing outside of me, that blood I was drawn to with such wonder: it was
mine.

I didn't want to open my eyes, I didn't want to keep on seeing. It was
important not to forget the rules and the laws, to remember that without
the rules and laws there would be no order, I had to not forget them and
defend them in order to defend myself.

But it was already too late for me to hold myself back.

The first bind had already involuntarily burst, and I was breaking loose
from the law, though I intuited that I was going to enter the hell of
living matter --- what kind of hell awaited me? but I had to go. I had
to sink into my soul's damnation, curiosity was consuming me.

So I opened my eyes all at once, and saw the full endless vastness of
the room, that room that was vibrating in silence, laboratory of hell.

The room, the unknown room. My entrance into it was finally complete.

The entrance to this room had a single passageway, and a narrow one:
through the cockroach. The cockroach that was filling the room with
finally open vibration, the vibrations of its rattlesnake tails in the
desert. Through a painstaking route, I had reached the deep incision in
the wall that was that room --- and the crevice created a vast, natural
hollow hall as in a cave.

Naked, as if prepared for the entrance of a single person. And whoever
entered would be transformed into a "she" or "he." I was the one the
room called "she." An I had gone in which the room had given a dimension
of she. As if I too were the other side of the cube, the side that goes
unseen when looked at straight on.

And in my great dilation, I was in the desert. How can I explain it to
you? in the desert as I'd never been before. It was a desert that was
calling me as a monotonous and remote canticle calls. I was being
seduced. And I was going toward that promising madness. But my fear
wasn't that of someone going toward madness, but toward a truth --- my
fear was of having a truth that I'd come not to want, an infamizing
truth that would make me crawl along and be on the roach's level. My
first contact with truths always defamed me.

--- Hold my hand, because I feel that I'm going. I'm going once again
toward the most divine primary life, I'm going toward a hell of raw
life. Don't let me see because I'm close to seeing the nucleus of life
--- and, through the cockroach that even now I'm seeing again, through
this specimen of calm living horror, I'm afraid that in this nucleus
I'll no longer know what hope is.

The cockroach is pure seduction. Cilia, blinking cilia that keep
calling.

I too, who was slowly reducing myself to whatever in me was irreducible,
I too had thousands of blinking cilia, and with my cilia I move forward,
I protozoan, pure protein. Hold my hand, I reached the irreducible with
the inevitability of a death-knell --- I sense that all this is ancient
and vast, I sense in the hieroglyph of the slow roach the writing of the
Far East. And in this desert of great seductions, the creatures: I and
the living roach. Life, my love, is a great seduction in which all that
exists seduces. That room that was deserted and for that reason primally
alive. I had reached the nothing, and the nothing was living and moist.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-14 .calibre}
::: story
I had reached the nothing, and the nothing was living and moist.

It was then --- it was then that as if from a tube the matter began
slowly oozing out of the roach that had been crushed.

The roach's matter, which was its insides, the thick, whitish and slow
matter, was coming out as from a tube of toothpaste.

Before my nauseated and seduced eyes, the shape of the roach began
slowly modifying as it swelled outward. The white matter slowly spilled
atop its back like a burden. Immobilized, it was bearing atop its dusty
flanks the weight of its own body.

"Scream," I calmly ordered myself. "Scream," I repeated uselessly with a
sigh of deep quietude.

The white thickness had halted atop its scales. I looked at the ceiling,
briefly resting the eyes that I felt had become deep and large.

But if I screamed even once, I might never again be able to stop. If I
screamed nobody could ever help me again; whereas, if I never revealed
my neediness, I wouldn't scare anybody and they would help me unawares;
but only if I didn't scare anybody by venturing outside the rules. But
if they find out, they'll be scared, we who keep the scream as an
inviolable secret. If I raised the alarm at being alive, voiceless and
hard they would drag me away since they drag away those who depart the
possible world, the exceptional being is dragged away, the screaming
being.

I looked at the ceiling with heavy eyes. Everything could be fiercely
summed up in never emitting a first scream --- a first scream unleashes
all the others, the first scream at birth unleashes a life, if I
screamed I would awaken thousands of screaming beings who would loose
upon the rooftops a chorus of screams and horror. If I screamed I would
unleash the existence --- the existence of what? the existence of the
world. With reverence I feared the existence of the world for me.

--- Because, hand that sustains me, because I, in a trial I never want
again, in a trial for which I ask pardon for myself, I was exiting my
world and entering the world.

Because I was no longer seeing myself, I was simply seeing. A whole
civilization that had sprung up, with the guarantee that what one sees
be mixed immediately with what one feels, an entire civilization whose
foundation is salvation --- so I was in its ruins. The only ones who
could depart this civilization were those whose special role is to
depart it: a scientist is given leave, a priest is given permission. But
not a woman who doesn't even have the guarantees of a title. And I was
fleeing, uneasily I was fleeing.

If you knew the solitude of those first steps of mine. It wasn't like
the solitude of a person. It was as if I'd already died and was taking
the first steps alone into another life. And it was as if that solitude
was called glory, and I too knew it was a glory, and was shivering all
over in that divine primal glory that I not only didn't understand, but
deeply didn't want.

--- Because, you see, I knew I was entering the crude and raw glory of
nature. Seduced, I was still fighting as best I could against the
quicksand that was swallowing me: and each movement I was making toward
"no, no!", each movement pushed me inevitably on; not having the
strength to fight was my only forgiveness.

I looked around the room where I'd imprisoned myself, and sought an
exit, desperately trying to escape, and inside me I had already shrunk
so much that my soul was against the wall --- not even able to stop, no
longer wanting to stop, fascinated by the certainty of the magnet that
was drawing me, I shrank into myself up to the wall where I was
implanted in the drawing of the woman. I had shrunk into the marrow of
my bones, my last refuge. Where, on the wall, I was so naked that I had
no shadow.

And the measurements, the measurements were still the same, I could feel
they were, I knew I'd never been more than that woman on the wall, I was
she. And I was well preserved, a long and fruitful path.

My tension suddenly snapped like a noise interrupted.

And the first true silence began to whisper. Whatever I'd seen that was
so calm and vast and foreign in my dark and smiling photographs ---
whatever that was was outside for the first time and entirely within my
reach, incomprehensible but within my reach.

Which was giving me relief as a thirst is relieved, it was relieving me
as if my whole life I'd been waiting for a water as necessary for my
bristling body as cocaine is for a body that demands it. Finally the
body, soaked with silence, was calming down. The relief came from my
fitting into the mute drawing in the cave.

Until that moment I hadn't wholly perceived my struggle, that's how
buried I was in it. But now, from the silence into which I had finally
fallen, I knew I'd struggled, that I had succumbed and surrendered.

And that, now, I really was in the room.

As inside it as a drawing that has been in a cave for three hundred
thousand years. And that's how I fit inside myself, that's how I inside
myself was engraved upon the wall.

The narrow route passed through the difficult cockroach, and I'd
squeezed with disgust through that body of scales and mud. And I'd ended
up, I too completely filthy, emerging through the cockroach into my past
that was my continuous present and my continuous future --- and that
today and always is on the wall, and my fifteen million daughters, from
then up to myself, were there too. My life was as continuous as death.
Life is so continuous that we divide it into stages, and we call one of
them death. I had always been in life, and it matters little that it
wasn't I properly speaking, not what I'd usually call I. I was always in
life.

I, neutral cockroach body, I with a life that at last doesn't escape me
because I finally see it outside of myself --- I am the roach, I am my
leg, I am my hair, I am the section of whitest light on the plaster of
the wall --- I am every hellish piece of me --- life in me is so
demanding that if they hacked me up, like a lizard, the pieces would
keep trembling and squirming. I am the silence engraved on a wall, and
the oldest butterfly flutters and finds me: the same as always. From
birth to death is when I call myself human, and shall never actually
die.

But that isn't eternity, it's damnation.

How luxurious this silence is. It's built up of centuries. It's a
silence of a roach that's looking. The world looks at itself in me.
Everything looks at everything, everything lives the other; in this
desert things know things. Things know things so much that that's . . .
that's what I'll call forgiveness, if I want to save myself in the human
world. It's forgiveness itself. Forgiveness is an attribute of living
matter.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-15 .calibre}
::: story
Forgiveness is an attribute of living matter.

---You see, my love, see how out of fear I'm already organizing, see how
I still can't deal with these primary laboratory elements without
immediately wanting to organize hope. Because for now the metamorphosis
of me into myself makes no sense. It's a metamorphosis in which I lose
everything I had, and what I had was me --- I only have what I am. And
what am I now? I am: standing in front of a fright. I am: what I saw. I
don't understand and I am afraid to understand, the matter of the world
frightens me, with its planets and roaches.

I, who used to live on words of charity or pride or anything. But what
an abyss between the word and what it was trying to do, what an abyss
between the word love and the love that doesn't even have a human
meaning --- because --- because love is living matter. Is love living
matter?

What was it that happened to me yesterday? and now? I'm confused, I
crossed deserts and deserts, but did I get stuck by some detail? trapped
as beneath a rock.

No, wait, wait: with relief I must remember that I left that room
yesterday, I left it, I'm free! and still have a chance to recover. If I
want to.

But do I?

What I saw is not organizable. But if I really want to, right now, I
could still translate what I found out into terms closer to ours, to
human terms, and could still let those hours yesterday pass unnoticed.
If I still want to I could, within our language, wonder some other way
what happened to me.

And, if I put it that way, I can still find an answer that would let me
recover. Recovery would be knowing that: G. H. was a woman who lived
well, lived well, lived well, lived on the uppermost layer of the sands
of the world, and the sands had never caved in beneath her feet: the
coordination was such that, as the sands moved, her feet moved along
with them, and so everything stayed firm and compact. G. H. lived on the
top floor of a superstructure, and, though built in the air, it was a
solid building, she herself in the air, as bees weave life in the air.
And that had been happening for centuries, with the necessary or
occasional changes, and it worked. It worked --- at least nothing spoke
and nobody spoke, nobody said no; so it worked.

But, precisely this slow accumulation of centuries automatically piling
atop each other was what, without anybody noticing, was making the
construction in the air very heavy: it was getting saturated with
itself: getting more compact, instead of getting more fragile. The
accumulation of living in a superstructure was getting increasingly
heavy to stay up in the air.

Like a building in which everyone sleeps calmly at night, unaware that
the foundations are sagging and that, in an instant unsuggested by the
peacefulness, the beams will give way because their cohesive strength is
slowly pulling them apart one millimeter per century. And then, when
it's least expected --- in an instant as repetitively common as lifting
a drink to a smiling mouth during a dance --- then, yesterday, on a day
as full of sunlight as the days at the height of summer, with men
working and kitchens giving off smoke and a jackhammer shattering stones
and children laughing and a priest trying to stop, but stop what?
yesterday, without warning, there was the loud sound of something solid
that suddenly crumbles.

In the collapse, tons fell upon tons. And when I, G. H. even on my
suitcases, I, one of the people, opened my eyes, I was --- not atop
debris, for even the debris had already been swallowed by the sands ---
I was on a calm plain, kilometers and kilometers below what had been a
great city. Things had gone back to being what they were.

The world had reclaimed its own reality, and, as after a catastrophe, my
civilization had ended: I was nothing more than a historical fact.
Everything in me had been reclaimed by the beginning of time and by my
own beginning. I had moved onto the first foreground, I was in the
silence of the winds and in the age of tin and copper --- in the first
age of life.

--- Listen, faced with the living cockroach, the worst discovery was
that the world is not human, and that we are not human.

No, don't get scared! certainly what had saved me until that moment from
the sentimentalized life from which I'd been living, is that the inhuman
part is the best part of us, it's the thing, the thing-part of us.
That's the only reason that, as a false person, I had never before
burrowed beneath the sentimental and utilitarian construction: my human
feelings were utilitarian, but I hadn't burrowed under because the
thing-part, matter of the God, was too powerful and was waiting to
reclaim me. The great neutral punishment of general life is that it can
suddenly undermine a single life; if it isn't given its own power, then
it bursts as a dam bursts --- and arrives pure, unadulterated: purely
neutral. That was the great danger: when that neutral part of things
doesn't sate a personal life, life arrives purely neutral.

But why exactly in me had the first silence suddenly reappeared? As if a
calm woman had simply been called and calmly set aside her embroidery on
a chair, stood up, and wordlessly --- abandoning her life, renouncing
embroidery, love and an already-made soul --- wordlessly that woman
composedly got down on all fours, started to crawl and drag herself
along with calm and sparkling eyes: because the earlier life had called
her and she went.

But why me? But why not me. If it hadn't been me, I wouldn't know, and
since it was me, I knew --- that's all. What was it that called me:
madness or reality?

Life was taking revenge on me, and its revenge was no more than coming
back, nothing more. In every case of madness something came back. The
possessed are not possessed by what is coming but by what is coming
back. Sometimes life comes back. If everything broke in me as the force
passed through, that's not because its function is to break: it just
finally needed to come through since it had already become too copious
to be contained or diverted --- along its way it buried everything. And
afterward, as after a flood, floating upon the waters was a wardrobe, a
person, a stray window, three suitcases. And that seemed like hell to
me, that destruction of layers and layers of human archeology.

Hell, because the world held no more human meaning for me, and man no
longer had human meaning for me. And without that humanization and
without the sentimentalization of the world --- I am terrified.

Without a cry I looked at the roach.

Seen up close, a roach is an object of great luxury. A bride in black
jewels. It is rare, it seems to be one-of-a-kind. In trapping it halfway
down its body with the wardrobe door, I had isolated the only known
specimen. Only half of its body was visible. The rest, which couldn't be
seen, could be huge, and was divided among thousands of houses, behind
things and wardrobes. Yet I didn't want the part allotted me. Behind the
surface of houses --- those murky jewels crawling along?

I was feeling unclean as the Bible speaks of the unclean. Why was the
Bible so concerned with the unclean, and made a list of unclean and
forbidden animals? why, if those animals, just like the rest, had been
created too? And why was the unclean forbidden? I had committed the
forbidden act of touching the unclean.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-16 .calibre}
::: story
I had committed the forbidden act of touching the unclean.

And so unclean was I, in that my sudden indirect knowledge of myself,
that I opened my mouth to ask for help. They say everything, in the
Bible, they say everything --- but if I understand what they say, they
themselves will call me mad. People just like me have said it, yet to
understand them would be my downfall.

"But thou shalt not eat of the impure: which are the eagle, and the
griffin, and the falcon." And neither the owl, nor the swan, nor the
bat, nor the stork, and any kind of raven.

I was finding out that the unclean animal of the Bible is forbidden
because the unclean is the root --- for there are created things that
never decorated themselves, and preserved themselves exactly as they
were the moment they were created, and only they continued to be the
still wholly complete root. And because they are the root one cannot eat
them, the fruit of good and of evil --- eating the living matter would
banish me from a paradise of adornments, and leave me to wander forever
with a shepherd's staff in the desert. Many were they who wandered with
a staff in the desert.

Worse --- it would lead me to see that the desert too is alive and has
moistness, and to see that everything is alive and made of the same.

To build a possible soul --- a soul whose head does not devour its own
tail --- the law commands us to keep only to what is disguisedly alive.
And the law commands that, whoever eats of the unclean, must do so
unawares. Since whoever eats of the unclean knowing that it is unclean
--- will also know that the unclean is not unclean. Is that it?

"And everything that crawls and has wings shall be impure, and not be
eaten."

I opened my mouth astonished: it was to ask for a help. Why? why didn't
I want to become as unclean as the roach? what ideal was fastening me to
the sentiment of an idea? why shouldn't I become unclean, exactly as I
was discovering my whole self to be? What was I afraid of? becoming
unclean with what?

Becoming unclean with joy.

Since now I understand that what I'd begun to feel was already joy,
which I still hadn't recognized or understood. In my mute plea for help,
what I was struggling against was a vague first joy that I didn't want
to perceive in myself because, even vague, it was already horrible: it
was a joy without redemption, I don't know how to explain it to you, but
it was a joy without the hope.

--- Ah, don't take your hand from mine, I promise myself that perhaps by
the end of this impossible story I'll perhaps understand, oh, perhaps on
the path of hell I'll come to find what we need --- but don't take away
your hand, even though I already know that finding has to be along the
path of whatever we are, if I manage not to sink definitively into
whatever we are.

See, my love, I'm already losing the courage to find whatever I'll have
to find, I'm losing the courage to hand myself over to the path and I'm
already promising us that in that hell I'll find hope.

--- Perhaps it's not the old hope. Perhaps it can't even be called hope.

I was struggling because I didn't want an unknown joy. It would be as
forbidden for my future salvation as the forbidden creature that was
called unclean --- and I was opening and closing my mouth in torture to
ask for help, since then it hadn't occurred to me to invent this hand I
now invented to hold my own. In my fear yesterday I was alone, and I
wanted to ask for help against my first dehumanization.

Dehumanization is as painful as losing everything, as losing everything,
my love. I was opening and closing my mouth to ask for help but I
couldn't and didn't know how to articulate it.

Because I had nothing more to articulate. My agony was like wanting to
speak before dying. I knew I was forever bidding farewell to something,
something was going to die, and I wanted to articulate the word that at
least summed up whatever was dying.

I finally managed to at least articulate a thought: "I'm asking for
help."

It occurred to me then that I didn't have anything to ask for help
against. I had nothing to ask.

Suddenly that was it. I was understanding that "asking" was still the
last remains of an appealable world that, more and more, was becoming
remote. And if I kept wanting to ask it was in order to still cling to
the last remains of my old civilization, to cling on so as not to let
myself be dragged off by whatever was now demanding me. And to which ---
in a pleasure without hope --- I was already giving in, ah, I already
wanted to give in --- to have experienced it was already the beginning
of a hell of wanting, wanting, wanting. . . . Was my will to want
stronger than my will for salvation?

More and more I had nothing to ask for. And I was seeing, with
fascination and horror, the pieces of my rotten mummy clothes falling
dry to the floor, I was watching my transformation from chrysalis into
moist larva, my wings were slowly shrinking back scorched. And a belly
entirely new and made for the ground, a new belly was being reborn.

Without taking my eyes off the cockroach, I began lowering myself until
I felt my body meeting the bed and, without taking my eyes from the
cockroach, I sat.

Now it was with raised eyes that I was seeing it. Now, bent over its own
midriff, it was looking down at me. I had fastened before me the unclean
of the world --- and had broken the spell of the living thing. I had
lost the ideas.

Then, once again, another thick millimeter of white matter spurted out.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-17 .calibre}
::: story
Then, once again, another thick millimeter of white matter spurted out.

Holy Mary, mother of God, I offer thee my life in exchange for that
moment yesterday's not being true. The roach with the white matter was
looking at me. I don't know if it was seeing me, I don't know what a
roach sees. But we were looking at each other, and also I don't know
what a woman sees. But if its eyes weren't seeing me, its existence was
existing me --- in the primary world I had entered, beings exist others
as a way of seeing one another. And in that world I was coming to know,
there are several ways that mean seeing: one a looking at the other
without seeing him, one possessing the other, one eating the other, one
just being in a place and the other being there too: all that also means
seeing. The roach wasn't seeing me directly, it was with me. The roach
wasn't seeing me with its eyes but with its body.

And I --- I was seeing. There was no way not to see it. No way to deny:
my convictions and my wings were quickly drying up and no longer had a
point. I could no longer deny it. I don't know what I could no longer
deny, but I no longer could. And I could no longer even rescue myself,
as before, with a whole civilization that would help me deny what I was
seeing.

I was seeing all of it, the roach.

The roach is an ugly and sparkling being. The roach is the other way
around. No, no, it doesn't have a way around: it is that. Whatever is
exposed in it is what I hide in me: from my outside being exposed I made
my unheeded inside. It was looking at me. And it wasn't a face. It was a
mask. A diver's mask. That precious gem of rusted iron. Its two eyes
were alive like two ovaries. It was looking at me with the blind
fertility of its gaze. It was fertilizing my dead fertility. Would its
eyes be salty? If I touched them --- since I was gradually getting more
and more unclean --- if I touched them with my mouth, would they taste
salty?

I'd already tasted in my mouth a man's eyes and, from the salt in my
mouth, realized he was crying.

But, thinking about the salt in the roach's black eyes, suddenly I
recoiled again, and my dry lips pulled back to my teeth: the reptiles
that move across the earth! In the halted reverberation of the light of
the room, the roach was a small slow crocodile. The dry and vibrating
room. The roach and I poised in that dryness as on the dry crust of an
extinct volcano. That desert I had entered, and also inside it I was
discovering life and its salt.

Once again the white part of the roach spurted out maybe less than a
millimeter.

This time I had hardly perceived the minute movement its matter had
made. I was looking on engrossed, unmoving.

--- Never, until then, had life happened to me by day. Never in
sunlight. Only in my nights did the world slowly revolve. Only that,
whatever happened in the dark of night itself, would also happen at the
same time in my own entrails, and my dark wasn't differentiated from the
dark outside, and in the morning, when I opened my eyes, the world was
still a surface: the secret life of the night soon reduced in my mouth
to the taste of a nightmare that disappears. But now life was happening
by day. Undeniable and to be seen. Unless I averted my eyes.

And I could still avert my eyes.

--- But hell had already taken me, my love, the hell of unhealthy
curiosity. I was already selling my human soul, because seeing had
already begun to consume me in pleasure, I was selling my future, I was
selling my salvation, I was selling us.

"I'm asking for help," I then suddenly shouted to myself with the
muteness of those whose mouths are gradually filled with quicksand, "I'm
asking for help," I thought still and seated. Yet not once did it occur
to me to get up and go, as if that were already impossible. The roach
and I had been buried in a mine.

The scale just had one pan on it now. Upon that pan was my deep refusal
of roaches. But now "refusal of roaches" were merely words, and I also
knew that in the hour of my death I too would not be translatable by
word.

Dying, yes, I knew, since dying was the future and is imaginable, and
for imagining I had always had time. But the instant, this instant ---
the present --- that isn't imaginable, between the present and I there's
no interval: it is now, in me.

--- Understand, dying I knew beforehand and dying still wasn't demanding
me. But what I'd never experienced was the crash with the moment called
"right now." Today is demanding me this very day. I had never before
known that the time to live also has no word. The time to live, my love,
was being so right now that I leaned my mouth on the matter of life. The
time to live is a slow uninterrupted creaking of doors continuously
opening wide. Two gates were opening and had never stopped opening. But
they were continuously opening onto --- onto the nothing?

The time to live is so hellishly inexpressive that it is the nothing.
What I was calling "nothing" was nevertheless so stuck to me that to me
it was . . . I? and that's why it was becoming invisible as I was
invisible to myself, and it was becoming the nothing. The doors as
always kept opening.

Finally, my love, I gave in. And it became a now.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-18 .calibre}
::: story
Finally, my love, I gave in. And it became a now.

It was finally now. It was simply now. It was like this: the country was
in eleven in the morning. Superficially as a yard that is green, of the
most delicate superficiality. Green, green --- green is a yard. Between
me and the green, the water of the air. The green water of the air. I
see everything through a full glass. Nothing is heard. In the rest of
the house the shadows are all swollen. The ripe superficiality. It's
eleven in the morning in Brazil. It's now. That means exactly now. Now
is time swollen to the limit. Eleven o'clock has no depth. Eleven
o'clock is full of eleven hours up to the brim of the green glass. Time
trembles as a motionless balloon. The air fertilized and wheezing. Until
in a national anthem the ringing of eleven-thirty cuts the cables of the
balloon. And suddenly we will all reach noon. Which will be green like
now.

I suddenly awoke from the unexpected green oasis where for a moment I
had taken full refuge.

But I was in the desert. And it isn't only at the summit of an oasis
that it's now: now is also in the desert, and fully. It was right now.
For the first time in my life it was fully about now. This was the
greatest brutality I had ever received.

For the present has no hope, and the present has no future: the future
will be exactly once again present.

I was so scared that I got even quieter inside myself. Because it was
seeming to me that I would finally have to feel.

It seems I shall have to give up everything I leave behind the gates.
And I know, I knew, that if I went through the gates that are always
open, I would enter the heart of nature.

I knew that entering is not a sin. But it's risky as dying. Just as one
dies without knowing where to, and that is the greatest courage of a
body. Entering was only a sin because it was the damnation of my life,
to which I later might never be able to regress. I might have already
known that, beyond the gates, there would be no difference between me
and the roach. Not in my own eyes or in the eyes of what is God.

That was how I started taking my first steps into the nothing. My first
hesitant steps toward Life, and abandoning my life. My foot stepped into
the air, and I entered paradise or hell: the nucleus.

I ran my hand over my forehead: with relief I was noticing that I had
finally begun to sweat. Shortly before there was just that hot dryness
scorching us both. Now I was beginning to moisten myself.

Ah, how tired I am. My desire now would be to interrupt all of this and
insert in this difficult story, purely for the sake of fun and
relaxation, a great anecdote I heard the other day about why a couple
broke up. Ah, I know so many interesting stories. And I could also, to
relax, speak of tragedy. I know tragedies.

My sweat was relieving me. I looked up, at the ceiling. With the play of
the beams of light, the ceiling had rounded and transformed itself into
something that reminded me of a vault. The vibration of the heat was
like the vibration of a sung oratorio. Only my hearing part was feeling.
Closed-mouth canticle, sound vibrating deaf like something imprisoned
and contained, amen, amen. Canticle of thanksgiving for the murder of
one being by another being.

The deepest murder: the one that is a way of relating, a way of one
being existing the other being, a way of seeing one other and being one
other and having one other, murder where there is neither victim nor
executioner, but a link of mutual ferocity. My primary struggle for
life. "Lost in the Fiery Hell of a Canyon a Woman Desperately Struggles
for Life."

I waited for that mute and imprisoned sound to pass. But the vastness
inside the little room was growing, the mute oratorio was enlarging it
in vibrations that reached the fissure in the ceiling. The oratorio was
not a prayer: it was not asking for anything. Passions in the form of an
oratorio.

The roach suddenly vomited through its slit another fluffy and white
spurt.

--- Ah! but who can I ask for help, if you too --- I then thought toward
a man who had been mine --- if you aren't any use to me now either.
Since like me, you wanted to transcend life and therefore surpassed it.
But now I won't be able to transcend anymore, I will have to know, and
will go without you, whom I tried to ask for help. Pray for me, my
mother, since not transcending is a sacrifice, and transcending used to
be my human effort at salvation, there was an immediate usefulness in
transcending. Transcending is a transgression. But staying inside
whatever is, that demands that I be fearless!

And I will have to stay inside whatever is.

There's something that must be said, don't you feel that there's
something that must be known? oh, even if I have to transcend it later,
even if later the transcending is born inescapably from me like the
breath of someone alive.

But, after what I found out, I'll accept like a breath of respiration
--- or like a noxious vapor? no, not like a noxious vapor, I take pity
on me! if the transcendence must come to me inescapably, may it be like
the breath born of the mouth itself, of the mouth that exists, and not
of a false mouth open on the arm or head.

It was with hellish joy that I as if I were going to die. I was starting
to feel that my haunted step would be irremediable, and that I was
little by little abandoning my human salvation. I was feeling that what
is mine inside me, despite its fluffy and white matter, nevertheless had
the power to explode my face of silver and beauty, farewell beauty of
the world. Beauty that now is remote to me and that I no longer want ---
I am no longer able to want beauty --- maybe I never had really wanted
it, but it was so good! and I remember how the game of beauty was good,
beauty was a continuous transmutation.

But with hellish relief I bid it farewell. What comes out of the roach's
belly is not transcendable --- ah, I don't want to say that it's the
opposite of beauty, "opposite of beauty" doesn't even make sense ---
what comes out of the roach is: "today," blessed be the fruit of thy
womb --- I want the present without dressing it up with a future that
redeems it, not even with a hope --- until now what hope wanted in me
was just to conjure away the present.

But I want much more than that: I want to find the redemption in today,
in right now, in the reality that is being, and not in the promise, I
want to find joy in this instant --- I want the God in whatever comes
out of the roach's belly --- even if that, in my former human terms,
means the worst, and, in human terms, the infernal.

Yes, I wanted it. But at the same time I was grabbing with both hands
onto the pit of my stomach: "I can't!" I implored of another man who
also could not and never could. I can't! I don't want to know what the
thing I would now call "the nothing" is made of! I don't want to feel
directly in my very delicate mouth the salt in the eyes of the roach,
because, my mother, I had been used to the sogginess of its layers and
not the simple moistness of the thing.

It was as I was thinking about the salt in the roach's eyes that, with
the sigh of someone who is going to have to give in yet again, I
realized that I was still using the old human beauty: salt.

Even the beauty of salt and the beauty of tears I would have to abandon.
Even that, since what I was seeing predated humanity.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-19 .calibre}
::: story
Since what I was seeing predated humanity.

No, there was no salt in those eyes. I was sure that the roach's eyes
were saltless. For salt I had always been ready, salt was the
transcendence that I used to experience a taste, and to flee what I was
calling "nothing." For salt I was ready, for salt I had built my entire
self. But what my mouth wouldn't know how to understand --- was the
saltless. What all of me didn't know --- was the neutral.

And the neutral was the life that I used to call the nothing. The
neutral was the hell.

The Sun had moved a bit and stuck itself to my back. Also in the
sunlight the roach was split in two. I can't do anything for you, roach.
I don't want to do anything for you.

Because it was no longer about doing something: the neutral gaze of the
roach was telling me it wasn't about that, and I knew it. Only I
couldn't bear just sitting there and being, and so I wanted to do. Doing
would be transcending, transcending is an exit.

But the moment had come for it no longer to be about that. Since the
roach didn't know about hope or pity. If it weren't imprisoned and were
larger than I, with neutral busy pleasure it would kill me. Just as the
violent neutral of its life was allowing me, because I was not
imprisoned and was larger, to kill it. That was the kind of tranquil
neutral ferocity of the desert where we were.

And its eyes were saltless, not salty as I would have wanted: salt would
be the feeling and the word and the taste. I knew that the neutral of
the roach has the same lack of taste as its white matter. Seated, I was
consisting. Seated, consisting, I was realizing that if I didn't call
things salty or sweet, sad or happy or painful or even with in-between
shades of greater subtlety --- that only then would I no longer be
transcending and remain in the thing itself.

That thing, whose name I do not know, was that thing that, looking at
the roach, I was now starting to call without a name. Contact with that
thing without qualities or attributes was disgusting to me, a living
thing with no name, or taste, or smell was repugnant. Insipidity: the
taste now was no more than a tartness: my own tartness. For a moment,
then, I felt a kind of quaking happiness all over my body, a horrible
happy unease in which my legs seemed to vanish, as always when the roots
of my unknown identity were touched.

Ah, at least I had already entered the roach's nature to the point that
I no longer wanted to do anything for it. I was freeing myself from my
morality, and that was a catastrophe without crash and without tragedy.

Morality. Would it be simplistic to think the moral problem with regard
to others consists in behaving as one ought to, and the moral problem
with regards to oneself is managing to feel what one ought to? Am I
moral to the extent that I do what I should, and feel as I should? All
of a sudden the moral question seemed to me not only overwhelming, but
extremely petty. The moral problem, in order for us to adjust to it,
should be at once less demanding and greater. Since as an ideal it is
both small and unattainable. Small, if one attains it: unattainable,
because it cannot even be attained. "The scandal still is necessary, but
woe to him through whom the scandal comes" --- was it in the New
Testament that it was said? The solution had to be secret. The ethics of
the moral is keeping it secret. Freedom is a secret.

Though I know that, even in secret, freedom doesn't take care of guilt.
But one must be greater than guilt. The tiny divine part of me is
greater than my human guilt. The God is greater than my essential guilt.
So I prefer the God, to my guilt. Not to excuse myself and to flee but
because guilt diminishes me.

I no longer wanted to do anything for the roach. I was freeing myself
from my morality --- though that gave me fear, curiosity and
fascination; and much fear. I'm not going to do anything for you, I too
creep along the ground. I'm not going to do anything for you because I
no longer know the meaning of love as I used to think I did. Also what I
thought about love, that too I'm bidding farewell, I barely know what it
is anymore, I don't remember.

Maybe I'll find another name, much crueler initially, and much more
it-self. Or maybe I won't. Is love when you don't give a name to the
identity of things?

But now I know something horrible: I know what it is to need, need,
need. And it's a new need, on a level that I can only call neutral and
terrible. It's a need without any pity on my need and without pity on
the roach's need. I was seated, calm, sweating, exactly as now --- and I
see that there is something more serious and more inevitable and more
nucleus than everything I used to call by names. I, who called love my
hope for love.

But now, it's in this neutral present of nature and of the roach and of
the living sleep of my body, that I want to know love. And I want to
know if hope was a contemporization with the impossible. Or if it was a
way of delaying what's possible now --- and which I only don't have out
of fear. I want the present time that has no promise, that is, that is
being. This is the core of what I want and fear. This is the nucleus
that I never wanted.

The roach was touching all of me with its black, faceted, shiny and
neutral gaze.

And now I was starting to let it touch me. In truth I had fought all my
life against the profound desire to let myself be touched --- and I had
fought because I couldn't allow myself the death of what I called my
goodness; the death of human goodness. But now I no longer wanted to
fight it. There had to be a goodness so other that it wouldn't resemble
goodness. I no longer wanted to fight.

With disgust, with despair, with courage, I was giving in. It was too
late, and now I wanted.

Was it only in that instant that I was wanting? No, or else I would have
left the room long before, or simply would barely have seen the roach
--- how often before had roaches happened to me and I had gone another
way? I was giving in, but with fear and shattering.

I thought that if the telephone rang, I would have to answer and would
still be saved! But, as if remembering an extinct world, I remembered
that I'd taken the phone off the hook. If not for that, it would ring, I
would flee the room to answer it, and never again, oh! never again would
return.

--- I remembered you, when I kissed your man face, slowly, slowly kissed
it, and when the time came to kiss your eyes --- I remembered that then
I had tasted the salt in my mouth, and that the salt of tears in your
eyes was my love for you. But, what bound me most of all in a fright of
love, had been, in the depth of the depths of the salt, your saltless
and innocent and childish substance: with my kiss your deepest insipid
life was given to me, and kissing your face was the saltless and busy
patient work of love, it was woman weaving a man, just as you had woven
me, neutral crafting of life.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-20 .calibre}
::: story
Neutral crafting of life.

Through having one day kissed the insipid residue found in the salt of a
tear, the unfamiliarity of the room became recognizable, like matter
already lived. If it hadn't been recognized until then, it was because
it had only been saltlessly lived by my deepest saltless blood. I was
recognizing the familiarity of everything. The figures on the wall, I
was recognizing them with a new way of looking. And I was also
recognizing the roach's watchfulness. The roach's watchfulness was life
living, my own watchful life living itself.

I felt around in the pockets of my robe, found a cigarette and matches,
lit it.

In the sun the white mass of the roach was becoming drier and slightly
yellowed. That informed me that more time had passed than I'd imagined.
A cloud covered the sun for an instant, and suddenly I was seeing the
same room without sun.

Not dark but just without light. So I noticed that the room existed by
itself, that it wasn't the heat of the sun, it could also be cold and
calm as the moon. Imagining its possible moonlit night, I breathed in
deeply as if entering a quiet reservoir. Though I also knew that the
cold moon wouldn't be the room either. The room was in itself. It was
the loud monotony of an eternity that breathes. That terrified me. The
world would only cease to terrify me if I became the world. If I were
the world, I wouldn't be afraid. If we are the world, we are moved by a
delicate radar that guides.

When the cloud passed, the sun in the room became even brighter and
whiter.

From time to time, for a light instant, the roach moved its antennae.
Its eyes kept looking at me monotonously, the two neutral and fertile
ovaries. In them I was recognizing my two anonymous neutral ovaries. And
I didn't want to, ah, how I didn't want to!

I'd taken the phone off the hook, but somebody could maybe ring the
doorbell, and I'd be free! The blouse! that I'd bought, they'd said
they'd deliver it, and then they'd ring the bell!

No, they wouldn't. I'd have to keep recognizing. And I was recognizing
in the roach the saltlessness of the time I was pregnant.

--- I recalled myself roaming the streets knowing I'd have the abortion,
doctor, I who about children only knew and only would know that I was
going to have an abortion. But at least I was getting to know pregnancy.
Along the streets I was feeling inside me the child that still wasn't
moving, while I was stopping to look in the shop windows at the smiling
wax mannequins. And when I entered a restaurant and ate, the pores of a
child were devouring like the mouth of a waiting fish. When I was
walking, when I was walking I was carrying it.

During the interminable hours that I roamed the streets making up my
mind about the abortion, which I had nevertheless already arranged with
you, sir, doctor, during those hours my eyes too must have been
saltless. On the street I too was no more than thousands of cilia of a
neutral protozoan beating, I had already known within myself the shiny
gaze of a roach captured at the waist. I had walked the streets with my
lips parched, and living, doctor, was for me the opposite side of a
crime. Pregnancy: I had been flung into the happy horror of the neutral
life that lives and moves.

And while I was looking at the shop windows, doctor, with my lips as
parched as someone who doesn't breathe through her nose, while I was
looking at the fixed and smiling mannequins, I was full of neutral
plankton, and was opening my suffocated and quiet mouth, I said this to
you, sir: "what's bothering me most, doctor, is that I'm having trouble
breathing." The plankton was giving me my color, the TapajÃ³s River is
green because its plankton is green.

When night arrived, I was making up my mind about the abortion I'd
already made up my mind about, lying on the bed with my thousands of
faceted eyes spying on the dark, with lips blackened from breathing,
without thinking, without thinking, making up my mind, making up my
mind: on those nights all of me was slowly blackening from my own
plankton just as the matter of the roach was yellowing, and my gradual
blackening was keeping track of the passing time. And was all that love
for the child?

If so, then love is much more than love: love is something before love:
it's plankton struggling, and the great living neutrality struggling.
Just like the life in the roach stuck at the waist.

The fear I always had of the silence with which life makes itself. Fear
of the neutral. The neutral was my deepest and most living root --- I
looked at the roach and knew. Until the moment of seeing the roach I'd
always had some name for what I was living, otherwise I wouldn't get
away. To escape the neutral, I had long since forsaken the being for the
persona, for the human mask. When I humanized myself, I'd freed myself
from the desert.

I'd freed myself from the desert, yes, but had also lost it! and also
lost the forests, and lost the air, and lost the embryo inside me.

But there it is, the neutral roach, without a name for pain or for love.
Its only differentiation in life is that it has to be either male or
female. I had only thought of it as female, since things crushed at the
waist are female.

I put out the cigarette butt that was already burning my fingers, I put
it out carefully on the floor with my slipper, and crossed my sweaty
legs, I had never thought legs could sweat that much. The two of us, the
ones buried alive. If I had the courage, and I'd wipe the sweat from the
roach.

Did it feel inside itself something like what my gaze saw in it? how
much did it take advantage of itself and take advantage of what it was?
even somehow indirectly, did it know that it crawled? or is crawling
something we ourselves don't know is happening? What did I know about
whatever it was that others obviously saw in me? how would I know if I
went around with my stomach pressed into the dust of the ground. Truth
has no witness? being isn't knowing? If a person doesn't look and
doesn't see, does the truth exist anyway? The truth that doesn't
transmit itself even to those who can see. Is that the secret of being a
person?

If I wanted to, even now, after everything that's happened, I can still
keep myself from having seen. And then I'll never know about the truth
I'm trying again to cross --- it still depends on me!

I was looking around the dry and white room, from which I could only see
sands and sands of wreckage, some covering others. The minaret where I
was standing was made of hard gold. I was upon the hard gold that
receives nothing. And I was needing to be received. I was afraid.

--- Mother: I killed a life, and there are no arms to receive me now and
in the hour of our desert, amen. Mother, everything now has turned to
hard gold. I interrupted an organized thing, mother, and that is worse
than killing, that made me enter through a breach that showed me, worse
than death, that showed me the thick and neutral life turning yellow.
The roach is alive, its eye gaze is fertilizing, I am afraid of my
hoarseness, mother.

Because my mute hoarseness was already the hoarseness of someone
enjoying a gentle hell.

The hoarseness --- of someone having pleasure. The hell was good for me,
I was enjoying that white blood that I had spilled. The roach is real,
mother. It is no longer an idea of a roach.

--- Mother, all I did was want to kill, but just look at what I broke: I
broke a casing! Killing is also forbidden because it breaks the hard
casing, and leaves one with the sticky life. From inside the hard casing
is emerging a heart thick and white and alive with pus, mother, blessed
art thou among the roaches, now and in the hour of this thy my death,
cockroach and jewel.

As if having said the word "mother" had freed inside myself a thick and
white part --- the intense vibration of the oratorio suddenly stopped,
and the minaret fell mute. And as after an intense attack of vomiting,
my forehead was relieved, fresh and cold. No longer even fear, no longer
even fright.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-21 .calibre}
::: story
No longer even fear, no longer even fright.

Had I vomited my last human remnants? And I was no longer asking for
help. The diurnal desert was before me. And now the oratorio was
starting up again but in another way, now the oratorio was the deaf
sound of the heat refracting off walls and ceilings, in rounded vaults.
The oratorio was made of the tremblings of sultriness. And my fear too
was different now: not the fear of someone about to enter, but the much
broader fear of someone who has already entered.

So much broader: it was fear of my lack of fear.

Since it was with my rashness that I then looked at the roach. And I
saw: it was a creature without beauty for other species. And as I saw
it, the little former fear returned for just an instant: "I swear, I'll
do everything you want! but don't leave me imprisoned in the roach's
room because something enormous is going to happen to me, I don't want
the other species! I just want people."

But, at my slight cringing, the oratorio just intensified, and so I kept
still, no longer trying to make a movement to help myself. I'd already
abandoned myself --- I could nearly see there at the beginning of the
path already traveled the body I'd cast off. But I was still sometimes
calling for it, still calling myself. And it was because I could no
longer hear my answer, that I knew I'd already abandoned myself beyond
my reach.

Yes, the roach was a creature without beauty for other species. The
mouth: if it had teeth, they would be big, square and yellow teeth. How
I hate the light of the sun that reveals everything, reveals even the
possible. With the edge of my robe I wiped my forehead, without taking
my gaze from the roach's eyes, and my own eyes also had the same lashes
as well. But no one touches yours, unclean thing. Only another roach
would want this roach.

And me --- who would want me today? who had already become as mute as I
was? who, like me, was calling fear love? and want, love? and need,
love? Who, like me, knew that I had never changed my form since they had
drawn me on the stone of a cave? and next to a man and a dog.

From now on I could call anything by the name I invented: in the dry
room I could, since any name would do, since none of them would. Within
the dry sounds of the vault everything could be called anything, because
anything would be transmuted in the same vibrating muteness. The roach's
much greater nature made anything, entering there --- name or person ---
lose its false transcendence. So much so that I was seeing only and
exactly the white vomit of its body: I was only seeing facts and things.
I knew that I was in the irreducible, though I was unaware what the
irreducible is.

But I also knew that ignorance of the law of the irreducible was no
excuse. I could no longer excuse myself by claiming I didn't know the
law --- since knowing oneself and knowing the world is the law that,
even unattainable, cannot be infringed, and nobody can be excused by
claiming not to know it. Worse: the roach and I were not faced with a
law we had to obey: we ourselves were the unknown law that we obeyed.
The renewedly original sin is this: I must fulfill my law of which I am
unaware, and if I don't fulfill my ignorance, I shall be originally
sinning against life.

In the garden of Paradise, who was the monster and who was not? between
the houses and apartments, and in the elevated spaces between the high
buildings, in that hanging garden --- who is, and who is not? How long
can I stand not at least knowing what is looking at me? the raw roach is
looking at me, and its law sees mine. I felt that I was going to know.

--- Don't abandon me now, don't let me make alone this already-made
decision. I had, yes, I still had the desire to take refuge in my own
fragility and in the sly, yet true, argument that my shoulders were a
woman's, feeble and slender. Whenever I had needed to, I'd excused
myself by arguing that I was a woman. But I was well aware that it's not
just women who are afraid to see, everyone fears seeing what is God.

I was afraid of the face of God, I was afraid of my final nudity on the
wall. Beauty, that new absence of beauty that had nothing to do with
whatever I used to call beauty, horrified me.

--- Give me your hand. Because I no longer know what I'm saying. I think
I made it all up, none of this existed! But if I made up what happened
to me yesterday --- who can guarantee that I didn't also invent my
entire life prior to yesterday?

Give me your hand:
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-22 .calibre}
::: story
Give me your hand:

I am now going to tell you how I entered the inexpressive that was
always my blind and secret search. How I entered whatever exists between
the number one and the number two, how I saw the line of mystery and
fire, and which is surreptitious line. A note exists between two notes
of music, between two facts exists a fact, between two grains of sand no
matter how close together there exists an interval of space, a sense
that exists between senses --- in the interstices of primordial matter
is the line of mystery and fire that is the breathing of the world, and
the continual breathing of the world is what we hear and call silence.

It wasn't by using any of my attributes as an instrument that I was
reaching the smooth mysterious fire of whatever is a plasma --- it was
precisely removing from myself all my attributes, and going only with my
living entrails. To have reached that point, I was abandoning my human
organization --- to enter that monstrous thing that is my living
neutrality.

--- I know, it's bad to hold my hand. It's bad to be left without air in
that collapsed mine where I brought you without mercy on you, but out of
mercy on me. But I swear I'll get you out of here still alive --- even
though I'm not lying, even though I'm not lying about what my eyes saw.
I'll save you from this terror in which, for the time being, I need you.
What mercy on you now, you whom I grabbed. You innocently gave me your
hand, and because I was holding it I had the courage to submerge myself.
But don't try to understand me, just keep me company. I know your hand
would drop me, if it knew.

How can I repay you? At least use me too, use me at least like a dark
tunnel --- and when you've crossed my darkness you'll find yourself on
the other side with yourself. You might not find yourself with me, I
don't know if I'll cross over, but with yourself. At least you're not
alone, as I was yesterday, and yesterday I was only praying to at least
get out of there alive. And not just alive --- the way that primarily
monstrous roach was just alive --- but organizedly alive like a person.

Identity --- identity that is the first inherence --- was that what I
was surrendering to? was that what I had entered?

Identity is forbidden to me, I know. But I'm going to take a chance
because I trust in my future cowardice, and it will be my essential
cowardice that will reorganize me once again into a person.

Not only through my cowardice. But I'll reorganize myself through the
ritual with which I was already born, as in the neutral of the semen the
ritual of life is inherent. Identity is forbidden to me but my love is
so great that I won't resist my will to enter the mysterious fabric,
into that plasma from which I may never again be able to depart. My
belief, however, is also so deep that, if I cannot depart, I know, even
in my new unreality the plasma of the God will be in my life.

Ah, but at the same time how can I want for my heart to see? if my body
is so weak that I can't face the sun without my eyes physically crying
--- how could I stop my heart from glittering in physically organic
tears if in nakedness I felt the identity: the God? My heart that
covered itself with a thousand cloaks.

The great neutral reality of what I was living was overtaking me with
its extreme objectivity. I was feeling incapable of being as real as the
reality that was reaching me --- could I be commencing in contortions to
be as nakedly real as what I was seeing? Yet I was living all that
reality with a feeling of the unreality of reality. Could I be living,
not the truth, but the myth of the truth? Every time I lived the truth
it was through an impression of inescapable dream: the inescapable dream
is my truth.

I'm trying to tell you how I reached the neutral and the inexpressive in
me. I don't know if I'm understanding what I'm saying, I'm feeling ---
and I very much fear the feeling, since feeling is only one of the types
of being. Yet I shall cross the stupefied sultriness that billows from
the nothing, and shall have to understand the neutral with the feeling.

The neutral. I am speaking of the vital element that binds things. Oh, I
am not afraid that you don't understand, but that I understand myself
badly. If I don't understand myself, I'll die from the same thing I live
from. Now let me tell you the scariest part:

I was being carried off by the demonic.

For the inexpressive is diabolic. A person who isn't committed to hope
lives the demonic. A person who has the courage to cast off feelings
discovers the ample life of an extremely busy silence, the same that
exists in the cockroach, the same in the stars, the same in the self ---
the demonic *precedes* the human. And the person who sees that
presentness burns as if seeing the God. Prehuman divine life is of a
presentness that burns.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-23 .calibre}
::: story
Prehuman divine life is of a presentness that burns.

I'm going to tell you: I feared a certain blind and already ferocious
joy that was starting to overtake me. And to lose me.

The joy of getting lost is a Sabbath joy. Getting lost is a dangerous
finding. I was experiencing in that desert the fire of things: and it
was a neutral fire. I was living from the tessitura of which things are
made. And it was a hell, that place, because in that world where I was
living neither compassion nor hope exists.

I had entered the Sabbath orgy. Now I know what happens in the dark of
the mountains on the nights of orgies. I know! I know with horror:
things enjoy themselves. The thing of which things are made delights
itself --- that is the raw joy of black magic. It was from that neutral
that I lived --- the neutral was my true primeval soup. I was moving
forward, and feeling the joy of the hell.

And the hell is not the torture of pain! it is the torture of a joy.

The neutral is inexplicable and alive, try to understand me: just as
protoplasm and semen and protein are of a living neutral. And I was all
new, like a novice. It was as if before I had had a palate addicted to
salt and sugar, and a soul addicted to joys and pains --- and had never
felt the first taste. And now I was experiencing the taste of the
nothing. I was rapidly becoming unaddicted, and the taste was new as the
mother's milk that only has taste for an infant's mouth. With the
landslide of my civilization and of my humanity --- which was a
suffering of great longing for me --- with the loss of humanity, I was
coming orgiastically to taste the identity of things.

It's very difficult to taste. Up till then I had been so engrossed by
sentimentalization that, experiencing the taste of the real identity, it
seemed as tasteless as the taste a raindrop has in your mouth. It's
horribly insipid, my love.

My love, it's like the most insipid nectar --- it's like the air that in
itself has no smell. Up till then my addicted senses were mute to the
taste of things. But the most archaic and demonic of my thirsts had led
me subterraneously to collapse all constructions. The sinful thirst was
guiding me --- and now I know that experiencing the taste of that almost
nothing is the secret joy of the gods. It is a nothing that is the God
--- and that has no taste.

But it's the most primary joy. And only that, at last, at last! is the
pole opposite the pole of the feeling-human-Christian. Through the pole
of the primary demonic joy, I was remotely perceiving and for the first
time --- that there really was an opposite pole.

I was clean of my own intoxification by feeling, so clean I could enter
the divine life that was a primary life entirely without comeliness,
life as primary as if it were a manna falling from heaven and that
doesn't have the taste of anything: manna is like a rain and has no
taste. Experiencing that taste of the nothing was my damnation and my
joyful terror.

Oh, my unknown love, remember that I was imprisoned there in the
collapsed mine, and that by then the room had taken on an unutterable
familiarity, like the truthful familiarity of dreams. And, as in dreams,
what I can't reproduce for you is the essential color of its atmosphere.
As in dreams, the "logic" was something else, was one that makes no
sense when you awaken, since the dream's greater truth is lost.

But remember that all this was happening with me awake and immobilized
by the light of day, and the truth of a dream was happening without the
anesthesia of the night. Sleep with me awake, and only thus can you know
of my great sleep and know what is the living desert.

Suddenly, sitting there, a tiredness all hardened and without any
lassitude, overtook me. A little more and it would petrify me.

Then, carefully, as if I already had paralyzed parts within me, I
started stretching out on the coarse mattress and there, all shriveled
up, I fell asleep as immediately as a roach falls asleep on a vertical
wall. There was no human stability in my sleep: it was the balancing
power of a roach that falls asleep atop the lime of a wall.

When I woke, the room had a sun even whiter and more fervidly
motionless. Returning from that sleep, to whose depthless surface my
short paws had clung, I was now trembling with cold.

But then the numbness was passing, and once again, fully inside the
burning of the sun, I was suffocating confined.

It must have been past noon. I got up before even making up my mind to,
and, though uselessly, tried to open even more the already wide open
window, and was trying to breathe, even if only to breathe a visual
expanse, I was seeking an expanse.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-24 .calibre}
::: story
I was seeking an expanse.

From that room excavated in the rock of a building, from the window of
my minaret, I saw as far as the eye could see the enormous range of
roofs and roofs calmly scorching in the sun. The apartment buildings
like squat villages. In size it surpassed Spain.

Beyond the rocky gullies, between the cements of the buildings, I saw
the favela atop the hill and saw a goat slowly climbing the hill. Beyond
stretched the highlands of Asia Minor. From there I was contemplating
the empire of the present. Over there was the Strait of the Dardanelles.
Further beyond the craggy ridges. Thy majestic monotony. Under the sun
thy imperial breadth.

And further beyond, already the start of the sands. The desert naked and
burning. When darkness fell, cold would consume the desert, and in it
one would shiver as on desert nights. Even further, the blue and salty
lake was sparkling. Over there, that must be the region of the great
salt lakes.

Beneath the trembling waves of sultriness, monotony. Through the other
apartment windows and on the cement terraces, I was seeing a coming and
going of shadows and people, like those of the first Assyrian merchants.
They were fighting for control of Asia Minor.

I had dug up the future perhaps --- or reached such remote ancient
depths that my hands that had dug them up could not fathom them. There I
was standing, like a child dressed as a friar, a sleepy child. But an
inquisitive child. From atop this building, the present contemplates the
present. Just as in the second millennium before Christ.

And I, now I was no longer an inquisitive child. I had grown, and had
become as simple as a queen. Kings, sphinxes and lions --- here is the
city where I live, and all extinct. I was what was left, stuck by one of
the stones that had fallen. And, since the silence judged my immobility
to be that of a dead woman, they all forgot me, they left without
pulling me out, and, presumed dead, I lay there watching. And I saw,
while the silence of those who really had died was invading me as ivy
invades the mouths of the stone lions.

And because I myself was then sure I would end up dying of starvation
beneath the fallen stone that was pinning me by my limbs --- I then saw
like someone who is never going to tell. I saw, as uninvolved as someone
who isn't even going to tell herself. I was seeing, like someone who
will never have to understand what she saw. As a lizard's nature sees:
without even having to remember afterward. The lizard sees --- as a
loose eye sees.

I was perhaps the first person to set foot in that castle in the air.
Five million years ago perhaps the last caveman had looked out from this
same point, where once there must have existed a mountain. And that
later, eroded, had become an empty area where later once again cities
had risen which themselves in turn eroded. Today the ground is widely
populated by diverse races.

Standing at the window, sometimes my eyes rested on the blue lake that
might have been no more than a piece of sky. But I soon grew tired,
since the blue was made of much intensity of light. My bleary eyes then
went to rest in the naked and burning desert, which at least didn't have
the hardness of a color. Three millennia later the secret oil would gush
from those sands: the present was opening gigantic perspectives onto a
new present.

Meanwhile, today, I was living in the silence of something that three
millennia later, after it was eroded and built again, would be stairs
again, cranes, men and constructions. I was living the pre-history of a
future. Like a woman who never had children but would have them three
millennia later, I was already living today from the oil that would gush
in three millennia.

If at least I'd entered the room at dusk --- tonight the moon would be
full, I remembered when recalling the party on the terrace the night
before --- I would see the full moon rising over the desert.

"Ah, I want to go back to my house," I suddenly asked myself, since the
moist moon had made me long for my life. But from that platform I
couldn't manage a single moment of darkness and moon. Only the heap of
embers, only the errant wind. And for me no flask of water, no vessel of
food.

But maybe, less than a year later, I'd make a find that nobody and not
even me would have dared to expect. A gold chalice?

For I was seeking the treasure of my city.

A city of gold and stone, Rio de Janeiro, whose inhabitants under the
sun were six hundred thousand beggars. The treasure of the city could be
in one of the breaches in the rubble. But which one? That city needed
the work of a cartographer.

Raising my gaze ever further, to ever steeper heights, before me lay
gigantic blocks of buildings that formed a heavy design, still not shown
on a map. My eyes went on, seeking on the hill the remains of some
fortified wall. Reaching the top of the hill, I let my eyes
circumnavigate the panorama. Mentally I traced a circle around the
semi-ruins of the favelas, and recognized that there once could have
been a city living there as large and limpid as Athens at its apogee,
with children running between the merchandise displayed in the streets.

My method of vision was entirely impartial: I was working directly with
the evidences of vision, and not allowing suggestions outside the vision
to predetermine my conclusions; I was entirely prepared to surprise
myself. Even if the evidence ended up contradicting everything that had
alighted upon me in my most tranquil delirium.

I know --- from my own and singular witness --- that in the beginning of
this my work of searching I didn't have the slightest idea of the kind
of language that would be slowly revealed to me until one day I could
arrive at Constantinople. But I was already prepared to have to bear in
the room the hot and humid season of our climate, and with it snakes,
scorpions, tarantulas and myriads of mosquitoes that arise when a city
collapses. And I knew that many times, in my work in the open field, I
would have to share my bed with the livestock.

For now the sun was scorching me at the window. Only today had the sun
fully reached me. But it was also true that only when the sun was
reaching me could I, because I was standing, become a source of shade
--- where I would keep fresh wineskins of my water.

I would need a drill twelve meters long, camels, goats, and sheep, an
electric strip; and I would have to use the expanse itself directly
because it would be impossible to reproduce, for example, in a simple
aquarium, the richness of oxygen found on the surface of the oceans.

To keep my enthusiasm for the work from fading, I'd try not to forget
that geologists already know that in the subsoil of the Sahara is an
immense lake of potable water, I remember reading that; and that in the
Sahara itself archeologists already unearthed the remains of household
utensils and old settlements: seven thousand years ago, I had read, in
that "region of fear" a prosperous agriculture had developed. The desert
has a moistness that must be found again.

How should I set to work? to keep the dunes in place, I would have to
plant two million green trees, especially eucalyptus --- before bed I'd
always read something, and I'd read a lot about the properties of the
eucalyptus.

And I couldn't forget, at the outset of the job, to prepare myself to
err. Not forgetting that the error had often become my path. Every time
something I was thinking or feeling didn't work out---was because
finally there was a breach, and, if I'd had courage before, I'd have
already gone through it. But I'd always been afraid of delirium and
error. My error, however, must be the path of a truth: since only when I
err do I step out of what I know and what I understand. If "truth" were
whatever I could understand --- it would end up being just a small
truth, one my size.

The truth must be exactly in what I shall never be able to understand.
And, later, could I understand myself afterward? I don't know. Will the
man of the future understand us as we are today? He distractedly, with
some distracted tenderness, will pet our head as we do with the dog that
comes over to us and looks at us from within its darkness, with mute and
afflicted eyes. He, the future man, would pet us, remotely understanding
us, as I remotely would understand myself later, beneath the memory of
the memory of the memory already lost of a time of pain, not knowing
that our time of pain would pass just as a child is not a static child,
it's a growing being.

Anyway, beyond keeping the dunes in place with eucalyptus, I couldn't
forget, if it turned out to be necessary, that rice prospers in brackish
soil, whose high salt content it helps to cut down; I also was
remembering that from my nightly readings that I, deliberately, tried to
make impersonal so they would help me fall asleep.

And what other instruments would I need to dig? pickaxes, a hundred and
fifty shovels, winches, even though I didn't exactly know what a winch
was, heavy wagons with steel axles, a portable forge, besides nails and
twine. As for my hunger, for my hunger I'd rely on the dates of ten
million palms, not to mention almond and olive trees. And I'd have to
know, beforehand, that, when praying from my minaret, I could only pray
to the sands.

But I had probably been ready for the sands since birth: I'd know how to
pray them, for that I wouldn't need to train beforehand, like
witch-doctors who don't pray to things but pray things. I had always
been prepared, trained as I had been by fear.

I remembered something engraved in my memory, and until that moment
uselessly: that Arabs and nomads call the Sahara El Khela, the nothing,
Tanesruft, the country of fear, Tiniri, land beyond the regions of
pasture.

To pray the sands, I like them was already prepared by fear.

Once again too scorched, I sought the great blue lakes where I plunged
my withered eyes. Lakes or luminous stains of sky. The lakes were
neither ugly nor beautiful. And that was just what was still terrifying
my human. I tried to think about the Black Sea, I tried to think about
the Persians descending the ravines --- but in all of that I found
neither beauty nor ugliness, just the infinite successions of centuries
of the world.

Which, all of a sudden, I could no longer stand.

And I suddenly turned to the interior of the room which, in its burning,
at least was not populated.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-25 .calibre}
::: story
I suddenly turned to the interior of the room which, in its burning, at
least was not populated.

No, during all that I hadn't been crazy or beside myself. It was just a
visual meditation. The danger of meditating is accidentally beginning to
think, and thinking is no longer meditating, thinking leads to an
objective. The least dangerous thing, in meditation, is "seeing," which
dispenses with thinking words. I know that an electronic microscope now
exists that shows the image of an object one hundred and sixty thousand
times larger than its natural size --- but I wouldn't call the vision
one has through that microscope hallucinatory, even if one no longer
recognizes the small object that it monstrously enlarged.

If I was wrong in my visual meditation?

Absolutely probable. But also in my purely optical visions, of a chair
or of a jug, I'm the victim of error: my visual witness of a jug or of a
chair is defective in various ways. Error is one of my inevitable ways
of working.

I sat back down on the bed. But now, looking at the roach, I already
knew much more.

Looking at it, I was seeing the vastness of the desert of Libya, in the
region of Elschele. The roach that had reached that spot millennia
before me, and also reached it before the dinosaurs. Faced with the
roach, I could already see in the distance Damascus, the oldest city on
the earth. In the desert of Libya, roaches and crocodiles? All that time
I hadn't wanted to think what I had really already thought: that the
roach is edible as a lobster, the roach is a crustacean.

And all I have is disgust for the crawling of crocodiles because I am
not a crocodile. I am horrified by the crocodile's silence full of
stratified scales.

But disgust is as necessary for me as the defilement of the waters is
necessary for the reproduction of the things in the waters. Disgust
guides me and fertilizes me. Through disgust, I see a night in Galilee.
A night in Galilee is as if in the dark the breadth of the desert moved.
The roach is a dark breadth moving.

I was already living the hell through which I was yet to pass, but I
didn't know if all I had to do was pass through it, or if I'd have to
stay there. I was already coming to know that this hell is horrible and
good, maybe I myself wanted to stay there. Since I was seeing the deep
and ancient life of the roach. I was seeing a silence that has the depth
of an embrace. The sun is as much in the desert of Libya, as it is hot
in itself. And the earth is the sun, how had I never seen that the earth
is the sun?

And then it will happen --- on a naked and dry rock in the desert of
Libya ---, the love of two roaches will happen. I now know what it's
like. A roach waits. I see its brown-thing silence. And now --- now I am
seeing another roach moving slowly and with difficulty across the sands
toward the rock. Upon the rock, whose flood dried up millennia ago, two
dry roaches. One is the silence of the other. The killers who meet: the
world is extremely reciprocal. The quivering of an entirely mute
rattling in the rock; and we, who made it to today, are still quivering
with it.

--- I promise this same silence for myself one day, I promise us what I
now learned. Except for us it will have to be at night, for we are moist
and salty beings, we are beings of seawater and tears. It will also be
with the wholly open eyes of the roaches, but only if it is night, for I
am a creature of great moist depths, I do not know the dust of dry
cisterns, and the surface of a rock is not my home.

We are creatures that must plunge into the depth in order to breathe
there, as the fish plunges in the water in order to breathe, except my
depths are in the air of the night. Night is our latent state. And it is
so moist that plants are born. In houses the lights go out in order to
hear the crickets more clearly, and so the grasshoppers can walk atop
the leaves almost without touching them, the leaves, the leaves, the
leaves --- in the night the soft anxiety is transmitted through the
hollow of the air, the void is a means of transport.

Yes, not for us the love in the diurnal desert: we are the ones that
swim, the night air is soggy and sweetened, and we are salty since
sweating is our exhalation. Long ago I was drawn with you in a cave, and
with you I swam from its dark depths up to today, I swam with my
countless cilia --- I was the oil that did not gush until today, when a
black African woman drew me in my house, making me sprout upon a wall.
Sleepwalking like the oil that gushes at last.

--- I swear that's how love is. I know, only because I was sitting there
and knowing. Only by the light of the roach, do I know that everything
the two of us once had was already love. The roach had to hurt me as
much as if my nails were being torn out --- and then I could no longer
stand the torture and confessed, and I'm informing. I could no longer
stand it and am confessing that I already knew a truth that never had
use or application, and that I would be afraid to apply, since I'm not
grown-up enough to know how to use a truth without destroying myself.

If you could know through me, without having to be tortured first,
without having to be split by the door of a wardrobe, without having
broken your casings of fear that were drying with time into casings of
stone, as mine had to be broken under the force of tongs until I reached
the tender neutral of myself --- if you could know through me . . . then
learn from me, who had to be wholly exposed and lose all of my suitcases
with their engraved initials.

--- Guess at me, guess at me because it's cold, losing the lobster's
casings is cold. Warm me up with your guesses about me, understand me
because I am not understanding me. I am only loving the roach. And it's
a hellish love.

But you're afraid, I know you were always afraid of the ritual. But when
one has been tortured to the point of becoming a nucleus, then one
starts demonically wanting to serve the ritual, even if the ritual means
consuming oneself --- just as in order to have the incense the only way
to get it is to burn the incense. Listen, because I'm as serious as a
roach that has cilia. Listen:

When one is one's own nucleus, one has no more deviations. Then one is
one's own solemnity, and no longer fears consuming oneself when serving
the consuming ritual --- the ritual is the unfolding of the life of the
nucleus, the ritual is not outside it: the ritual is inherent. The roach
has its ritual within its cell. The ritual --- believe me because I
think I know --- the ritual is the mark of the God. And every child is
already born with the same ritual.

--- I know: the two of us were always afraid of my solemnity and of your
solemnity. We thought that it was a solemnity of form. And we always
disguised what we knew: that living is always a question of life and
death, hence the solemnity. We also knew, but without the gift of the
grace of knowing it, that we are the life within us, and that we obey
ourselves. The only destiny we are born with is that of the ritual. I
had been calling the "mask" a lie, and it wasn't: it was the essential
mask of solemnity. We would have to put on ritual masks to love one
other. Scarabs are born with the mask with which they will fulfill
themselves. Through original sin, we lost our mask.

I looked: the roach was a scarab. It was entirely only its own mask.
Through the profound absence of the roach's laughter, I was seeing its
warrior ferocity. It was meek but its function was fierce.

I am meek but my function in living is fierce. Ah, pre-human love
invades me. I understand, I understand! The form of living is a secret
so secret that it is the silent crawling of a secret. It's a secret in
the desert. And I certainly already knew. Since, by the light of the
love of two roaches there came to me the memory of a true love I once
had and that I didn't know I'd had --- since love then was something I
understood with a word. But there is something that must be said, it
must be said.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-26 .calibre}
::: story
But there is something that must be said, it must be said.

--- I'm going to say what I never said to you before, maybe that's
what's missing: having said. If I didn't say it, it wasn't out of greed
in telling, or because of my muteness of a roach that has more eyes than
mouth. If I didn't say it it's because I didn't know that I knew --- but
I know now. I'm going to say to you that I love you. I know that I said
that to you before, and that it was also true when I said it, but only
now am I really saying it. I have to say it before I . . . Oh, but it's
the roach that's going to die, not I! I don't need this letter from a
cell on death row. . . .

--- No, I don't want to give you the fright of my love. If you're afraid
of me, I'll be afraid of me. Don't be scared of the pain. I'm now as
certain as the certainty that in that room I was alive and the roach was
alive: I'm certain of this: that all things course above and below pain.
Pain is not the true name for whatever people call pain. Listen: I'm
certain of it.

Since, now that I was no longer struggling with myself, I quietly knew
that that was a roach, that pain was not pain.

Ah, if only I'd known what was going to happen in the room, and had
picked up more cigarettes before coming in: I was consuming myself with
the will to smoke.

--- Ah, if I could transmit the memory to you, the memory that's just
now come alive, of what the two of us had lived without being aware of
it. Do you want to remember with me? oh, I know it's hard: but let's go
toward ourselves. Instead of surpassing ourselves. Don't be afraid now,
you're safe because at least it already happened, unless you see danger
in knowing that it happened.

It's that, when we loved, I didn't know that love was happening much
more exactly when the thing we were calling love wasn't there. The
neutral of love, that was what we were living and despising.

What I'm talking about is when nothing was happening, and, we called
that nothing-happening an interval. But what was that interval like?

It was the enormous flower opening, all swollen with itself, my great
and trembling vision. What I was watching, was immediately clotting
beneath my gaze and becoming mine --- but not a permanent clot: if I
pressed it between my hands, like a bit of clotted blood, the
solidification would liquefy again into blood between my fingers.

And time wasn't totally liquid because, for me to gather things with my
hands, things had to coagulate like fruits. In the intervals we called
empty and calm, and when we thought that the love had stopped . . .

I remember the soreness in my throat back then: tonsils swollen,
clotting within me was swift. And could easily liquefy: my sore throat
went away, I was telling you. Like glaciers in summertime, and liquefied
the rivers run. Every word of ours --- in the time we called empty ---
each word was as light and empty as a butterfly: the word from inside
fluttering out to meet the mouth, the words were said but we didn't even
hear them because the melting glaciers made so much noise as they ran.
Amidst the liquid din, our mouths were moving speaking, and in fact we
only saw the moving mouths but didn't hear them --- we each looked at
the mouth of the other, seeing it speak, and it hardly mattered that we
didn't hear, oh, in the name of God it hardly mattered.

And in our name, it was enough to see the mouth speaking, and we laughed
because we were hardly paying attention. And yet we were calling that
not-listening indifference and lack of love.

But we actually were speaking and how! speaking the nothing. Yet
everything shimmered as when heavy tears stick in the eyes; that is why
everything shimmered.

In those intervals we were thinking of ourselves as resting from one
being the other. Really it was the great pleasure of not being the
other: since that way each of us had two. Everything was going to end,
when what we called the interval of love ended; and because it was going
to end, it weighed tremulous beneath the very weight of its ending
already in itself. I remember all this as through a quake of water.

Ah, could it be that we were not originally human? and that, out of
practical necessity, we became human? that horrifies me, as it does you.
Since the roach was looking at me with its scarab carapace, with its
broken body made completely of pipes and of antennae and flabby cement
--- and that was undeniably a truth prior to our words, that was
undeniably the life that up till then I had not wanted.

--- Then --- then through the door of damnation, I ate life and was
eaten by life. I was understanding that my kingdom is of this world. And
I understood that through the hell inside me. Because inside myself I
saw what hell is like.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-27 .calibre}
::: story
Because inside myself I saw what hell is like.

Hell is the mouth that bites and eats the living flesh with its blood,
and the one being eaten howls with delight in his eye: hell is pain as
delight of the matter, and with the laughter of delight, the tears run
in pain. And the tear that comes from the laughter of pain is the
opposite of redemption. I was seeing the inexorability of the roach with
its ritual mask. I was seeing that that was hell: the cruel acceptance
of pain, the solemn lack of pity for one's own destiny, loving the
ritual of life more than one's own self --- that was hell, where the one
eating the other's living face was indulging in the joy of pain.

For the first time I was feeling with hellish voracity the desire to
have had the children I never had: I wanted to have reproduced, not in
three or four children, but in twenty thousand my organic hellishness
full of pleasure. My future survival in children would be my true
present, which is, not just myself, but my pleasurable species never
interrupted. Not having had children left me spasmodic as if confronting
an addiction denied.

That roach had had children and I had not: the roach could die crushed,
but I was condemned never to die, since if I died, even just once, I
would die. And I wanted not to die but to remain eternally dying as the
delight of supreme pain. I was in hell pierced with pleasure like a low
buzz of nerves of pleasure.

And all that --- oh, my horror --- all that was happening in the wide
heart of indifference. . . . All that losing oneself in a spiraling
destiny, and that does not get lost. In that infinite destiny, made only
of cruel present, I, like a larva --- in my deepest inhumanity, since
until then what had escaped me was my real inhumanity --- I and we like
larvae devour ourselves in soft flesh.

And there is no punishment! That is hell: there is no punishment. Since
in hell we make the supreme delight of what would be punishment, in this
desert we make of punishment yet another ecstasy of laughter with tears,
in hell we make of punishment a hope for delight.

So was this the other side of humanization and hope?

In hell, that demonic faith for which I am not responsible. And which is
faith in orgiastic life. The orgy of hell is the apotheosis of the
neutral. The joy of the Sabbath is the joy of getting lost in the
atonal.

What still frightened me was that even the unpunishable horror would be
generously reabsorbed by the abyss of unending time, by the abyss of
unending heights, by the deep abyss of the God: absorbed into the heart
of an indifference.

So unlike human indifference. Since that was a
self-serving-indifference, a fulfilled indifference. It was an extremely
energetic indifference. And all in silence, in that hell of mine. Since
laughter forms part of the volume of the silence, only in the eye
sparkled the indifferent-pleasure, but laughter was in the blood itself
and cannot be heard.

And all this is in this very instant, it is in the now. Yet at the same
time the present instant is entirely remote because of the size-grandeur
of the God. Because of the enormous perpetual size, even whatever exists
right now, is remote: in the very instant that the roach is broken in
the wardrobe, it too is remote in relation to the heart of the great
self-seeking-indifference that reabsorbs it with impunity.

The grandiose indifference --- was that what was existing inside me?

The hellish grandeur of life: since not even my body delimits me, mercy
does not let my body delimit me. In hell, my body does not delimit me,
and is that what I call soul? Living the life that is no longer the life
of my body --- is that what I call impersonal soul?

And my impersonal soul burns me. The grandiose indifference of a star is
the soul of the roach, the star is the very exorbitance of the body of
the roach. The roach and I aspire to a peace that cannot be ours ---
it's a peace beyond the size and destiny of the roach and of me. And
because my soul is so unlimited that it is no longer me, and because it
is so beyond me --- because I am always remote to myself, I am as
unreachable to myself as a star is unreachable to me. I contort myself
to try to reach the present time that surrounds me, but I am still
remote in relation to this very instant. The future, alas, is closer to
me than the instant now.

The roach and I are hellishly free because our living matter is greater
than we are, we are hellishly free because my own life is so barely
containable inside my body that I cannot use it. My life is used more by
the earth than by me, I am so much greater than whatever I used to call
"I" that, just by having the life of the world, I would have myself. It
would take a horde of roaches to make a slightly sensitive spot in the
world --- yet one single roach, just through its attention-life, that
single roach is the world.

The whole most unreachable part of my soul and which does not belong to
me --- is the one that touches my border with whatever is no longer I,
and to which I give myself. All my anguish has been this unsurpassable
and excessively close closeness. I am more whatever within me is not.

And that's when the hand I was holding abandoned me. No, no. I am the
one who pulled my hand away because now I must go alone.

If I manage to return from the kingdom of life I shall take your hand
again, and kiss it gratefully because it waited for me, and waited for
my path to go by, and for me to return thin, ravenous and humble: hungry
only for the little, hungry only for the less.

Because, sitting and unmoving there, I had started wanting to live my
own remoteness as the only way of living my present. And that, which is
apparently innocent, that was once again a pleasure that resembled a
horrendous and cosmic delight.

To relive it, I let go of your hand.

Because in that enjoyment there was no pity. Pity is being the child of
someone or of some thing --- but being the world is the cruelty.
Cockroaches gnaw each other and kill each other and penetrate each other
in procreation and eat each other in an eternal summer that darkens into
night --- hell is a summer that boils and almost darkens into night. The
present does not see the roach, the present time looks at it from such a
great distance that it does not perceive the roach from the heights, and
only sees a silent desert --- the present time does not even suspect, in
the naked desert, the orgiastic festival of gypsies.

Where, reduced to small jackals, we eat each other with laughter. With
the laughter of pain --- and free. The mystery of human destiny is that
we are inevitable, but we have the freedom to carry out or not our
inevitability: it depends on us to carry out our inevitable destiny.
While inhuman beings, like the roach, carry out their own complete
cycle, without ever erring because they do not choose. But it depends on
me to freely become whatever I inevitably am. I am the mistress of my
inevitability, and, if I decide not to carry it out, I shall remain
outside my specifically living nature. But if I carry out my neutral and
living nucleus, then, within my species, I shall be being specifically
human.

--- But becoming human can be transformed into an ideal, and suffocate
beneath accretions. . . . To be human ought not be an ideal for man who
is inevitably human, being human must be the way that I, living thing,
obeying freely the path of whatever is alive, am human. And I don't even
need to care for my soul, it will inevitably care for me, and I don't
have to make a soul for myself: all I have to do is choose to live. We
are free, and that is hell. But there are so many roaches that they
appear a prayer.

My kingdom is of this world . . . and my kingdom was not only human. I
knew. But knowing that would scatter death-life, and a child in my womb
would be vulnerable to being eaten by life-death itself, and without a
Christian word making sense. . . . But there are so many children in the
womb that they appear a prayer.

At that moment I had still not understood that the first sketch of what
would become a prayer was already being born from the happy hell I had
entered, and which I no longer wanted to depart.

From that country of rats and tarantulas and roaches, my love, where
enjoyment drips in fat drops of blood.

Only the mercy of the God could yank me out of that terrible indifferent
joy in which I was bathing, complete.

For I was exulting. I was coming to know the violence of the happy dark
--- I was happy as a demon, hell is my maximum.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-28 .calibre}
::: story
Hell is my maximum.

I was fully in the heart of an indifference that is still and alert. And
in the heart of an indifferent love, of an indifferent waking sleep, of
an indifferent pain. Of a God who, if I loved Him, I didn't understand
what He wanted from me. I know, He wanted me to be his equal, and for me
to equal Him through a love of which I was incapable.

Through a love so great that it would be of such an indifferent personal
--- as if I were not a person. He wanted for me to be the world with
Him. He wanted my human divinity, and that had to start with an initial
stripping-down of the constructed human.

And I had taken the first step: since at least I already knew that being
a human is a sensitization, an orgasm of nature. And that, only through
an anomaly of nature, instead of being the God, as other beings are He,
instead of being He, we wanted to see Him. It would not hurt to see Him,
if we were as great as He. A roach is greater than I because its life is
so given over to Him that it comes from the infinite and goes toward the
infinite without noticing, it doesn't miss a beat.

I had taken the first great step. But what had happened to me?

I had fallen into the temptation of seeing, the temptation of knowing
and feeling. My grandeur, searching for the grandeur of the God, had
taken me to the grandeur of hell. I had not been able to understand His
organization except through the spasm of a demonic exultation. Curiosity
had expelled me from the shelter --- and I was finding the indifferent
God who is all good because He is neither bad nor good, I was in the
heart of matter that is the indifferent explosion of itself. Life was
having the strength of a titanic indifference. A titanic indifference
that wanted to advance. And I, who wanted to advance with it, had been
hooked on the pleasure that was making me merely hellish.

The temptation of pleasure. The temptation is to eat directly from the
source. The temptation is to eat directly from the law. And the
punishment is no longer wanting to stop eating, and eating oneself who
am equally edible matter. And I was seeking damnation like a happiness.
I was seeking the most orgiastic in myself. I would never rest again: I
had stolen the hunting horse of a king of joy. I was now worse than
myself!

I shall never rest again: I stole the hunting horse from the Sabbath
king. If I fall asleep for an instant, the echo of a whinny wakes me.
And it is useless not to go. In the dark of night the panting gives me
goose bumps. I pretend to sleep but in the silence the steed breathes.
It says nothing but it breathes, waits and breathes. Every day it will
be the same thing: right at dusk I start to get melancholy and
thoughtful. I know that the first drum on the mountain will make the
night, I know that the third will already wrap me in its thunder.

And by the fifth drum I shall already be unconscious inside my greed.
Until at dawn, by the last lightest drums, I shall end up without
knowing how beside a creek, without ever knowing what I did, beside the
enormous and tired head of the horse.

Tired from what? What did we do, we who trot in the hell of joy? I have
not gone for two centuries. The last time I got down from the adorned
saddle, my human sadness was so great that I swore never again. Yet the
trotting carries on inside me. I chat, tidy the house, smile, but I know
that the trot is inside me. I miss it like one who dies. I can no longer
not go.

And I know at night, when it calls me, I shall go. I want just one more
time for the horse to lead my thought. That was who I learned with. If
you can call it thought, that hour between barks. The dogs bark, I start
to get sad because I know, with my eye already shining, that I shall go.
When at night it calls me to hell, I go. I come down like a cat on the
roofs. Nobody knows, nobody sees. I turn up in the dark, mute and aglow.
Fifty-three flutes run after us. Ahead of us a clarinet lights us. And
nothing more is given to me to know.

At dawn I shall see us exhausted beside the creek, without knowing what
crimes we committed before reaching the dawn. In my mouth and on your
hooves the mark of blood. What did we sacrifice? At dawn I shall be
standing beside the mute steed, with the first bells of a Church flowing
down the creek, with the remains of the flutes still flowing from my
hair.

The night is my life, darkness falls, the happy night is my sad life ---
steal, steal the steed from me because after stealing so much I have
even stolen the dawn, and made a premonition from it: swiftly steal the
steed while there's still time, before darkness falls, if there still is
time, because when I stole the steed I had to kill the King, and in
murdering him I stole the death of the King. And the joy of the murder
consumes me with pleasure.

I was eating myself, I who am also living matter of the Sabbath.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-29 .calibre}
::: story
I was eating myself, I who am also living matter of the Sabbath.

Could that have been, though much more than that, the temptation of the
saints? And from which he who would or would not be a saint, emerges
sanctified or does not. From that temptation in the desert, I, laywoman,
the unsaint, would succumb or emerge from it for the first time as a
living being.

--- Listen, there's something called human sainthood, and which is not
that of the saints. I'm afraid that not even the God understands that
human sainthood is more dangerous than divine sainthood, that the
sainthood of the laity is more painful. Yet Christ himself knew that if
they had done what they did to Him, they would do much more to us, since
He said: "For if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be
done in the dry?"

Trial. Now I understand what a trial is. Trial: it means that life is
trying me. But trial: means that I too am trying. And trying can become
an ever more insatiable thirst.

Wait for me: I'm going to pull you out of the hell into which I
descended. Listen, listen:

Since from the delight without reprieve, a sob was already being born
inside me that seemed more like a sob of joy. It wasn't a sob of pain, I
had never heard it before: it was that of my life splitting in order to
procreate me. In those desert sands I was starting to be of the
daintiness of a first shy offering, like that of a flower. What was I
offering? what could I offer of myself --- I, who was being the desert,
I, who had asked and had?

I was offering the sob. I was finally crying inside my hell. I use and
sweat the very wings of blackness, and was using them and sweating them
for me --- which art Thou, thou, flash of silence. I am not Thou, but me
art Thou. Only for that I shall never be able to feel Thee directly:
because Thou art me.

Oh, God, I was starting to understand with enormous surprise: that my
hellish orgy was human torment itself.

How could I have guessed? if I didn't know that one laughs in suffering.
Because I didn't know that that was how one suffered. So I had called
joy my deepest suffering.

And in the sob the God came to me, the God was occupying all of me now.
I was offering my hell to God. The first sob had made --- of my terrible
pleasure and of my feast --- a new pain: that now was as light and
helpless as the flower of my own desert. The tears that were flowing now
were like those for a love. The God, who could never be understood by me
except as I understood Him: breaking me like a flower that at birth can
barely hold itself up and seems to break.

But now, that I knew that my joy had been suffering, I was wondering if
I was fleeing toward a God because I couldn't stand my humanity. Because
I needed someone who wasn't petty like me, someone who was so much wider
than I in order to allow my misfortune without even using pity and
solace --- someone who was, who was! and not, like me, an accuser of
nature, not like me, a person astonished by the power of my own hates
and loves.

Right this second, now, a doubt surprises me. God, or whatever Thou art
called: I only ask for help now: but for Thou to help me now not darkly
as Thou art me, but clearly this time and in plain sight.

Since I need to know exactly this: am I feeling what I am feeling, or am
I feeling what I would like to feel? or am I feeling what I might need
to feel?

Because I no longer even want the concretization of an ideal, what I
want to be is just a seed. Even if afterwards from that seed ideals are
born again, either the real ones, which are the birth of a path, or the
false ones, which are the accretions. Could I be feeling what I would
like to feel? Since a millimeter's difference is enormous, and that
millimeter of space can save me through truth or once again make me lose
everything I saw. It's dangerous. Men praise highly what they feel.
Which is as dangerous as detesting what one feels.

I had offered my hell to the God. And my cruelty, my love, my cruelty
had suddenly stopped. And suddenly that same desert was the still-vague
sketch of what was called paradise. The moisture of a paradise. Not
another thing, but that same desert. And I was surprised as one is
surprised by a light that comes out of the nothing.

Was I understanding that what I had experienced, that nucleus of hellish
rapacity, was that what is called love? But --- neutral-love?

Neutral love. The neutral was whispering. I was reaching what I had
sought all my life: whatever is the most final identity and that I had
called inexpressive. That was what had always been in my eyes in the
snapshot: an inexpressive joy, a pleasure that does not know that it is
pleasure --- a pleasure too delicate for my coarse humanity that had
always been made of coarse concepts.

--- I made such an effort to speak to myself of a hell that has no
words. Now, how shall I speak of a love that only has whatever one
feels, and before which the word "love" is a dusty object?

The hell I had gone through --- how can I explain it to you? --- had
been the hell that comes from love. Ah, people put the idea of sin in
sex. But how innocent and childish that sin is. The real hell is that of
love. Love is the experience of a danger of greater sin --- it is the
experience of the mud and the degradation and the worst joy. Sex is the
fright of a child. But how shall I speak for myself about the love that
I now knew?

It's almost impossible. Because in the neutral of love is a continual
joy, like a noise of leaves in the wind. And I fit into the neutral
nakedness of the woman on the wall. The same neutral, the one that had
consumed me in pernicious and eager joy, it was in that same neutral
that I now was hearing another kind of continual joy of love. Whatever
God is was more in the neutral noise of the leaves in the wind than in
my old human prayer.

Unless I could make the real prayer, and which to others and myself
would resemble the kabbalah of a black magic, a neutral murmur.

That murmur, without any human meaning, would be my identity touching
the identity of things. I know that, in relation to the human, that
neutral prayer would be a monstrosity. But in relation to whatever is
God, it would be: being.

I had been forced into the desert to find out with horror that the
desert is alive, to find out that a roach is life. I had drawn back
until I found out that in me the deepest life is before the human ---
and for that I had had the diabolic courage to get rid of feelings. I
had to give no human value to life in order to understand the breadth,
much more than the human breadth, of the God. Had I asked for the most
dangerous and forbidden thing? risking my soul, would I have boldly
demanded to see God?

And now it was as if I were before Him and didn't understand --- I was
standing uselessly before Him, and I was once again before the nothing.
To me, as to everyone, everything had been given, but I wanted more: I
wanted to know about that everything. And I had sold my soul in order to
find out. But now I was understanding that I had not sold it to the
devil, but much more dangerously: to God. Who had let me see. Since He
knew that I would not know how to see whatever I saw: the explanation of
an enigma is the repetition of the enigma. What art Thou? and the answer
is: Thou art. What do Thou existest? and the answer is: what thou
existest. I had the ability to ask the question, but not to hear the
answer.

No, I had not even known how to ask the question. Yet the answer had
imposed itself upon me since I was born. Because of this continual
answer I, the wrong way around, had been forced to seek the
corresponding question. So I had got lost in a labyrinth of questions,
and asked questions at random, hoping that one of them would
occasionally correspond to the answer, and that I could then understand
the answer.

But I was like a person who, having been born blind and not having
anyone around who could see, that person could not even form a question
about vision: she wouldn't know that seeing existed. But, since vision
actually did exist, even if that person didn't know about it and had
never even heard of it, that person would be motionless, restless,
alert, not knowing how to ask about something she didn't know existed
--- she would feel the lack of something that should have been hers.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-30 .calibre}
::: story
She would feel the lack of something that should have been hers.

--- No. I didn't tell you everything. I still wanted to see if I could
get away with only telling myself a little. But my liberation will only
come about if I have the immodesty of my own incomprehension.

Because, sitting on the bed, I then said to myself:

--- They gave me everything, and just look what everything is! it's a
roach that is alive and that is about to die. And then I looked at the
door handle. After that I looked at the wood of the wardrobe. I looked
at the glass of the window. Just look at what everything is: it's a
piece of thing, a piece of iron, of gravel, of glass. I said to myself:
look what I fought for, to have exactly what I already had, I crawled
until the doors opened for me, the doors of the treasure I was seeking:
and look what the treasure was!

The treasure was a piece of metal, it was a piece of whitewash from the
wall, it was a piece of matter made into roach.

Since prehistory I had started my march through the desert, and without
a star to guide me, only perdition guiding me, only going astray guiding
me --- until, almost dead from the ecstasy of fatigue, illuminated by
passion, I finally found the safe. And in the safe, sparkling with
glory, the hidden secret. The most remote secret in the world, opaque,
but blinding me with the irradiation of its simple existence, sparkling
there with glory that hurt my eyes. Inside the safe the secret:

A piece of thing.

A piece of iron, a roach's antenna, a plaster chip.

My exhaustion was prostrate at the feet of the piece of thing, hellishly
adoring. The secret of power was power, the secret of love was love ---
and the jewel of the world is an opaque piece of thing.

The opacity was reverberating in my eyes. The secret of my millennial
trajectory of orgy and death and glory and thirst until I finally found
what I had always had, and for that I had had to die first. Ah, I am
being so direct that I manage to seem symbolic.

A piece of thing? the secret of the pharaohs. And for that secret I had
almost given my life . . .

More, much more: to have that secret, that even now I still did not
understand, I would give my life again. I had risked the world in search
of the question that follows the answer. An answer that was still a
secret, even once the corresponding question was revealed. I had not
found a human answer to the enigma. But much more, oh, much more: I had
found the enigma itself. I had been given too much. What would I do with
what had been given to me? "May the holy thing not be given to the
dogs."

And I was not even touching the thing. I was just touching the space
that goes from me to the vital node --- I was within the zone of
cohesive and controlled vibration of the vital node. The vital node
vibrates at the vibration of my arrival.

My greatest possible approach stops a step away. What prevents that step
from being taken? It is the opaque irradiation, simultaneously from the
thing and from me. Because we are similar, we repel one other; because
we are similar we cannot enter the other. And if the step were taken?

I don't know, I don't know. Since the thing can never really be touched.
The vital node is a finger pointing at it --- and, the thing being
pointed at, wakens like a milligram of radium in the tranquil dark. Then
the wet crickets are heard. The light of the milligram does not alter
the dark. Because the dark is not illuminable, the dark is a way of
being: the dark is in the vital node of the dark, and you cannot touch
the vital node of a thing.

Would the thing for me have to reduce itself to being just whatever
surrounds the untouchable part of the thing? My God, give me what Thou
hast done. Or hast Thou already given it to me? and I am the one who
cannot take the step that will give me what Thou hast done? Am I what
Thou hast made? and I cannot take the step toward me, me that art Thing
and Thou. Give me what Thou art in me. Give me what Thou art in others,
Thou art the he, I know, I know because when I touch I see the he. But
the he, the man, takes care of what Thou hast given him and covers
himself in a casing made especially for me to touch and see. And I want
more than the casing that I love too. I want what I Thee love.

But I had only found, beyond the casing, the enigma itself. And was
trembling all over for fear of the God.

I tremble in fear and adoration of whatever exists.

Whatever exists, and which is just a piece of thing, yet I must place my
hand over my eyes against the opacity of that thing. Ah, the violent
loving unconsciousness of whatever exists surpasses the possibility of
my consciousness. I am afraid of so much matter --- the matter vibrates
with attention, vibrates with process, vibrates with inherent present
time. Whatever exists beats in strong waves against the unbreakable
grain that I am, and that grain whirls between abysses of calm billows
of existence, it whirls and does not dissolve, that grain-seed.

What am I the seed of? Seed of thing, seed of existence, seed of those
very billows of neutral-love. I, person, am an embryo. The embryo is
only sensitive --- that is its only particular inherence. The embryo
hurts. The embryo is eager and shrewd. My eagerness is my most initial
hunger: I am pure because I am eager.

Of the embryo that I am, this joyful matter is also made: the thing.
Which is an existence satisfied with its own process, deeply occupied
with no more than its own process, and the process vibrates entirely.
That piece of thing inside the safe is the secret of the coffer. And the
coffer itself is also made of the same secret, the safe holding the
jewel of the world, the safe too is made of the same secret.

Ah, and I don't want any of this! I hate what I managed to see. I don't
want that world made of thing!

I don't want it. But I cannot help feeling all enlarged inside myself by
the poverty of the opaque and the neutral: the thing is alive like
weeds. And if that is hell, it is heaven itself: the choice is mine. I
am the one who shall be demonic or angel; if I am demonic, this is hell;
if I am angel, this is heaven. Ah, I send my angel to prepare the path
before me. No, not my angel: but my humanity and its compassion.

I sent my angel to prepare the path before me and to let the stones know
of my coming and for them to soften before my incomprehension.

And my gentlest angel was who found the piece of thing. It couldn't find
anything except what it was. Since even when something falls from the
sky, it is a meteorite, that is, a piece of thing. My angel lets me be
the worshipper of a piece of iron or glass.

But I am the one who must stop myself from giving a name to the thing.
The name is an accretion, and blocks contact with the thing. The name of
the thing is an interval for the thing. The desire for the accretion is
great --- because the naked thing is so tedious.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-31 .calibre}
::: story
Because the naked thing is so tedious.

Ah, so that was why I had always had a kind of love for tedium. And a
continual hatred of it.

Because tedium is saltless and resembles the thing itself. And I had not
been great enough: only the great love monotony. Contact with supersound
of the atonal has an inexpressive joy that only flesh, in love,
tolerates. The great have the vital quality of flesh, and, not only
tolerate the atonal, they aspire to it.

My old constructions had consisted in continually trying to transform
the atonal into tonal, in dividing the infinite into a series of
finites, and without noticing that finite is not a quantity, it is a
quality. And my great discomfort in all that had been feeling that, no
matter how long the series of finites, it did not exhaust the residual
quality of the infinite.

But tedium --- tedium had been the only way I could feel the atonal. And
I just had not known that I liked tedium because I suffered from it. But
in living matter, suffering is not the measure of life: suffering is the
fatal by-product and, no matter how sharp, is negligible.

Oh, and I who should have noticed all that long before! I, who had as my
secret theme the inexpressive. An inexpressive face fascinated me; the
moment that was not the climax attracted me. Nature, what I liked about
nature, was its vibrating inexpressiveness.

--- Ah, I don't know how to tell you, since I only get eloquent when I
err, error leads me to argue and think. But how to speak to you, if
there is a silence when I get it right? How to speak to you of the
inexpressive?

Even in tragedy, since the true tragedy is in the inexorability of its
inexpressiveness, which is its naked identity.

Sometimes --- sometimes we ourselves manifest the inexpressive --- one
does that in art, in bodily love as well --- to manifest the
inexpressive is to create. In the end we are so so happy! since there is
not just one way of entering into contact with life, there are even
negative ways! even painful ones, even almost impossible ones --- and
all that, all that before dying, all that even while we are awake! And
there is also sometimes the exasperation of the atonal, which is of a
deep joy: the exasperated atonal is the flight taking off --- nature is
the exasperated atonal, that was how the worlds formed: the atonal got
exasperated.

And consider the leaves, how green and heavy they are, they got
exasperated in thing, how blind the leaves are and how green they are.
And feel in the hand how everything has a weight, the weight does not
escape the inexpressive hand. Do not awaken the person who is entirely
absent, who is absorbed is feeling the weight of things. Weight is one
of the proofs of the thing: only things with weight can fly. And the
only things that fall --- the celestial meteorite --- are those that
have weight.

Or is all that still me wanting the delight of the words of things? or
is that still me wanting the orgasm of extreme beauty, of understanding,
of the extreme gesture of love?

Because tedium is of a too primary joy! And that is why heaven is
intolerable to me. And I don't want heaven, I miss hell! I'm not up to
staying in heaven because heaven has no human taste! it has the taste of
thing, and the vital thing has no taste, like blood in my mouth when I
cut myself and suck the blood, I am frightened because my own blood has
no human taste.

And mother's milk, which is human, mother's milk is much before the
human, and has no taste, it is nothing, I already tried it --- it is
like the sculpted eye of a statue that is empty and has no expression,
since when art is good it is because it touched upon the inexpressive,
the worst art is expressive, that art which trangresses the piece of
iron and the piece of glass, and the smile, and the scream.

--- Ah, hand holding mine, if I hadn't needed so much of myself to shape
my life, I would already have had life!

But that, as far as humans are concerned, would be destruction: living
life instead of living one's own life is forbidden. It is a sin to enter
the divine matter. And that sin has an irremediable punishment: one who
dares to enter this secret, in losing individual life, disorganizes the
human world. I too could have left my solid constructions in the air,
even knowing that they were dismantlable --- if not for the temptation.
And the temptation can keep one from crossing to the other shore.

But why not stay inside, without trying to cross to the opposite shore?
Staying inside the thing is madness. I do not want to stay inside, or
else my previous humanization, which was so gradual, would come to have
had no basis.

And I do not want to lose my humanity! ah, losing it hurts, my love,
like casting off a still-living body and that refuses to die like the
severed pieces of a lizard.

But now it was too late. I would have to be greater than my fear, and I
would have to see what my previous humanization was made of. Ah, I must
believe with so much faith in the true and hidden seed of my humanity,
that I must not fear seeing humanization from the inside.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-32 .calibre}
::: story
I must not fear seeing humanization from the inside.

--- Give me your hand once again, I still don't know how to comfort
myself about the truth.

But --- sit with me for a moment --- the greatest lack of belief in the
truth of humanization would be to think that the truth would destroy
humanization. Wait for me, wait: I know that later I'll know how to fit
all this into daily practicality, don't forget that I too need a daily
life!

But see, my love, the truth cannot be bad. The truth is what it is ---
and, exactly because it is immutably what it is, it must be our great
security, just as having desired our father or mother is so inevitable
that it must have been our foundation. So then, understand? why would I
be afraid of eating the good and the evil? if they exist that is because
that is what exists.

Wait for me, I know I'm heading for some thing that hurts because I am
losing others --- but wait for me to go a little further. From all that,
perhaps, a name could be born! a name without word, but that might
implant the truth in my human makeup.

Don't be afraid as I am afraid: it cannot be bad to have seen life in
its plasma. It is dangerous, it is sinful, but it cannot be bad because
we are made of that plasma.

--- Listen, don't be afraid: remember that I ate of the forbidden fruit
and yet was not struck down by the orgy of being. So, listen: that means
I shall find even greater refuge than if I had not eaten of life. . . .
Listen, because I dived into the abyss I started to love the abyss of
which I am made. Identity can be dangerous because of the intense
pleasure that could become mere pleasure. But now I'm accepting loving
the thing!

And it's not dangerous, I swear it's not dangerous.

Since the state of grace exists permanently: we are always saved. All
the world is in a state of grace. A person is only struck down by
sweetness when realizing that we are in grace, the gift is feeling that
we are in grace, and few risk recognizing that within themselves. But
there is no danger of perdition, I know now: the state of grace is
inherent.

--- Listen. I was only used to transcending. Hope for me was
postponement. I had never let my soul free, and had quickly organized
myself as a person because it is too risky to lose the form. But I now
see what was really happening to me: I had so little faith that I had
invented merely the future, I believed so little in whatever exists that
I was delaying the present for a promise and for a future.

But now I discover that one doesn't even need hope.

It's much more serious. Ah, I know I am once again meddling with danger
and should shut up to myself. One shouldn't say that hope is not
necessary, because that could transform itself, since I am weak, into a
destructive weapon. And for yourself, into a useful weapon of
destruction.

I could not understand and you could not understand that dispensing with
hope --- really means action, and today. No, it is not destructive,
wait, let me understand us. It is a forbidden subject not because it is
bad but because we risk ourselves.

I know that if I abandoned what was a life entirely organized around
hope, I know that abandoning all that --- in favor of that wider thing
which is being alive --- abandoning all that hurts like separating from
a child not yet born. Hope is a child not yet born, only promised, and
that bruises.

But I know that at the same time I want and no longer want to contain
myself. It's like death throes: some thing in death wants to break free
and yet fears letting go of the safety of the body. I know it is
dangerous to speak of the lack of hope, but listen --- a deep alchemy is
happening in me, and it was in the fire of hell that it was forged. And
that gives me the greatest right: to err.

Listen without fright and without suffering: the neutral of the God is
so great and vital that I, unable to stand the cell of the God, I had
humanized it. I know it is horribly dangerous to discover now that the
God has the power of the impersonal --- because I know, oh, I know! that
it's as if that meant the destruction of the plea!

And it is as if the future stopped coming to exist. And we cannot, we
are needy.

But listen for a moment: I am not speaking of the future, I am speaking
of a permanent present. And that means that hope does not exist because
it is no longer a postponed future, it is today. Because the God does
not promise. He is much greater than that: He is, and never stops being.
We are the ones who cannot stand this always present light, and so we
promise it for later, just in order not to feel it today, right this
very minute. The present is the face today of the God.The horror is that
we know that we see God in life itself. It is with our eyes fully open
that we see God. And if I postpone the face of reality until after my
death --- it's out of guile, because I prefer to be dead when it is time
to see Him and that way I think I shall not really see Him, just as I
only have the courage to really dream when I sleep.

I know that what I am feeling is serious and could destroy me. Because
--- because it is like giving myself the news that the kingdom of heaven
already is.

And I don't want the kingdom of heaven, I don't want it, all I can stand
is the promise of it! The news I am getting from myself sounds
cataclysmic to me, and once again nearly demonic. But it is only out of
fear. It is fear. Since relinquishing hope means that I shall have to
start living, and not just promise myself life. And this is the greatest
fright I can have. I used to hope. But the God is today: his kingdom
already began.

And his kingdom, my love, is also of this world. I did not have the
courage to stop being a promise, and I was promising myself, like an
adult who lacks the courage to see she is already an adult and keeps
promising herself maturity.

And so I was realizing that the divine promise of life is already being
honored, and that it always was. Before, only once in a while, I was
reminded, in an instantaneous and immediately shunned vision, that the
promise is not only for the future, it is yesterday and it is
permanently today: but that was shocking to me. I preferred to keep
asking, without the courage to already have.

And I do. I always will. All I have to do is need, and I have. Needing
never ends since needing is inherent to my neutral. Whatever I do with
the plea and the want --- that will be the life I will have made from my
life. Not putting oneself in view of hope is not the destruction of the
plea! and is not abstaining from neediness. Ah, it's by increasing it,
it's by infinitely increasing the plea that is born of neediness.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-33 .calibre}
::: story
Infinitely increasing the plea that is born of neediness.

It is not for us that the cow's milk flows, but we drink it. The flower
was not made for us to look at it or for us to smell its fragrance, and
we look at it and smell it. The Milky Way does not exist for us to know
of its existence, but we know of it. And we know God. And what we need
from Him, we elicit. (I don't know what I am calling God, but thus he
may be called.) If we only know very little of God, that is because we
need little: we only have of Him whatever is inevitably enough for us,
we only have of God whatever fits inside us. (Nostalgia is not for the
God we are missing, it is the nostalgia for ourselves who are not
enough; we miss our impossible grandeur --- my unreachable present is my
paradise lost.)

We suffer from being so little hungry, though our small hunger is enough
for us to deeply miss the pleasure we would have if our hunger were
greater. We only drink as much milk as the body needs, and of the flower
we only see as far as our eyes and their flat fullness go. The more we
need, the more God exists. The more we can take, the more God we shall
have.

He lets us. (He was not born for us, neither were we born for Him, we
and He are at the same time). He is uninterruptedly busy with being, as
all things are being but He does not keep us from joining Him, and, with
Him, be busy being, in such a fluid and steady interchange --- like that
of living. He, for example, He uses us totally because there is nothing
in each of us that He, whose necessity is absolutely infinite, does not
need. He uses us, and does not prevent us from using Him. The ore that
is in the earth is not responsible for not being used.

We are very behind, and have no idea how to take advantage of God in an
interchange --- as if we still had not discovered that milk can be
drunk. A few centuries on or a few minutes on we might say astonished:
and to think that God always was! the one who barely was was me --- just
as we would say of oil that we finally needed it enough to know how to
wrest it from the earth, just as one day we shall regret those who died
of cancer without using the cure that is there. Clearly we still do not
need to not die of cancer. Everything is here. (Beings from another
planet might already know things and live in an interchange that for
them is natural; for us, meanwhile, the interchange would be "holiness"
and would completely unsettle our life.)

The cow's milk, we drink it. And if the cow does not let us, we resort
to violence. (In life and in death everything is lawful, living is
always a matter of life and death.) With God we can also force our way
through violence. He Himself, when He more especially needs one of us,
He chooses us and violates us.

Except my violence toward God must be toward myself. I must violate
myself in order to need more. In order to become so desperately greater
that I end up empty and indigent. Thus shall I have touched the root of
needing. The great emptiness in me shall be my place for existing; my
extreme poverty shall be a great volition. I must violate myself until I
have nothing, and need everything; when I need, then I shall have,
because I know that it is just to give more to whoever asks for more, my
demand is my size, my emptiness is my measure. One also can violate God
directly, through a love full of fury.

And He shall understand that this raging and murderous greed of ours is
actually our sacred and vital rage, our attempt to violate ourselves,
the attempt to eat more than we can to artificially increase our hunger
--- in the demand of life everything is lawful, even the artificial, and
the artificial is sometimes the great sacrifice one makes in order to
have the essential.

But, since we are little and therefore only need little, why should
little not be enough for us? Because we suspect the pleasure. As the
blind grope along, we foresee the intense pleasure of living.

And if we foresee it, it's also because we feel uneasily used by God, we
feel uneasily that we are being used with an intense and uninterrupted
pleasure --- moreover our salvation for now has been that of at least
being used, we are not useless, we are intensely taken advantage of by
God; body and soul and life are for just that: for the interchange and
ecstasy of someone. Uneasy, we feel that we are being used every instant
--- but that awakens within us the uneasy desire to use as well.

And He not only allows us, but He needs to be used, being used is a way
of being understood. (In all religions God demands to be loved.) In
order for us to have, all we are missing is to need. Needing is always
the supreme moment. As the most daring joy between a man and a woman
comes when the greatness of needing is such that we feel in agony and
fright: without you I could not live. The revelation of love is a
revelation of neediness --- blessed be the poor in spirit for theirs is
the lacerating kingdom of life.

If I abandon hope, I am celebrating my neediness, and that is the
greatest weight of living. And, because I owned up to my lacking, then
life is at hand. Many were they who abandoned all they had, and went in
search of the greater hunger.

Ah, I lost my shyness: God already is. We were already announced, and it
was my own erring life that announced me to the right one. Blessedness
is the continuous pleasure of the thing, the process of the thing is
made of pleasure and contact with whatever is gradually more and more
needed. My whole fraudulent struggle came from my not wanting to own up
to the promise that is fulfilled: I did not want reality.

Since being real is owning up to the promise itself: owning up to one's
own innocence and retaking the taste of which one was never aware: the
taste of the living.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-34 .calibre}
::: story
The taste of the living.

Which is an almost null taste. And that because things are very
delicate. Ah, the attempts to taste the host.

The thing is so delicate that I am astonished it manages to be visible.
And there are things even so much more delicate that they are not
visible. But all of them have a delicateness equivalent to what it means
for our body to have a face: the sensitization of the body that is a
human face. The thing has a sensitization of itself like a face.

Ah, and I who did not know how to consubstantiate my "soul." It is not
immaterial, it is of the most delicate material of thing. It is thing, I
just cannot manage to consubstantiate it in visible thickness.

Ah, my love, things are very delicate. We tread upon them with a
too-human hoof, with too many feelings. Only the delicateness of
innocence or only the delicateness of the initiates can taste its almost
null taste. Before I needed seasoning for everything, and that was how I
leapt over the thing and experienced the taste of the seasoning.

I could not experience the taste of the potato, since the potato is
almost the matter of the earth; the potato is so delicate that --- from
my incapacity to live on the level of delicateness of the merely earthy
taste of the potato --- I put my human hoof atop it and broke its
living-thing delicateness. Because the living matter is very innocent.

And my own innocence? It hurts me. Because I also know that, on a solely
human level, innocence is having the cruelty that the roach has with
itself as it is slowly dying without pain; to go beyond pain is the
worst cruelty. And I am afraid of that, I who am extremely moral. But
now I know that I must have a much greater courage: that of having
another morality, so exempt that I myself do not understand it and that
scares me.

--- Ah, I remembered you, who are the oldest thing in my memory. I see
you once again fastening the electrical wires to fix the light socket,
mindful of the positive and negative poles, and treating things with
delicateness.

I didn't know I learned so much from you. What did I learn from you? I
learned how to look at a person intertwining electrical wires. I learned
to see you once fixing a broken chair. Your physical energy was your
most delicate energy.

--- You were the oldest person I ever met. You were the monotony of my
eternal love, and I didn't know it. I had for you the tedium I feel on
holidays. What was it? it was like water flowing in a stone fountain,
and the years demarcated on the smoothness of the stone, the moss parted
by the thread of running water, and the cloud overhead, and the beloved
man resting, and love halted, it was a holiday, and the silence in the
mosquitoes' flight. And the available present. And my slowly bored
freedom, the abundance, the abundance of the body that asks not and
needs not.

I did not know how to see that that was delicate love. And it seemed
like tedium to me. It really was tedium. It was a search for someone to
play with, the desire to deepen the air, to enter into deeper contact
with the air, the air that cannot be deepened, that was destined to stay
right there suspended.

I don't know, I remember it was a holiday. Ah, how I wanted pain then:
it would distract me from that great divine void that I had with you. I,
the goddess resting; you, upon Olympus. The great yawn of happiness?
Distance following distance, and another distance and another --- the
abundance of space that the holiday has. That unfolding of calm energy,
which I did not even understand. That already thirstless kiss upon the
distracted forehead of the beloved man resting, the pensive kiss upon
the already beloved man. It was a national holiday. Flags raised.

But night falling. And I could not stand the slow transformation of
something that was slowly transforming into the same something, only
increased by one more identical drop of time. I remember that I told
you:

--- I'm a little sick to my stomach, I said breathing with a certain
satiety. What should we do tonight?

--- Nothing, you responded so much wiser than I, nothing, it's a
holiday, said the man who was delicate with things and with time.

The profound tedium --- like a great love --- united us. And the next
morning, very early in the morning, the world was offering itself to me.
The wings of things were open, it was going to be hot in the afternoon,
you could already feel it in the fresh sweat of those things that had
passed the listless night, as in a hospital where the patients still
awaken alive.

But all that was too refined for my human hoof. And I, I wanted beauty.

But now I have a morality that relinquishes beauty. I shall have to bid
farewell with longing to beauty. Beauty was a soft enticement for me, it
was the way that I, weak and respectful, adorned the thing in order to
tolerate its nucleus.

But now my world is of the thing that I once called ugly or monotonous
--- and that no longer is ugly or monotonous to me. I went through
gnawing the earth and through eating the ground, and I went through
having an orgy in that, and feeling with moral horror that the earth
gnawed by me also felt pleasure. My orgy really came from my puritanism:
pleasure offended me, and from that offense I was making greater
pleasure. Yet this world of mine now, I once would have called it
violent.

Because the absence of the taste of water is violent, the absence of
color in a piece of glass is violent. A violence that is all the more
violent because it is neutral.

My world today is raw, it is a world of a great vital difficulty.
Because, more than a star, today I want the thick and black root of the
stars, I want the source that always seems dirty, and is dirty, and that
is always incomprehensible.

It is with pain that I bid farewell even to the beauty of a child --- I
want the adult who is more primitive and ugly and drier and more
difficult, and who became a child-seed that cannot be broken between the
teeth.

Ah, and I also want to see if I can relinquish the horse drinking water,
which is so pretty. Neither do I want my feeling because it prettifies;
and could I relinquish the sky moving in clouds? and the flower? I don't
want pretty love. I don't want dusk, I don't want the well-made face, I
don't want the expressive. I want the inexpressive. I want the inhuman
inside the person; no, it isn't dangerous, since people are human
anyway, you don't have to fight for that: wanting to be human sounds too
pretty to me.

I want the material of things. Humanity is drenched with humanization,
as if that were necessary; and that false humanization trips up man and
trips up his humanity. A thing exists that is fuller, deafer, deeper,
less good, less bad, less pretty. Yet that thing too runs the risk, in
our coarse hands, of becoming transformed into "purity," our hands that
are coarse and full of words.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-35 .calibre}
::: story
Our hands that are coarse and full of words.

--- Bear with my telling you that God is not pretty. And that because He
is neither a result nor a conclusion, and everything we find pretty is
sometimes only because it is already concluded. But what is ugly today
shall be seen centuries from now as beauty, because it shall have
completed one of its movements.

I no longer want the completed movement that never is really complete,
and we are the ones who complete it out of desire; I no longer want to
delight in the easiness of liking a thing only because, being apparently
completed, it no longer scares me, and therefore is falsely mine --- I,
devourer that I was of beauties.

I do not want beauty, I want identity. Beauty would be an accretion, and
now I shall have to dispense with it. The world does not have the
intention of beauty, and that once would have shocked me: in the world
no aesthetic plane exists, not even the aesthetic plane of goodness, and
that once would have shocked me. The thing is much more than that. The
God is greater than goodness with its beauty.

Ah, bidding farewell to all that means such great disappointment. But it
is in disappointment that the promise is fulfilled, through
disappointment, through pain the promise is fulfilled, and that is why
one must go through hell first: until one sees that there is a much
deeper manner of loving, and that manner relinquishes the accretion of
beauty. God is whatever exists, and all the contradictions are within
the God, and therefore do not contradict Him.

Ah, everything in me is aching as I let go of what to me was the world.
Letting go is such a harsh and aggressive gesture that the person who
opens her mouth to speak of letting go should be imprisoned and kept
incommunicado --- I myself prefer to consider that I have temporarily
taken leave of my senses, rather than having the courage to think that
all of this is a truth.

--- Give me your hand, don't abandon me, I swear I didn't want it
either: I too lived well, I was a woman of whom you could say "life and
loves of G. H." I cannot put into words what the system was, but I lived
inside a system. It was as if I had organized myself inside the fact of
having a stomachache because, if I no longer had it, I would also lose
the marvelous hope of freeing myself one day from the stomachache: my
old life was necessary to me because it was exactly its badness that
made me delight in imagining a hope that, without that life I led, I
would not have known.

And now I am risking an entire suitable hope, in favor of a reality so
much greater that I cover my eyes with my arm in order not to have to
face up to a hope that is fulfilled so now --- and even before I die! So
before I die. I too sear myself in this discovery: that a morality
exists in which beauty is of a great fearful superficiality. Now
whatever is luring me and calling me is the neutral. I have no words to
express, and speak therefore of the neutral. I only have that ecstasy,
which also is no longer what we called ecstasy, since it is not a peak.
But that ecstasy without a peak expresses the neutral of which I speak.

Ah, speaking to me and to you is being mute. Speaking to the God is the
mutest that exists. Speaking to things, is mute. I know this sounds sad
to you, and to me too, since I am still addicted to the condiment of the
word. And that is why muteness hurts me like a dismissal.

But I know that I must dismiss myself: contact with the thing has to be
a murmur, and to speak with the God I must gather disconnected
syllables. My neediness came from having lost the inhuman side --- I was
banished from paradise when I became human. And the true prayer is the
mute inhuman oratorio.

No, I don't have to rise through prayer: I must, engorged, become a
vibrating nothing. What I say to God must not make sense! If it makes
sense it is because I err.

Ah, don't misunderstand me: I am not taking anything from you. What I am
doing is requiring of you. I know it seems I am taking away your and my
humanity. But it's the opposite: what I am wanting is to live from that
initial and primordial thing that was exactly what made certain things
reach the point of aspiring to be human. I am wanting for me to live
from the most difficult human part: for me to live from the seed of
neutral love, since it was from that source that there began to rise
something that later was distorting itself in sentimentations until the
nucleus was suffocated by the accretion of richness and crushed in
ourselves by the human hoof. I am demanding of myself a much greater
love --- it is a life so much greater that it does not even have beauty.

I am having that hard courage that hurts me like the flesh that
transforms itself in childbirth.

But no. I still haven't told everything.

Not that what I am going to tell now is all that's missing. Much more is
missing in this story of mine to myself: father and mother, for example,
are missing; I have not yet had the courage to honor them; so many
humiliations I went through are missing, and which I omit because only
they who are not humbled are humiliated, and instead of humiliation I
should speak about my lack of humility; and humility is much more than a
feeling, it is reality seen with a minimum of good sense.

A lot of what I could tell is missing. But there is something that will
be indispensable to say.

(I know one thing: if I reach the end of this story, I shall go, not
tomorrow, but this very day, out to eat and dance at the "Top-Bambino,"
I furiously need to have some fun and diverge myself. Yes, I'll
definitely wear my new blue dress that flatters me and gives me color,
I'll call Carlos, Josefina, AntÃ´nio, I don't really remember which of
the two of them I noticed wanted me or if both of them wanted me, I'll
eat crevettes Ã  la whatever, and I know because I'll eat crevettes,
tonight, tonight will be my normal life resumed, the life of my common
joy, for the rest of my days I'll need my light, sweet and good-humored
vulgarity, I need to forget, like everyone.)

Because I haven't told everything.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-36 .calibre}
::: story
Because I haven't told everything.

I haven't told how, sitting there and unmoving, I still had not stopped
looking with great disgust, yes, still with disgust at the yellowed
white paste atop the roach's grayness. And I knew that as long as I was
disgusted, the world would elude me and I would elude me. I knew that
the basic error in living was being disgusted by a roach. Being
disgusted by kissing the leper was my erring the first life within me
--- since being disgusted contradicts me, contradicts my matter within
me.

Then the one thing that I, out of pity for myself, didn't want to think,
then I thought it. I could no longer hold myself back, and I thought
what really was already thought.

Now, out pity for the anonymous hand I am holding in mine, out of pity
for what that hand is not going to understand, I don't want to take it
with me to the horror to which I went yesterday, alone.

Because what I suddenly found out is that the moment had come not only
to understand that I must no longer transcend, but the instant had come
to really no longer transcend. And to have now what I used to think
should be for tomorrow. I'm trying to spare you, but I can't.

Because redemption had to be in the thing itself. And redemption in the
thing itself would be putting into my mouth the white paste of the
roach.

At the very idea, I shut my eyes with the power of someone locking her
teeth, and I clenched my teeth so hard that any more and they would have
broken inside my mouth. My entrails were saying no, my paste was
rejecting the roach's.

I had stopped sweating, once again I had entirely dried. I tried to
reason with my disgust. Why would I be disgusted by the paste coming out
of the roach? had I not drunk of the white milk that is liquid maternal
paste? and on drinking the thing of which my mother was made, had I not
called it, namelessly, love? But reason was getting me nowhere, except
with teeth clenched as though made of shivering flesh.

I couldn't.

There was only one way I could: if I gave myself a hypnotic command, and
then as if I had fallen asleep and acted somnambulistically --- and when
I opened my eyes from sleep, I already would have "done," and it would
be like a nightmare from which one wakes free because it was while
sleeping that one lived through the worst.

But I knew that that was not how I should do it. I knew that I would
have to eat the paste of the roach, but eat it all of me, and eat it
also my own fear. Only then would I have what suddenly seemed to me
would be the anti-sin: eating the paste of the roach is the anti-sin,
sin would be my easy purity.

The anti-sin. But at what a price.

At the price of traversing a sensation of death.

I got up and took a step forward, with the determination not of a
suicide but of a murderer of myself.

The sweat now started again, I was now sweating from head to toe, my
sticky toes sliding inside my slippers, and the root of my hair was
softening that viscous thing that was my new sweat, a sweat I didn't
recognize and that smelled like what comes from dried-up earth after the
first rains. That deep sweat was however what enlivened me, I was slowly
swimming through my oldest primeval soup, the sweat was plankton and
pneuma and pabulum vitae, I was being, I was me being.

No, my love, it wasn't good like what's called good. It was what's
called bad. Really very, very bad. Since my root, which I was only now
tasting, had the flavor of potato-tuber, mixed with the earth from which
it had been torn. Yet that bad taste had a strange grace of life that I
can only understand if I felt it again and can only explain by feeling
it again.

I took one more step. But instead of moving forward, I suddenly threw up
the milk and bread I had eaten for breakfast.

Entirely shaken by the violent vomit, which had not even been preceded
by the warning of nausea, disillusioned with myself, frightened by my
lack of strength to go through with the gesture that seemed to me the
only one that could unite my body to my soul.

Despite myself, after throwing up, I calmed down, my forehead refreshed,
and physically peaceful.

Which was worse: now I would have to eat the roach but without the help
of the earlier exaltation, the exaltation that would have acted in me
like a hypnosis; I had vomited the exaltation. And unexpectedly, after
the revolution that is vomiting, I felt physically simple as a girl. It
would have to be this way, like a girl who was unintentionally happy,
that I would eat the paste of the roach.

So I stepped forward.

My joy and my shame came upon waking from the faint. No, it hadn't been
a faint. It had been more of a dizziness, since I was still standing,
resting my hand on the wardrobe. A dizziness that made me lose track of
moments and of time. But I knew, even before thinking, that, while I
took leave of myself in the dizziness, "something had been done."

I didn't want to think but I knew. I was afraid of tasting in my mouth
what I was tasting, I was afraid of running my hand across my lips and
finding traces. And I was afraid of looking at the roach --- which now
should have less white paste upon its opaque back. . . .

I was ashamed of having gone dizzy and unconscious in order to do
something that I would never again know how I had done --- since before
doing it I had removed from myself all participation. I had not wanted
"to know."

So that was how things were processed? "Not knowing" --- so that was how
the deepest things happened? some thing would always, always have to be
apparently dead in order for the living to process? I'd had to not know
that I was alive? Was the secret of never escaping from the greater life
living like a sleepwalker?

Or was living like a sleepwalker the greatest act of trust? closing
one's eyes in dizziness, and never knowing what went on.

Like a transcendence. Transcendence, which is the memory of the past or
the present or the future. In me was transcendence the only way I could
reach the thing? Since even eating of the roach, I had acted to
transcend the very act of eating it. And now all I had was the vague
memory of a horror, all I had was the idea.

Until the memory got so strong that all my body screamed inside itself.

I tensed my fingernails on the wall: I now felt the nastiness in my
mouth, and then began to spit, to furiously spit that taste of no such
thing, taste of a nothing that nonetheless seemed almost sweetened to me
like certain flower petals, taste of myself --- I was spitting out
myself, without ever reaching the point of feeling that I had finally
spit out my whole soul. "---------because you are lukewarm, and neither
hot nor cold, I will spit you out of My mouth," it was the Apocalypse
according to Saint John, and the phrase that must refer to other things
I no longer remembered, the phrase came to me from the depths of memory,
standing for the insipid of which I had eaten --- and I was spitting.

Which was difficult: because the neutral thing is extremely energetic, I
was spitting and it was still I.

I only halted in my fury when I understood with surprise that I was
undoing everything I had laboriously done, when I understood that I was
renouncing myself. And that, alas, I was only up to my own life.

I stopped astonished, and my eyes filled with tears that only burned and
did not flow. I think I did not even judge myself worthy that tears
should flow, I lacked the first pity for myself, which allows crying,
and in my pupils I retained in ardor the tears that were salting me and
that I did not deserve to flow.

But, even without flowing, the tears were in some way companions and
bathed me in some way with commiseration, so that I started lowering a
consoled head. And, like someone returning from a journey, I returned to
sitting quietly on the bed.

I who had thought that the best proof of the transmutation of me into
myself would be putting the white paste of the roach in my mouth. And
that that way I would draw near to whatever is . . . divine? to whatever
is real? The divine for me is whatever is real.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-37 .calibre}
::: story
The divine for me is whatever is real.

But kissing a leper is not even goodness. It is self-reality, self-life
--- even if that also means the leper's salvation. But it is first of
all one's own salvation. The saint's greatest benefit is to himself,
which does not matter: since when he reaches his own great largeness,
thousands of people are enlarged by his largeness and live from it, and
he loves others as much as he loves his own terrible enlargement, he
loves his enlargement with impiety for himself. Does the saint want to
purify himself because he feels the need to love the neutral? to love
whatever is not accretion, and to relinquish the good and the pretty.
The great goodness of the saint --- is that to him everything is the
same. The saint sears himself until he reaches the love of the neutral.
He needs that for himself.

I then understood that, in whatever fashion, living is a goodness toward
others. Living is enough, and that itself ends up in the great goodness.
He who lives totally is living for others, he who lives his own
largeness is making an offering, even if his life takes place within the
incommunicability of a cell. Living is such a great offering that
thousands of people benefit from every life lived.

--- Does it pain you that the goodness of the God is neutrally
continuous and continuously neutral? But what I once wanted as a
miracle, what I called a miracle, was really a desire for discontinuity
and interruption, the desire for an anomaly: I called a miracle exactly
that moment in which the true continuous miracle of the process was
interrupted. But the neutral goodness of the God is still more
appealable than if it were not neutral: to have it all you must do is
go, to have it all you must do is ask.

And the miracle can be requested, and had, since continuity has
interstices that do not discontinue it, the miracle is the note between
two notes of music, it is the number between number one and number two.
To have it all you have to do is need it. Faith --- is knowing you can
go and eat the miracle. Hunger, that is what faith is in itself --- and
needing is my guarantee that to me it will always be given. Needing is
my guide.

No. I did not need to have had the courage to eat the paste of the
roach. Since I lacked the humility of the saints: I had given to the act
of eating it a meaning of "maximum." But life is divided into qualities
and kinds, and the law is that the roach shall only be loved and eaten
by another roach; and that a woman, in the hour of love for a man, that
woman is living her own kind. I understood that I had already done the
equivalent of living the paste of the roach --- for the law is that I
must live with the matter of a person and not of a roach.

I understood that, by placing in my mouth the paste of the roach, I was
not stripping myself as the saints do, but was once again yearning for
the accretion. The accretion is easier to love.

And now I am not taking your hand for myself. I am the one giving you my
hand.

Now I need your hand, not so that I won't be scared, but so that you
won't. I know that believing in all this will be, at first, your great
solitude. But the moment will come when you will give me your hand, no
longer out of solitude, but as I am doing now: out of love. Like me, you
will no longer fear adding yourself to the extreme energetic sweetness
of the God. Solitude is having only the human destiny.

And solitude is not needing. Not needing leaves a man very alone, all
alone. Ah, needing does not isolate the person, the thing needs the
thing: all you have to do is see the chick walking around to see that
its destiny will be what neediness makes of it, its destiny is to join
as drops of mercury join other drops of mercury, even if, like each drop
of mercury, it has in itself an entirely complete and round existence .

Ah, my love, do not be afraid of neediness: it is our greater destiny.
Love is so much more fatal than I had thought, love is as inherent as
wanting itself, and we are guaranteed by a necessity that shall renew
itself continuously. Love already is, it is always. All that is missing
is the coup de grÃ¢ce --- which is called passion.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-38 .calibre}
::: story
All that is missing is the coup de grÃ¢ce --- which is called passion.

What I am feeling now is a joy. Through the living roach I am coming to
understand that I too am whatever is alive. Being alive is a very high
stage, it is something that I only reached now. It is such a high
unstable equilibrium that I know I shall not be able to know about that
equilibrium for long --- the grace of passion is short.

Maybe, being man, like us, is only a special sensitization we call
"having humanity." Oh, I too fear losing that sensitization. Until now I
had called life my sensitivity to life. But being alive is something
else.

Being alive is a coarse radiating indifference. Being alive is
unattainable by the finest sensitivity. Being alive is inhuman --- the
deepest meditation is so empty that a smile exhales as from a matter.
And even more delicate shall I be, and as a more permanent state. Am I
speaking of death? am I speaking of after death? I don't know. I feel
that "not human" is a great reality, and that it does not mean
"unhuman," to the contrary: the not-human is the radiating center of a
neutral love in Hertzian waves.

If my life is transformed into it-self, the thing I today call
sensitivity will not exist --- it will be called indifference. But I
cannot yet grasp that way. It is as if hundreds of thousands of years
from now we are finally no longer what we feel and think: we shall have
something that more closely resembles a "mood" than an idea. We shall be
the living matter revealing itself directly, ignorant of word,
surpassing thought which is always grotesque.

And I shall not wander "from thought to thought," but from mood to mood.
We shall be inhuman --- as the loftiest conquest of man. Being is being
beyond human. Being man does not work, being man has been a constraint.
The unknown awaits us, but I feel that this unknown is a totalization
and will be the true humanization for which we longed. Am I speaking of
death? no, of life. It is not a state of happiness, it is a state of
contact.

Ah, don't think this all doesn't nauseate me, I even find it so tiresome
that it makes me impatient. Because it seems like heaven, where I cannot
even imagine what I would do, since I can only imagine myself thinking
and feeling, two attributes of being, and I cannot imagine merely being,
and relinquishing the rest. Just being --- that would give me an
enormous lack of things to do.

At the same time I was also a bit suspicious.

Because, just as before when I had frightened myself by entering what
could end up being despair, I now suspected that I was once again
transcending things. . . .

Could I be excessively enlarging the thing precisely in order to surpass
the roach and the piece of iron and the piece of glass?

I don't think so.

Since I was not even reducing hope to a simple result of constructing
and counterfeiting, nor denying that something to hope for exists. Nor
had I removed the promise: I was simply feeling, with an enormous
effort, that the hope and the promise are fulfilled every instant. And
that was terrifying, I was always afraid of being struck down by
completion, I had always thought that completion is an end --- and had
not counted on the ever-born need.

And also because I feared, unable to bear simple glory, turning it into
yet another accretion. But I know --- I know --- that there is an
experience of glory in which life has the purest taste of the nothing,
and that in glory I feel it empty. When living comes to pass, one
wonders: but was that it? And the answer is: that is not only it, that
is exactly it.

Except I still must be careful not to make more of it than this, or else
it will no longer be it. The essence is of a pungent insipidity. I will
have "to purify myself" much more in order not to even want the
accretion of events. Purifying myself once meant a cruelty against what
I called beauty, and against what I called "I," without knowing that "I"
was an accretion of myself.

But now, through my most difficult fright --- I am finally heading
toward the inverse path. I head toward the destruction of what I built,
I head for depersonalization.

I am avid for the world, I have strong and defined desires, tonight I'll
go dance and eat, I won't wear the blue dress, but the black-and-white
one. But at the same time I need nothing. I don't even need for a tree
to exist. I now know of a way that relinquishes everything --- and
including love, nature, objects. A way that does without me. Though, as
for my desires, my passions, my contact with a tree --- they are still
for me like a mouth eating.

Depersonalization as the dismissal of useless individuality --- losing
everything one can lose and, even so, being. Little by little stripping,
with an effort so mindful that one does not feel the pain, stripping,
like getting rid of one's own skin, one's characteristics. Everything
that characterizes me is just the way that I am most easily visible to
others and how I end up being superficially recognizable to myself. As
there was the moment in which I saw that the roach is the roach of all
roaches, so do I want to find in me the woman of all women.

Depersonalization as the great objectification of oneself. The greatest
exteriorization one can reach. Whoever gets to oneself through
depersonalization shall recognize the other in any disguise: the first
step in relation to the other is finding inside oneself the man of all
men. Every woman is the woman of all women, every man is the man of all
men, and each of them could appear wherever man is judged. But only in
immanence, because only a few reach the point of, in us, recognizing
themselves. And then, by the simple presence of their existence,
revealing ours.

Whatever we live from --- and because it has no name only muteness
pronounces it --- it is from that that I draw closer to myself through
the great largess of letting myself be. Not because I then find the name
of the name and the impalpable becomes concrete --- but because I
designate the impalpable as impalpable, and then the breath breaks out
anew as in a candle's flame.

The gradual deheroization of oneself is the true labor one works at
beneath the apparent labor, life is a secret mission. So secret is the
true life that not even to me, who am dying of it, can the password be
entrusted, I die without knowing wherefrom. And the secret is such that,
only if the mission manages to be accomplished shall I, in a flash,
perceive that I was born in charge of it --- every life is a secret
mission.

The deheroization of myself is subterraneously undermining my building,
coming to pass without my consent like an unheeded calling. Until it is
finally revealed to me that the life in me does not bear my name.

And I too have no name, and that is my name. And because I depersonalize
myself to the point of not having my name, I reply whenever someone
says: I.

Deheroization is the great failure of a life. Not everyone manages to
fail because it is so laborious, one first must climb painfully until
finally reaching high enough to be able to fall --- I can only reach the
depersonality of muteness if I have first constructed an entire voice.
My civilizations were necessary for me to rise to a point from which I
could descend. It is exactly through the failure of the voice that one
comes to hear for the first time one's own muteness and that of others
and of things, and accepts it as the possible language. Only then is my
nature accepted, accepted with its frightened torture, where pain is not
something that happens to us, but what we are. And our condition is
accepted as the only one possible, since it is what exists, and not
another. And since living it is our passion. The human condition is the
passion of Christ.

Ah, but to reach muteness, what a great effort of voice. My voice is the
way I go in search of reality; reality, before my language, exists like
a thought that is not thought, but inescapably I was and am compelled to
need to know what the thought thinks. Reality precedes the voice that
seeks it, but as the earth precedes the tree, but as the world precedes
the man, but as the sea precedes the vision of the sea, life precedes
love, the matter of the body precedes the body, and in turn language one
day will have preceded the possession of silence.

I have to the extent I designate --- and this is the splendor of having
a language. But I have much more to the extent I cannot designate.
Reality is the raw material, language is the way I go in search of it
--- and the way I do not find it. But it is from searching and not
finding that what I did not know was born, and which I instantly
recognize. Language is my human effort. My destiny is to search and my
destiny is to return empty-handed. But --- I return with the unsayable.
The unsayable can only be given to me through the failure of my
language. Only when the construction fails, can I obtain what it could
not achieve.

And it is no use to try to take a shortcut and want to start, already
knowing that the voice says little, starting straightaway with being
depersonal. For the journey exists, and the journey is not simply a
manner of going. We ourselves are the journey. In the matter of living,
one can never arrive beforehand. The via crucis is not a detour, it is
the only way, one cannot arrive except along it and with it. Persistence
is our effort, giving up is the reward. One only reaches it having
experienced the power of building, and, despite the taste of power,
preferring to give up. Giving up must be a choice. Giving up is the most
sacred choice of a life. Giving up is the true human instant. And this
alone, is the very glory of my condition.

Giving up is a revelation.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-39 .calibre}
::: story
Giving up is a revelation.

I give up, and will have been the human person --- it is only in the
worst of my condition that that condition is taken up as my destiny.
Existing demands of me the great sacrifice of not having strength, I
give up, and all of a sudden the world fits inside my weak hand. I give
up, and onto my human poverty opens the only joy granted me human joy. I
know that, and I tremble --- living strikes me so, living deprives me of
sleep.

I climb high enough to be able to fall, I choose, I tremble and give up,
and, finally, dedicating myself to my fall, depersonal, without a voice
of my own, finally without me --- then does everything I do not have
become mine. I give up and the less I am the more I live, the more I
lose my name the more they call me, my only secret mission is my
condition, I give up and the less I know the password the more I fulfill
the secret, the less I know the more the sweetness of the abyss is my
destiny. And so I adore it.

With my hands quietly clasped on my lap, I was having a feeling of
tender timid joy. It was an almost nothing, like when the breeze makes a
blade of grass tremble. It was almost nothing, but I could make out the
minuscule movement of my timidity. I don't know, but with distressed
idolatry I was approaching something, and with the delicateness of one
who is afraid. I was approaching the most powerful thing that had ever
happened to me.

More powerful than hope, more powerful than love?

I was approaching something I think was --- trust. Perhaps that is the
name. Or it doesn't matter: I could also give it another.

I felt that my face in modesty was smiling. Or perhaps it wasn't, I
don't know. I was trusting.

Myself? the world? the God? the roach? I don't know. Perhaps trusting is
not a matter of what or whom. Perhaps I now knew that I myself would
never be equal to life, but that my life was equal to life. I would
never reach my root, but my root existed. Timidly I let myself be
pierced by a sweetness that humbled me without restraining me.

Oh God, I was feeling baptized by the world. I had put a roach's matter
into my mouth, and finally performed the tiniest act.

Not the maximum act, as I had thought before, not heroism and sainthood.
But at last the tiniest act that I had always been missing. I had always
been incapable of the tiniest act. And with the tiniest act, I had
deheroized myself. I, who had lived from the middle of the road, had
finally taken the first step along its beginning.

Finally, finally, my casing had really broken and without limit I was.
Through not being, I was. To the ends of whatever I was not, I was.
Whatever I am not, I am. All shall be within me, if I shall not be; for
"I" is just one of the instantaneous spasms of the world. My life does
not have a merely human meaning, it is much greater --- so much greater
that, as humanity goes, it makes no sense. Of the general organization
that was greater than I, I had previously only perceived the fragments.
But now, I was much less than human --- and I would only fulfill my
specifically human destiny if I handed myself over, as I was handing
myself over, to whatever was no longer I, to whatever is already
inhuman.

And handing myself over with the trust of belonging to the unknown.
Since I can only pray to whatever I do not know. And I can only love the
unknown evidence of things, and can only add myself to what I do not
know. Only that is really handing myself over.

And such handing-over is the only surpassing that does not exclude me. I
was now so much greater that I could no longer see myself. As great as a
far-off landscape. I was far off. But perceptible in my furthest
mountains and in my remotest rivers: the simultaneous present no longer
scared me, and in the furthest extremity of me I could finally smile
without even smiling. At last I was stretching beyond my sensibility.

The world independed on me --- that was the trust I had reached: the
world independed on me, and I am not understanding whatever it is I'm
saying, never! never again shall I understand anything I say. Since how
could I speak without the word lying for me? how could I speak except
timidly like this: life just is for me. Life just is for me, and I don't
understand what I'm saying. And so I adore it. ------------------
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-5 .calibre}
::: story
Translator's Note

A friend in Brazil told me of a young woman in Rio who'd read Clarice
Lispector obsessively and was convinced --- as I and legions of other
Clarice devotees have been --- that she and Clarice Lispector would have
a life-changing connection if they met in person. She managed to get in
touch with the writer, who kindly agreed to meet her. When the young
woman arrived, Clarice sat and stared at her and said nothing until the
woman finally fled the apartment.

To translate an author who is no longer alive is always a bit like this
woman's encounter. You can ask a question but you don't get an answer.
The author just stares at you and says nothing and you wonder if the
best thing to do would be to get up and run out of the room, especially
if the work you're translating is as mystifying as *The Passion
According to G. H*.

I would have liked to ask about her curiously alternating use of "o
Deus" ("the God") and "Deus" ("God") --- how strange she intended that
article to sound to the reader. I also would have liked to ask her about
the various words that recur throughout the book like the subjects in a
fugue, returning each time at a slightly different pitch. She uses the
word *preso*, for example, to refer to a prisoner and then to the
figures in a bas-relief on a wall and then to the narrator's feeling as
she stands inside the dry, hot room of her former maid where the entire
novel takes place.

I knew one of my priorities as the translator of this novel had to be
recreating the fugue-like repetitions of words like *preso* throughout
the novel, but in several instances using "imprisoned" made the sentence
sound odd in English in a way it didn't in the original, as when she
uses *preso* to describe the sensation of being pinned under a rock. I
ultimately used "pinned" instead of "imprisoned" for that instance, but
wish I could have asked her: was I right to go with "pinned" here, or
should I have used "imprisoned" instead, as the lyrical use of
repetition is so essential to what makes this novel such a hypnotizing
book?

This dilemma came up with certain moments of wordplay as well, as when
she says there are so many roaches that they "parece uma prece," which
literally means they "seem a prayer." That literal rendering, however,
fails to capture the sonic pleasure of the phrase in the Portuguese. I
ultimately went with the phrase "they appear a prayer." The repetition
of the *p*'s and *r*'s offered some of the inventive lyricism of the
phrase in the original, although seeming and appearing are not perfect
matches sensewise. As I couldn't ask Clarice when to prioritize the
music and when the meaning in this book, I had to trust what I'd come to
hear in my head rereading *G. H*. many times over the past decade. This
was the first work of hers I encountered in college, and I was so
riveted by it that I immediately read everything else she'd written. The
following year, I learned Portuguese in part to learn how her voice
sounded in the original.

Even after rereading this novel so often and so intently that I know a
number of passages in it by memory, I still feel as if every hair on my
head has caught on fire when I reach the end of it. The experience of
translating *G. H*. has left me feeling bald, and not as if I lost my
hair in the process so much as discovering that like *G. H*., like the
roach, I am actually all cilia and antennae and would never have come to
know this without gradually, painstakingly experiencing every word in
this book. And so --- as in the last line of this finest of novels --- I
adore it.

Idra Novey
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-40 .calibre}
::: story
Copyright Â© 1964 by the Heirs of Clarice Lispector

Translation copyright Â© 2012 by Idra Novey

Introduction copyright Â© 2012 by Caetano Veloso

Originally published as [A PaixÃ£o segundo G. H]{.italic}. Published by
arrangement with the Heirs of Clarice Lispector and Agencia Literaria
Carmen Balcells,\
Barcelona.

All rights reserved. Except for brief passages quoted in a newspaper,
magazine, radio, television, or website review, no part of this book may
be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying and recording, or by any information storage and
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the Publisher.

First published by New Directions as [ndp]{.sm-caps}1224 in 2012

Published simultaneously in Canada by Penguin Books Canada Limited

Design by Erik Rieselbach

[Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data]{.italic}

Lispector, Clarice.

\[PaixÃ£o segundo G. H. English\]

The passion according to G. H. / Clarice Lispector ; translated by Idra
Novey ; edited by Benjamin Moser ; introduction by Caetano Veloso.

p\. cm.

eISBN 978-0-8112-2069-9

I. Novey, Idra. II. Moser, Benjamin. III. Title.

PQ9697.L585P313 2012

869.342---dc23

2012005502

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

New Directions Books are published for James Laughlin

by New Directions Publishing Corporation

80 Eighth Avenue. New York 10011
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-41 .calibre}
::: story
A[LSO BY]{.small} C[LARICE]{.small} L[ISPECTOR]{.small}

A[VAILABLE]{.small} F[ROM]{.small} N[EW]{.small} D[IRECTIONS]{.small}

Ãgua Viva

A Breath of Life

The Foreign Legion

The Hour of the Star

Near to the Wild Heart

Selected CrÃ´nicas

Soulstorm
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-42 .calibre}
::: story
![ad](images/000000.jpg){.calibre2}
:::
::::
