---
title: "The Dialectic of Duration"
author: "Gaston Bachelard"
translator: "Mary McAllester Jones"
voice: "Gaston Bachelard"
voice_role: "Foundation Stone - Material Imagination"
tradition: "French Philosophy"
period: "20th Century"
region: "France"
genre: "Phenomenology"
form: "Philosophical Treatise"
mode: "Temporal Analysis"
work_type: "Primary Source"
source_type: "Complete Work"
source_quality: "Scholarly Translation"
publisher: "Rowman & Littlefield International"
series: "Groundworks"
chamber_integration: "June 2025"
significance: "Core Four completion - poetics of space and material imagination"
tags:
  - duration
  - temporality
  - phenomenology
  - rhythm
  - temporal-dialectic
  - lived-time
  - material-imagination
related_voices:
  - Henri Bergson
  - Maurice Merleau-Ponty
  - Emmanuel Levinas
chamber_position: "Second Ring - Foundation Stones - The Core Four"
status: "source-aware"
---

# The Dialectic of Duration

*Gaston Bachelard*

*Translated and annotated by Mary McAllester Jones*  
*Introduction by Cristina Chimisso*

---

**Groundworks Series**

*Series Editors:* Arne De Boever, California Institute of the Arts; Bill Ross, Staffordshire University; Jon Roffe, University of New South Wales; Ashley Woodward, University of Dundee

What are the hidden sources that determine the contemporary moment in continental thought? This series goes 'back to the source', publishing English translations of the hidden origins of our contemporary thought in order to better understand not only that thought, but also the world it seeks to understand. The series includes important French, German and Italian texts that form the lesser-known background to prominent work in contemporary continental philosophy. With an eye on the contemporary moment—on both world-historical events and critical trends—Groundworks seeks to recover foundational but forgotten texts and to produce a more profound engagement not only with the contemporary but also with the sources that have shaped it.

---

*Chamber Note: This text completes the Core Four foundation (Alexander, Bachelard, Berger, Sennett), providing essential material imagination and temporal phenomenology for authentic Chamber dialogue.*[London • New York]{.i}

 

Published by Rowman & Littlefield International, Ltd.

[]{#calibre_link-354 .calibre4}Unit A, Whitacre Mews, 26-34 Stannary
Street, London SE11 4AB

[www.rowmaninternational.com](http://www.rowmaninternational.com){.calibre4}

Rowman & Littlefield International, Ltd. is an affiliate of Rowman &
Littlefield

4501 Forbes Boulevard, Suite 200, Lanham, Maryland 20706, USA

With additional offices in Boulder, New York, Toronto (Canada),and
Plymouth (UK)

[www.rowman.com](http://www.rowman.com){.calibre4}

This edition first published by Rowman & Littlefield International, 2016

Translation © Mary McAllester Jones 2000

Introduction © Cristina Chimisso 2000

Published in French by Presses Universitaires de France as [La
Dialectiquede la durée]{.i1}

© Presses Universitaires de France, 1950

Bibliothèque de philosophie contemporaine

108 boulevard Saint-Germain, 75006, Paris

First English translation published by Clinamen Press, 2000

A slightly adapted section of this work previously published in

Jones, Mary McAllester, Gaston [Bachelard, Subversive Humanist ]{.i1}©
1991. Reprinted by permission of the University of Wisconsin Press.

[All rights reserved]{.i1}. No part of this book may be reproduced in
any form or by any electronic or mechanical means, including information
storage and retrieval systems, without written permission from the
publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote passages in a review.

[British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data]{.b}

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

ISBN: HB 978-1-78660-058-5

PB 978-1-78660-059-2

[Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data]{.b}

Library of Congress Control Number: 2016947516

![Infinity.eps](images/000000.png){.image1} The paper used in this
publication meets the minimum requirements of American National Standard
for Information Sciences---Permanence of Paper for Printed Library
Materials, ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992.

Printed in the United States of America

 

[[]{#calibre_link-356 .calibre4}Contents]{.b}

[]{#calibre_link-357 .calibre4}[Groundworks Series
Preface](#calibre_link-2){#calibre_link-16 .calibre4}

[Translator's Note](#calibre_link-3){#calibre_link-17 .calibre4}

[Foreword](#calibre_link-4){#calibre_link-18 .calibre4}

[Introduction](#calibre_link-5){#calibre_link-32 .calibre4}\
[Cristina Chimisso]{.i1}

[**1** Relaxation and Nothingness](#calibre_link-6){#calibre_link-86
.calibre4}

[**2** The Psychology of Temporal
Phenomena](#calibre_link-7){#calibre_link-102 .calibre4}

[**3** Duration and Physical
Causality](#calibre_link-8){#calibre_link-120 .calibre4}

[**4** Duration and Intellectual
Causality](#calibre_link-9){#calibre_link-126 .calibre4}

[**5** Temporal Consolidation](#calibre_link-10){#calibre_link-136
.calibre4}

[**6** Temporal Superimpositions](#calibre_link-11){#calibre_link-146
.calibre4}

[**7** Metaphors of Duration](#calibre_link-12){#calibre_link-166
.calibre4}

[**8** Rhythmanalysis](#calibre_link-13){#calibre_link-198 .calibre4}

[Index](#calibre_link-14){#calibre_link-216 .calibre4}

[About the Author](#calibre_link-15){#calibre_link-346 .calibre4}

[Page references for the 2nd French edition (France: PUF, 1993) are
given in the margin]{.i1}

 

[[Groundworks Series Preface](#calibre_link-16){.calibre4}]{.b}

[]{#calibre_link-358 .calibre4}The purpose of the new Groundworks series
is to present English translations of significant texts of European
philosophy, with an emphasis on those works which enjoy an influence on
the shape and evolution of continental thought which has been felt only
at one remove in the Anglophone tradition. The present volume, Gaston
Bachelard's [The Dialectic of Duration]{.i1}, has remained little known
in the Anglophone world despite its importance; it represents
Bachelard's direct counterpoint to the work of his great contemporary,
Henri Bergson. Both are pre-eminent names in the history of the French
academy, whose work each in its way is testament to the suppleness and
adaptability of a broadly phenomenological tradition in the hands of
genuinely creative thinkers. Despite the fact that Bergson's reputation
waned dramatically in the latter half of his career, this has been
recuperated posthumously with equal force, not least due to the
influence of his most famous reader, Gilles Deleuze. Bachelard's
reputation suffered no such reversal; his presence has been an enduring
feature of the landscape of continental thought, while his prodigious
output has steadily worked its way into translation. It would be fair to
say, though, that for readers coming to [The Dialectic of Duration]{.i1}
first in this translation, and perhaps more familiar with the themes of
continuity, intuition and the virtual, as they have settled from
Bergsonism into the Anglophone tradition, this of all Bachelard's work
retains the greatest power to unsettle and to reframe the strands of
thought which are in danger today of becoming too readily emblematic of
continental thought as such. Yet for all that, there is
[]{#calibre_link-359 .calibre4}a great deal to this book which reaches
beyond the disputed territory between the two philosophers; it was in
this work that Bachelard first marshalled all the components of his
visionary philosophy of science, with its steady insistence on the human
context and subtle encompassing of the irrational within the rational.
As such it represents a privileged point of entry to the work of one of
the great modern philosophers of science.

 

[[Translator's Note](#calibre_link-17){.calibre4}]{.b}

[]{#calibre_link-360 .calibre4}In his discussion of time in [The
Dialectic of Duration]{.i1}, Gaston Bachelard tackles a wide range of
topics and in doing so, faces the translator with a number of
challenges. In translating this book my aim has been---as
always---fidelity both to Bachelard's French and to the English
language; conflicts of loyalty do of course arise and in such instances
the translator's first duty must, in my view, be to Bachelard. His ideas
are stimulating, thought-provoking and sometimes difficult: smoothing
out these difficulties would be a disservice to Bachelard. I have
therefore sought to retain the sense one has while reading the French
text that he is grappling with new ideas, working his way towards
understanding them through language and style that in places reflect
their complexity. Bachelard's delight in language is also very evident
in this book: his choice of unexpected, striking words is often
illuminating, helping our understanding, while his fondness for
word-play and neologism forces us to attend and to think. The
translation of these neologisms offers a particular challenge: I have
added notes where I think these may baffle English readers, while
seeking to retain in the translation the slight shock of Bachelard's
neologisms to the French ear.

The range of material Bachelard covers in [The Dialectic of Duration
]{.i1}has stimulated much discussion with colleagues and friends, and I
wish to thank them warmly for the time they have given me and for their
interest. As someone who has specialised in Bachelard for many years,
often in face of the puzzlement of those more caught up with
philosophical and literary fashion, I have been very pleased---surprised
even---by []{#calibre_link-361 .calibre4}the interest in Bachelard so
readily shown by those with whom I have discussed him in the course of
this translation. Discussions of Bachelard with my students over the
years have shown how thought-provoking he remains, with his capacity for
opening to us entirely new perspectives; I would like to thank
them---and in particular those members of my class of '99 so smitten
with Bachelard---for their enthusiasm.

I am indebted to the University of Wisconsin Press for kind permission
to use here translated extracts from [The Dialectic of Duration
]{.i1}that first appeared in my book [Gaston Bachelard, Subversive
Humanist]{.i1}, published by them in 1991. Some small amendments have
been made here to those original translations.

This translation owes much to the support of my husband Robert
McAllester Jones: for his understanding, his patient proofreading and
his discussions, I am deeply grateful.

[November 1999]{.i}\
Mary McAllester Jones

 

[[Foreword](#calibre_link-18){.calibre4}]{.b}

[]{#calibre_link-336 .calibre4}This study will only lose its obscurity
if we establish its metaphysical aim at the outset: it is intended to be
an introduction to the teaching of a philosophy of repose. However, a
philosophy of repose is not something you can just drift into, as will
be seen from the very beginning of this book. Philosophers cannot
quietly seek tranquility. They have to have metaphysical proof before
they can accept that repose is something to which thought has a right,
and a wide variety of experience and much discussion are needed for them
to admit that repose is an element of becoming. Readers should thus
forgive the demands made by a book which cares little for familiar
advice and example, preferring to state from the beginning its
conviction that repose lies at the heart of being, that we must feel it
in the very depths of our being, intimately bound to the becoming that
is accorded to our being, at the very level of that temporal reality
which is the ground of our consciousness and our person.

Once readers have forgiven this philosopher his lack of jollity they
have still another illusion to lose, since it is not part of this book's
intention to describe the approach to a secret, peaceful life. This
would have taken very many pages and also a whole psychology of the
emotions which we are no longer interested in studying, because
professionally we have to reject them. We could thus reap the benefit of
that happy age when human beings are restored to themselves, when
thought is more taken up with organising inaction than with serving
external, social demands. We have left out here, as being too
elementary, the study of anything to do with distancing oneself from the
world, with defending []{#calibre_link-273 .calibre4}a life of
seclusion, or with strengthening moral solitude. Let everyone take, each
in their own way, their first steps along the road leading to the pool
of Siloam^[1](#calibre_link-19){#calibre_link-25 .calibre10}^ and the
very sources of the person! Let everyone free themselves, as they
themselves choose, from the contingent stimuli that draw them out of
themselves! It is in the impersonal part of the person that the
philosopher must discover areas of repose and reasons for repose, with
which he will make a philosophical system of repose. Through
philosophical thought, being will free itself from a life force that
carries it far from individual goals and expends itself in imitated
actions. When the intelligence has been restored to its speculative
function, it will be revealed to us as a function that creates and
strengthens leisure. Pure consciousness will be revealed as the capacity
for waiting and for watchfulness, as the freedom and the will to do
nothing.

We were thus led quite naturally to examine the negating powers of the
mind. We first examined this negation at its root, recognising that the
mind could conflict with life, oppose ingrained habits, and in a way
make time flow back on itself so as to bring about renewals of being,
returns to original conditions. Why did we not regard the negative and
positive actions of time as equally important? Our intention was to go
straight to the metaphysical heart of the problem and so what had to be
founded was a dialectic of being in duration. Now, as soon as we had
acquired through meditation some skill in emptying lived time of all its
excess and ordering the different levels of temporal phenomena into a
series, we realised that these phenomena did not all have the same
[duration: ]{.i1}the conception of one single time carrying our soul
away for ever and ever along with things can only correspond to an
overview which offers an inadequate summary of the temporal diversity of
phenomena. Botanists who limited their science to saying that all
flowers fade would just be doing the same thing as some philosophers who
underpin their theories by repeating that all things pass away and that
time flies. We very soon saw that between this passing of things and the
abstract passing of time there is no synchronism, and that temporal
phenomena must each be studied according to its appropriate rhythm and
from a particular point of view. When we examined this phenomenology in
its contexture, taking it at any one of its levels but with the proviso
that our study be restricted to this same level, we saw that it always
comprises a duality of events and intervals. In short, when we looked at
it in the detail of its flow, we always saw a precise, concrete duration
that teemed with lacunae.

[]{#calibre_link-303 .calibre4}Our first task had to be to establish
metaphysically---against the Bergsonian thesis of duration---the
existence of these lacunae in duration. We thus had to begin by
discussing Bergson's famous discourse on the idea of nothingness and set
about restoring the balance between the passage of being to nothingness
and of nothingness to being. This was an indispensable basis for
founding the alternative of repose and action.

This is not in our view a pointless debate since by drawing on a
dialectical conception of duration we can, as we have set out to show in
this book, help solve the problems posed by psychological causality or,
more accurately, by psychological causalities. As we examine layer by
layer the different sequential levels of the psyche, we see the
discontinuities of psychic production. If there is continuity, it is
never at the level specifically under examination. For example,
'continuity' in the effectiveness of intellectual motives does not lie
at the intellectual level; it is [postulated ]{.i1}at the levels of
emotions, of instincts and of interests. Psychic concatenations are
therefore often hypotheses. In short, in our opinion psychic continuity
poses a problem and it seems to us impossible not to recognise the need
to base complex life on a plurality of durations that have neither the
same rhythm nor the same solidity in their sequence, nor the same power
of continuity.

Were we able to convey to the reader our firm belief that [psychic
continuity is not given but made, ]{.i1}we would of course still have to
show how duration is constructed and how the various permanencies of
being are grounded in its diverse attributes.

We have been encouraged in this difficult task by a number of ideas,
first and foremost by those of Gaston Roupnel, whose lessons drawn from
life were dispensed along the paths of Burgundy, amidst the
vineyards.^[2](#calibre_link-20){#calibre_link-26 .calibre10}^ There, in
this landscape shaped by human beings, Roupnel showed us that different
things and different times slowly adjust to each other, that space acts
on time and time reacts upon space. Ploughed fields depict figures of
duration every bit as clearly as figures of space; they show us the
rhythm of human toil. A furrow is the temporal axis of work and evening
repose is the field's boundary-mark. How poorly are such temporal moulds
as these expressed by a continuously, regularly flowing duration! How
much more real, as the basis of temporal effectiveness, must seem the
concept of rhythm!

[]{#calibre_link-304 .calibre4}As Roupnel also asks, what remains of the
historical past, what lasts from it? Only that which has reasons for
beginning again. Thus, alongside duration through things, there is
duration through reason. The same is always true: all true duration is
essentially polymorphous; the real action of time requires the richness
of coincidence and the syntony of rhythmic efforts. We are beings with a
strong constitution, living in sure and certain repose, only if we know
how to live according to our own rhythm by rediscovering each in our own
way, in moments of weariness and despair, the momentum of our origins.
This is what the lovely story of Siloam illustrates, teaching us how to
restore our former soul courageously, deliberately and rationally. We
have already devoted a book^[3](#calibre_link-21){#calibre_link-27
.calibre10}^ to this myth and so shall not return to it. It has,
however, influenced our thinking so profoundly that it had to be
mentioned here, at the beginning of this new book.

Since what has most duration is what is best at starting itself up all
over again, we came to understand that the concept of rhythm is the
fundamental concept of time. We were thus led to put forward an argument
that may seem very paradoxical but that we shall attempt to justify. It
is this: the phenomena of duration are constructed by rhythms, rhythms
that are by no means necessarily grounded on an entirely uniform and
regular time. Ideas found in the books of Maurice Emmanuel, Lionel
Landry and Pius Servien has helped us formulate this argument briefly
and succinctly here. It was precisely because they had no metaphysical
aims that these books were chosen to support a metaphysical argument.
They seemed to us better able to help us show the essentially
metaphorical character of the continuity of temporal phenomena. To have
duration, we must entrust ourselves to rhythms---that is to say, to
systems of instants. Exceptional events must find resonance in us if
they are to mark us deeply. In the end then, we would venture to turn
the platitude 'life is harmony' into a truth. Without harmony, without a
well-ordered dialectic, without rhythm, life and thought cannot be
stable and secure: repose is a happy
vibration.^[4](#calibre_link-22){#calibre_link-28 .calibre10}^ Lastly,
we were a few years ago given the opportunity to read an important work
which, as far as we know, has never been published commercially and
which has the splendidly luminous and thought-provoking title [La
Rythmanalysis]{.i1}.^[5](#calibre_link-23){#calibre_link-29 .calibre10}^
Reading this convinced us that in exactly the same way that we refer to
psychoanalysis, so there is a place for rhythmanalysis in psychology. A
sick soul---especially one that suffers the pain of time and of
despair---has to be cured by living and thinking rhythmically,
[]{#calibre_link-338 .calibre4}by rhythmic attentiveness and rhythmic
repose. It must first be cleared of all false permanence and ill-made
durations, and disorganised[ temporally]{.i1}. In the days of people
like Novalis, Jean-Paul Richter and Lavater, it was the fashion to
disorganise psyches that were stuck in contingent forms of
sentimentality and therefore unable to lead aesthetic and moral
lives.^[6](#calibre_link-24){#calibre_link-30 .calibre10}^ In our view
though, this kind of disorganisation at the emotional level is still too
crude. Here again, we have tried to take our philosophy of negativity a
stop further and bring our desire to dissociate to bear on the very
fabric of time itself. Ill-made rhythms have been tossed into delirium,
forced ones given peace and listless ones aroused; syntheses of being
have been sought in the syntony of becoming, and finally to all life
that has the quiet, ordered movement of a wave new vigour has been
imparted by the soft tones of intellectual liberty. Sometimes, in
moments of happiness that are all too rarely found, we rediscovered more
natural rhythms, both simpler and more peaceful. We would emerge from
these rhythmanalysis sessions feeling more serene. Our repose would be
more cheerful, more spiritual and poetic, as we lived this well-ordered
temporal diversity. Ill-prepared as we might be for such emotions by our
all too abstract culture, we felt that these rhythmanalytical
meditations brought us a kind of philosophical echo of the joys of
poetry. Between pure thought and pure poetry we would suddenly find
links, agreements, even Baudelairian correspondences. We moved not just
from one meaning to another but from meaning to the soul. Could it then
be that poetry is not an accident, a detail, a mere diversion of being?
Could it be the very principle of creative evolution? Do human beings
have a poetic destiny? Could it be that they are on this earth in order
to sing the dialectic of joy and pain? These are questions of a kind we
are not qualified to go into. We have therefore reduced our task to the
minimum and summarised Pinheiro dos Santos's most essential ideas in a
short concluding chapter here, turning them slightly in the direction of
an idealist philosophy in which the rhythm of ideas and songs would
gradually command the rhythm of things.

[notes]{.b}

[1.](#calibre_link-25){#calibre_link-19 .calibre4} Bachelard refers
obliquely here to Gaston Roupnel's [Siloë ]{.i1}(Paris: Delamain et
Boutelleau, 1927). Bachelard's first book on time was a response
[]{#calibre_link-333 .calibre4}to this work by his friend and colleague
at the University of Dijon, as its subtitle indicates: [L'Intuition de
l' instant: essai sur la 'Siloë' de Gaston Roupnel ]{.i1}(Paris, 1932).
Roupnel took up the story recounted in St. John's Gospel (chapter 9,
verse 7) of the blind man whose sight was restored after bathing in the
pool of Siloam. Bachelard reinterprets this, malking the blind man
symbolise those who refuse to think, who isolate themselves in the
Bergsonian consciousness; for Bachelard, the restorer of sight is not
just reason but what he conceives to be the new relationship between
reason and reality in modern science, and the new view of human beings
he derives from this. Bachelard refers again to this story later in his
foreword.

[2.](#calibre_link-26){#calibre_link-20 .calibre4} Bachelard refers
implicitly here to Roupnel's [Histoire de la campagne française
]{.i1}(Paris: B. Grasset, 1932).

[3.](#calibre_link-27){#calibre_link-21 .calibre4} Bachelard's footnote:
[L'Intuition de l' instant: essai sur la 'Siloë' de Gaston Roupnel
]{.i1}(Paris: Editions Stock, 1932).

[4.](#calibre_link-28){#calibre_link-22 .calibre4} The word 'vibration'
recurs in this book; surprising as this first occurrence may seem, it is
an important one. Bachelard in fact draws on the physics of vibration
for his theory of time.

[5.](#calibre_link-29){#calibre_link-23 .calibre4} Bachelard's footnote:
Lucio Alberto Pinheiro dos Santos teaches philosophy at the University
of Porto in Brazil. [La Rythmanalyse ]{.i1}was published by the Rio de
Janeiro Psychological and Philosophical Society in 1931.

[6.](#calibre_link-30){#calibre_link-24 .calibre4} Bachelard's footnote:
see for example Spenlé's fine thesis on Novalis which brings out the
philosophical and moral significance of 'disorganisation'.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-31 .calibre3}
[[Introduction](#calibre_link-32){#calibre_link-5 .calibre4}]{.b}

[]{#calibre_link-362 .calibre4}'Of Bergsonism we accept everything but
continuity' (p. 20). With this remarkable sentence, Bachelard concludes
his somewhat ironic presentation of Bergson's philosophy in chapter one
of [The Dialectic of Duration]{.i1}. Bachelard explicitly presents his
book as a critique of one of the most popular philosophies of the first
half of the Twentieth Century: that of Henri Bergson. The above claim
leaves no doubt that this is an anti-Bergsonian book, for to deny
continuity is to reject Bergsonism. In fact the reader does not need to
reach chapter one to realise the polemical character of Bachelard's
book; the cover would suffice, for the title openly reveals the author's
intentions. Dialectic cannot but destroy Bergson's [duration]{.i1},
which is continuous and devoid of contradictions.

Bachelard was implacable: indeed, four years earlier, in 1932, he had
already published a book aimed at a radical criticism of Bergson's
philosophy: [L'intuition de
l'instant]{.i1}.^[1](#calibre_link-33){#calibre_link-59 .calibre10}^
This title was fashioned to have the same rhetorical effect as the title
[The Dialectic of Duration ]{.i1}was to have; just as the latter
subverts one of the fundamental principles of Bergson's philosophy,
duration, the former contradicts the other, intuition. For Bergson,
intuition enables us to grasp 'real time', or duration. The time
perceived by intuition, being continuous, is qualitatively different
from the time of physics, which is made up of instants. Physics cannot
go beyond its discontinuous conception of time precisely because it is
not intuitive knowledge. An intuition of the instant, as Bachelard's
title suggests, would create a bridge between those elements that
Bergson intends to separate: intuition and instant. Intuition is for
Bergson the []{#calibre_link-363 .calibre4}organ of philosophical
knowledge, while the instant is a scientific concept which exists
precisely because intuition is not available to science. Science relies
on intellect; Bergson concedes that the intellect serves to grasp one
level of reality, namely the realm of inert matter. He claims that:

The intellect \[is\] a special function of the mind, essentially turned
toward inert matter.^[2](#calibre_link-34){#calibre_link-60 .calibre10}^

Bergson does not regard scientific knowledge as relative, despite its
being intellectual knowledge; rather, he believes that it can reach an
absolute status provided it applies to its proper object. However, when
it departs from inert matter, it becomes less and less reliable. Biology
for him is already a borderline case, for its object is constituted by
living beings.^[3](#calibre_link-35){#calibre_link-61 .calibre10}^ He
thinks that in order to grasp life, intellect is not adequate, and that
therefore science will always fail in this endeavour.

The intellect is characterised by a natural inability to comprehend
life.^[4](#calibre_link-36){#calibre_link-62 .calibre10}^

For Bergson, in order to comprehend life, intuition is needed, and
philosophy is the discipline that rests on it. He vindicates a role for
philosophy which is distinct from that of the 'positive sciences', in
its method and its object; its method being intuition and its object
life. Despite his concessions to science, philosophy appears to be not
only different from science but also superior to it, for it succeeds
where science fails:

Chemistry and physics will \[n\]ever give us the key to
life.^[5](#calibre_link-37){#calibre_link-63 .calibre10}^

In science objects are conceived as static, because intellectual
knowledge is only capable of this much: '[of immobility alone does the
intellect form a clear
idea]{.i1}'.^[6](#calibre_link-38){#calibre_link-64 .calibre10}^
Becoming is therefore for science only a succession of immobile
pictures. Bergson calls scientific and ordinary knowledge
'cinematographic',^[7](#calibre_link-39){#calibre_link-65 .calibre10}^
for, as in moving pictures, the movement is an illusion created by a
succession of static frames. In Bergson's eyes, philosophers have not
managed to go beyond this fragmentation: the ancient philosophers denied
the importance of time, and sought truth outside it. Modern philosophers
have considered time, but they have shared the world-view of the
sciences, and have reduced it to a succession of snapshots. Indeed, time
has been modelled on space and equated []{#calibre_link-364 .calibre4}to
it, most notably by Kant. For Bergson 'real time', being continuous,
escapes the intellect, for '[of the discontinuous alone does the
intellect form a clear
idea]{.i1}'.^[8](#calibre_link-40){#calibre_link-66 .calibre10}^

The provocation of Bachelard's first anti-Bergsonian book, [L'intuition
de l'instant]{.i1}, is apparent: for Bergson intuition is the faculty
which allows us to go beyond the fragmented time---instants---in order
to access the 'real' continuous time, duration. [The Dialectic of
Duration ]{.i1}expresses the same criticism from the opposite end: to
dialecticise duration amounts to reducing it to the discontinuous time
of physics. Dialectic of duration is not a small correction of
Bergsonism, but rather its negation. And yet, Bachelard claims that his
aim is to correct Bergsonism:

We wish therefore to develop a discontinuous Bergsonism, showing the
need to arithmetise Bergsonian duration so as to give it more fluidity,
more numbers, and also more accuracy in the correspondence the phenomena
of thought exhibit between themselves and the quantum characteristics of
reality (p. 20).

If read as a mere discussion of Bergson's philosophy, [The Dialectic of
Duration ]{.i1}is rather paradoxical, as shown by Bachelard's aim at
'arithmetising' it. However, this book is much more than a comment on
Bergsonism; it is the exposition of Bachelard's own conception of time,
history and knowledge. Why do it by opposing Bergson?

One reason is inherent in Bachelard's own view that advancement of
knowledge proceeds dialectically. A new doctrine, or a new scientific
theory, cannot be formulated without a polemical discussion with an
existent, and competing, doctrine. Indeed, Bachelard argues that it is
time to substitute Kant's 'architectonic reason' with 'polemical
reason'.^[9](#calibre_link-41){#calibre_link-67 .calibre10}^ In [Le
nouvel esprit scientifique
]{.i1}(1934),^[10](#calibre_link-42){#calibre_link-68 .calibre10}^ he
had already set out his epistemology of oppositions: he had interpreted
Einstein's physics as an opposition to classical mechanics, and had
argued that modern epistemology opposed Cartesianism. In [La philosophie
du non]{.i1}, published in 1940, he was going to provide an articulated
theoretical defence of polemical reason. In this book, he argued that in
science:

Above all we must recognise the fact that new experience says [no
]{.i}to old experience, otherwise we are quite evidently not up against
a new experience at all.^[11](#calibre_link-43){#calibre_link-69
.calibre10}^

[]{#calibre_link-365 .calibre4}Philosophy, in order to proceed, must say
[no ]{.i1}to old philosophy, and to competing philosophies. In [The
Dialectic of Duration]{.i1}, philosophy is made to develop by saying [no
]{.i1}to Bergsonism.

The other reason for Bachelard to direct his attack on Bergson is more
circumstantial, bound up with the competing currents of philosophical
thought and practice in the French universities at the time. In the
first half of the Twentieth Century, Bergsonism had a tremendous impact
on Parisian intellectual life. Bergson's lectures at the Collège de
France were crowded beyond belief; in illustrations of the time, we see
people climbing windows to get a glimpse of the celebrated philosopher.
This philosopher declared the sciences limited in their object and in
their scope. He proposed a new role for philosophy, freed from
subordination to the sciences. At the time of [The Dialectic of
Duration]{.i1}, Bachelard was Professor of Philosophy at the University
of Dijon, but four years later returned to the Sorbonne, where he had
obtained his PhD, as Professor of History and Philosophy of the
Sciences, and as Director of the Institute of History of the Sciences
and Techniques. This Institute had been created in 1932 by Abel Rey,
Bachelard's supervisor on one of his two doctoral dissertations.
Bachelard's philosophy, like those of his mentors at the Sorbonne,
represented a defence of scientific rationalism, to which Bergson was a
formidable threat. In 1936, Bergson was seventy-eight, and had long left
his chair at the Collège de France. However, his philosophy was still
very influential; his last book, [La pensée et le mouvant]{.i1}, had
been published in 1934, and he had received the Nobel prize for
literature in 1927. What made his philosophy more menacing for the
Sorbonne philosophers of science was that it was kept alive precisely in
the domain of philosophy of science. Bergson's chair had gone to his
follower Edouard Le Roy. Le Roy, a mathematician by training and a
militant Catholic, regarded himself as a disciple of Bergson and of
Poincaré, and intended to combine their philosophies. His examination of
the possibilities and limits of science brought him to conclude that
scientific knowledge is an essentially conventional, if useful,
practice. Above science, he posed intuitive knowledge, which grasps
reality directly and truly, as Bergson had taught. Bachelard's other
mentor at the Sorbonne, the historian of philosophy Léon Brunschvicg,
had done battle with Le Roy's 'new philosophy' in the pages of the
[Revue de Metaphysique et Morale ]{.i1}already at the turn of the
century. Brunschvicg had defended 'intellectualism' against Le Roy's
attacks. Bachelard went much further in []{#calibre_link-366
.calibre4}this defence, and his two anti-Bergsonian books constitute the
outline of his version of rationalism.

Rather than undermining Bergsonism from within, Bachelard challenges it
from a different perspective; that of rationalism. Bachelard does not
try, as, for instance, Bertrand Russell did, to show that Bergson
misunderstood the concept of number as mathematics assumes it, or to
demonstrate that Bergson's solution of Zeno's paradox of Achilles and
the tortoise is fallacious.^[12](#calibre_link-44){#calibre_link-70
.calibre10}^ The project of [The Dialectic of Duration ]{.i1}is much
more ample than finding inconsistencies or logical problems with
Bergson's argument. It is part of the building of a new philosophy,
which comprises not only an epistemology but also a historiography and
an ethics.

By opposing Bergson's project of divorcing philosophy from science,
Bachelard defends the view that 'science in fact creates philosophy' as
he declares in [Le nouvel esprit scientifique ]{.i1}\[[The New
Scientific Spirit]{.i1}\].^[13](#calibre_link-45){#calibre_link-71
.calibre10}^ However, by this Bachelard does not mean that the role of
philosophy is simply to accept the results of the sciences and to adopt
their language. It suffices to read a few pages of [The Dialectic of
Duration ]{.i1}to be assured that we are rather far from any project of
scientistic or positivistic philosophy. For Bachelard what science has
to teach philosophy is of a general order; first of all, its method, but
not the specific methods of the specific sciences, which for him are
diverse and open to change. Rather, Bachelard thinks that philosophy
should adopt the dialectical method that characterizes scientific
inquiry. Science, he argues throughout his extensive output, is always
the result of a fertile clash of new experiences and projects against
old ones; it is always the result of interaction and dialogue between
individuals; finally, it is a positive knowledge which comes out as
negation of other possibilities and other solutions.

Not surprisingly, Bachelard attacks Bergson's conception of intuition as
the way of attaining true knowledge. For Bachelard, no knowledge is
possible without mediations and rectifications. The criticism of
immediate knowledge is a constant theme in Bachelard's work, starting
with one of his two doctoral dissertations, [Essai sur la connaissance
approchée]{.i1}. In the chapter 'Intuition et réalisme en
mathématiques', he judges mathematical intuition as very often unable to
lead 'to a rigorous knowledge'.^[14](#calibre_link-46){#calibre_link-72
.calibre10}^ For him, intuition 'hinders ... the freedom of the
spirit'.^[15](#calibre_link-47){#calibre_link-73 .calibre10}^ One could
say that Bachelard holds an 'anti-Rousseauian' philosophy: for him,
human nature is not naturally good, and certainly the human
[]{#calibre_link-367 .calibre4}mind is not: it is not able to know if
untrained. In order to attain scientific knowledge, the mind has to
fight against 'easy intuitions'. Bachelard returns many times to the
necessity of revising 'first knowledge' or 'first intuitions', for they
are generally wrong.^[16](#calibre_link-48){#calibre_link-74
.calibre10}^ The 'first experience', the experience which has not
undergone a critical examination, is the first of the obstacles to
objective knowledge that he analyses in [La formation de l'esprit
scientifique]{.i1}.^[17](#calibre_link-49){#calibre_link-75 .calibre10}^
For Bachelard, science is a model of knowledge precisely because it
advances by revising and correcting previous achievements. In his vision
of history of science, a new way of thinking, which he calls 'the new
scientific mind', emerged with non-Euclidean geometry as the overcoming
of the immediate, intuitive and naive approach of Euclidean geometry.
What is intuitive for Bachelard is the product of imagination and desire
and this hinders the course of science. Moreover, for Bachelard
scientific activity represents a model also because it requires
interactions between individuals; modern physics, he argues, cannot be
carried out by isolated scientists. Indeed, he claims that 'all
rationalism is
interrationalism'.^[18](#calibre_link-50){#calibre_link-76 .calibre10}^
By contrast, intuitive knowledge, which Bergson defends, is private.

Bachelard's conception of knowledge as discursive, indeed as polemical,
requires negations. A positive item of knowledge emerges against
something that is [not ]{.i1}it. In the first chapter of [The Dialectic
of Duration]{.i1}, Bachelard considers Bergson's criticism of negation
and of the idea of nothing. Bergson regards the idea of nothing as a
pseudo-problem, despite its persistence in the history of philosophy.
Nothing cannot be imagined or perceived; it is only a name, even though
it plays a social and pedagogical role. Consequently, for Bergson
negation is in fact an affirmation:

Thus, whenever I add a 'not' to an affirmation, whenever I deny, I
perform two acts: (1) I interest myself in what one of my fellow- men
affirms, or in what he was going to say, or in what might have been said
by another [Me]{.i}, whom I anticipate; (2) I announce that some other
affirmation, whose content I do not specify, will have to be substituted
for the one I find before me. Now, in neither of these two acts is there
anything but affirmation.^[19](#calibre_link-51){#calibre_link-77
.calibre10}^

As a result, for Bergson there is no disorder: any negation of order is
simply the affirmation of another order. There are different [kinds
]{.i1}of order, rather than disorder. Bergson sees qualitative
differences where Bachelard []{#calibre_link-368 .calibre4}sees
oppositions. For Bergson, philosophy, through its organ, intuition, is
able to grasp qualitative differences whereas science reduces everything
to quantities and formal models. However, he argues that philosophers so
far have not pursued the possibilities of their discipline. In
particular they have failed to consider the qualitative distinctions of
the various processes which go under the name of 'becoming'. In
Bergson's words:

That which goes from yellow to green is not like that which goes from
green to blue: they are different [qualitative ]{.i}movements. That
which goes from flower to fruit is not like that which goes from larva
to nymph and from nymph to perfect insect: they are different
[evolutionary ]{.i}movements. The action of eating or drinking is not
like the action of fighting: they are different [extensive
]{.i}movements. And these three kinds of movements
themselves---qualitative, evolutionary, extensive---differ
profoundly.^[20](#calibre_link-52){#calibre_link-78 .calibre10}^

For Bergson the perception of a discontinuity in a process is due only
to the limitation of our comprehension. He wants to show that we cannot
stop perceiving; that suppressing something only means replacing it with
something else; and that negating something means affirming something
else. This is why Bachelard calls Bergson's philosophy 'a philosophy of
fullness' and his psychology 'a psychology of plenitude'. He polemically
remarks:

This psychology is so rich, so multifarious and
mobile^[21](#calibre_link-53){#calibre_link-79 .calibre10}^ that it
cannot be contradicted. ... In these conditions, life cannot go in fear
of some total failure. If intellect dims then instinct awakens. Indeed
human beings---who in dedicating themselves to intellect have put so
much at risk---have at least held on to sufficient instincts to keep
themselves in ignorance and error. They will take decisions, clearly and
rationally, but in between these they move with all the confidence of a
sleepwalker (p. 15).

When Bachelard wrote [The Dialectic of Duration]{.i1}, Bergson had
already attacked the dominant school of the experimental psychology of
his time, in [Matter and Memory ]{.i1}first and then in several talks,
notably in 'Le cerveau et la pensée: une illusion philosophique' and in
'L'âme et le corps'.^[22](#calibre_link-54){#calibre_link-80
.calibre10}^ In particular, he had criticised the doctrine of
parallelism, according to which to any psychic state there corresponds a
neurological state. The adherents to parallelism denied any distinction
between brain and mind. Bergson proposed his own psychology which
restated []{#calibre_link-369 .calibre4}a dualism between body and soul,
matter and consciousness. Matter---our body---acts, whereas the mind
remembers. In its autonomous experience, the mind does not experience
those temporal discontinuities and voids which characterise the
perception of material things. As a result the mind is capable of
preserving the past in its entirety, so that it always remains part of
the present.

Pierre Janet, Professor of Experimental Psychology at the Collège de
France, criticised Bergson's conception of time and memory in his course
of lectures delivered in 1927--1928 and immediately
published.^[23](#calibre_link-55){#calibre_link-81 .calibre10}^
Bachelard relied on Janet's criticism, for it was aimed to show the
psychological implausibility of duration as formulated by Bergson. In
chapter 2 of [The Dialectic of Duration]{.i1}, Bachelard extensively
quotes from Janet's lectures and pays particular attention to his
'psychology of commencement'. The importance Janet attaches to the
beginning and end of actions and events lends support to Bachelard's
theory of time as discontinuous. In his own words:

we need the concept of the instantaneous in order to understand the
psychology of beginning (p. 48).

Moreover, Janet's insistence on the human and dialectical character of
memory was particularly useful to Bachelard's goal. In the lecture
titled 'Le récit', Janet characterises the act of memory as social and
as being aimed at 'triumphing over an absence'. Indeed human beings use
memory to 'fight against absence'. Bachelard endorsed Janet's conception
of memory as something to be constructed. Bachelard wanted to show that
our personal history is neither memory of a continuity nor contains the
entirety of our past, but rather selected memories. For Bachelard, our
personal history is the account of our actions. Its continuity is not a
reality apprehended by an immediate intuition, but it is rather a
construction realised through the reasons we attach to our distinct
actions (p. 42). For him, the way in which we know our past is not
different from the way we know material objects, for both require
reflection and judgement. Consequently, Bachelard rejects Bergson's
attempt to make intellectual knowledge a particular type of knowledge
the object of which cannot be life:

In vain do we try to differentiate between understanding a process and
living it (p. 42).

[]{#calibre_link-342 .calibre4}For Bachelard the knowledge of our
history is equally mediated. He cites Pierre Janet expressing a concept
which was going to be a key to his own philosophy: to know is always to
teach. Knowledge is always a dialectical exchange and a discussion, even
in the case of solitary knowledge, in which the discussion becomes
internal to the individual. Knowledge of something is realised when it
becomes transmittable. This requires an order. We evaluate past events,
select and organise them according to a plan:

It is impossible to know time without judging it (p. 43).

In [The Dialectic of Duration]{.i1}, Bachelard presents his concept of
'rational memory' or 'rationalised memory', which he fully develops in
his later books (p. 76).^[24](#calibre_link-56){#calibre_link-82
.calibre10}^ Rational memory reconstructs the past according to present
conceptions and finalities. This is for him the way the sciences use
their past, and he calls this process 'recurrent history'. The recurrent
history of a science is constituted by a selective choice of theories
interpreted in the light of present theories. Bachelard claims that
science is able to incorporate previous theories, despite the fact that
it advances by contradicting them, precisely because it reconstructs its
history in this way. In other words, only a reinterpretation of the past
can create the continuity of history of science, which otherwise would
exhibit ruptures and contradictions. Memory as a coherent narrative is
for Bachelard the result of a construction rather than a given, and so
is any 'psychic continuity' (p. xiii).

A fundamental point of Bachelard's criticism is that Bergson's
philosophy prevents human beings from judging, choosing and acting
according to a plan. Bergson's creative evolution proceeds thanks to an
internal, 'natural' motor: the vital impulse. By contrast, for
Bachelard, change (rather than 'evolution') is brought about by work,
commitment and critical assessment of past ideas and practices. That
[The Dialectic of Duration ]{.i1}was intended to provide not only a
metaphysical justification of discontinuity but also an ethical reason
for it is clearly stated.

The concluding chapter of the book,
'Rhythmanalysis',^[25](#calibre_link-57){#calibre_link-83 .calibre10}^
is an articulated proposal of how we should give a 'rhythm' to our life.
This rhythm is analogous to the rhythm of intellectual knowledge, that
is to say, to its dialectic process. Just as knowledge proceeds by
alternating negation and creation, our life should be an alternation of
the []{#calibre_link-370 .calibre4}effort of intellectual knowledge and
the rest from its demands. Indeed Bachelard presents this book as an
'introduction to the teaching of a philosophy of repose' (p. xi). This
repose, during which imagination can express itself, should also receive
a 'rhythm': continuity for Bachelard is just not creative. He argues
that poetic rhythm has been achieved by Surrealism, an avant-garde
movement that he greatly admired. In chapter 7 of [The Dialectic of
Duration]{.i1}, he explains how surrealist poetry provides a good
example of temporal dialectic. If it is not understood by psychologists,
logicians and literary critics, Bachelard goes on, it is because they
want to judge it by superimposing on it the schemes of continuity,
without allowing for the dialectical freedom on which it is constructed.
In 'Surrationalism', an article published the same year as [The
Dialectic of Duration]{.i1}, Bachelard compares the rhythm of surrealist
poetry with the rhythm he proposes for rational knowledge. He suggests
that the dialectic between rational plot and dream devised by Tristan
Tzara for poetry could represent a model for rational knowledge, so that
'rationalism' would turn into 'surrationalism'.

For Bachelard the alternation of these two dialectical
activities---intellectual and imaginative---should form the rhythm of
our own life. Indeed he proposes the dialectical play of presence and
absence of intellectual work as a philosophy of life. The dialectic of
activity and rest put forward in [The Dialectic of Duration ]{.i1}is
reflected in the subjects of Bachelard's books. Some of them are about
science while others are about the works of imagination. In all of them,
he supports an alternation of intellectual and imaginative activities
which would form a 'complete anthropology'. His conception of the
interplay between intellect and imagination is indeed 'polemical'.
Intellectual knowledge must purify itself from imagination, and it
advances by overcoming the obstacles that imagination poses by diverting
the attention from its proper object and spoiling the logic of
intellectual knowledge. Conversely, imagination must purify itself from
the constraints of intellect in order freely to express itself. In his
view, neither faculty can be eliminated, because the atrophy of one
would stop the activity of the other, and because human beings need to
exercise both.

Far from being a merely polemical book, [The Dialectic of Duration
]{.i1}contains all the major themes of Bachelard's philosophy of science
as well as of his philosophy of imagination. He continued his ambitious
project of providing a basis for a 'complete anthropology' in his
[]{#calibre_link-371 .calibre4}subsequent books, which are often more
specific and focused than [The Dialectic of Duration]{.i1} but develop
the ideas exposed in this short but still all-encompassing
work.^[26](#calibre_link-58){#calibre_link-84 .calibre10}^

Cristina Chimisso

[notes ]{.b}

[1.](#calibre_link-59){#calibre_link-33 .calibre4} [L'intuition de
l'instant]{.i1} (Paris: Stock, 1992 \[1931\]). Translated as [Intuition
of the Instant]{.i1} (US: Northwestern University Press, 2013).

[2.](#calibre_link-60){#calibre_link-34 .calibre4} Henri Bergson,
[Creative Evolution]{.i1} (Mineola, NY: Dover, 1998 \[1907\]), 206.

[3](#calibre_link-61){#calibre_link-35 .calibre4}. Henri Bergson, [The
Creative Mind]{.i1} (New York: Hubner, 1946 \[1903--1923\]), 43--50.

[4](#calibre_link-62){#calibre_link-36 .calibre4}. Henri Bergson,
[Creative Evolution]{.i1} (Mineola, NY: Dover, 1998 \[1907\]), 165.

[5](#calibre_link-63){#calibre_link-37 .calibre4}. [Ibid.]{.i1}, 31.

[6](#calibre_link-64){#calibre_link-38 .calibre4}. [Ibid.]{.i1}, 155.

[7](#calibre_link-65){#calibre_link-39 .calibre4}. [Ibid.]{.i1}, 306.

[8](#calibre_link-66){#calibre_link-40 .calibre4}. [Ibid.]{.i1}, 154.

[9](#calibre_link-67){#calibre_link-41 .calibre4}. Gaston Bachelard,
[L'engagement rationaliste]{.i1} (Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France, 1972), 'La psychologie de la raison': 27--34.

[10](#calibre_link-68){#calibre_link-42 .calibre4}. Paris, Presses
Universitaires de France, 1991 (Engl. trans.: [The New Scientific
Spirit]{.i1} \[Boston: Beacon Press, 1984\]).

[11](#calibre_link-69){#calibre_link-43 .calibre4}. Gaston Bachelard,
[La philosophie du non]{.i1}. [Essai d'une philosophie du nouvel esprit
scientifique]{.i1} (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1988
\[1940\]), 9 (Engl. trans.: [The Philosophy of No]{.i1}. [A Philosophy
of the New Scientific Mind ]{.i1}\[New York: The Orion Press, 1968\],
9).

[12](#calibre_link-70){#calibre_link-44 .calibre4}. Bertrand Russell,
[The Philosophy of Bergson]{.i1} (Cambridge: Bowes and Bowes, 1914).

[13](#calibre_link-71){#calibre_link-45 .calibre4}. Gaston Bachelard,
[Le nouvel esprit scientifique]{.i1} (Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France, 1984 \[1934\]), 7 (Engl. trans.: [The New Scientific
Spirit]{.i1} \[Boston: Beacon Press, 1984\], 3).

[14](#calibre_link-72){#calibre_link-46 .calibre4}. Gaston Bachelard,
[Essai sur la connaissance approché]{.i1} (Paris: Vrin, 1987 \[1927\]),
170.

[15](#calibre_link-73){#calibre_link-47 .calibre4}. [Ibid.]{.i1}, 169.

[16](#calibre_link-74){#calibre_link-48 .calibre4}. Gaston Bachelard,
[Le nouvel esprit scientifique]{.i1} (Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France, 1984 \[1934\]), 40--41 (Engl. trans., 38--39).

[17](#calibre_link-75){#calibre_link-49 .calibre4}. Gaston Bachelard,
[La formation de l'esprit scientifique: contribution à une psychanalyse
de la connaissance objective]{.i1} (Paris: Vrin, 1993 \[1938\]), ch. 1.

[]{#calibre_link-372 .calibre4}[18.](#calibre_link-76){#calibre_link-50
.calibre4} Gaston Bachelard, [Le rationalisme appliqu]{.i1}é (Paris:
Presses Universitaires de France, 1986 \[1949\]), 21.

[19](#calibre_link-77){#calibre_link-51 .calibre4}. Henri Bergson,
[Creative Evolution]{.i1} (Mineola, NY: Dover, 1998 \[1907\]), 289.

[20](#calibre_link-78){#calibre_link-52 .calibre4}. [Ibid.]{.i1}, 304.

[21](#calibre_link-79){#calibre_link-53 .calibre4}. On the following
page, Bachelard says, 'Bergsonism that has been accused of a
predilection for mobility'. Bachelard here refers to Julien Benda, who
had attacked Bergson in his [Le Bergsonisme ou une philosophie de la
mobilité]{.i1} (Paris: Mercure de France, 3rd ed., 1912). Ironically, he
was going to extend his attack to other philosophers, including
Bachelard, as their work become available. In [De quelques constantes de
l'esprit humain. Critique du mobilisme contemporain (Bergson,
Brunschvicg, Boutroux, Le Roy, Bachelard, Rougier)]{.i1} (Paris:
Gallimard, 1950), he published new and old essays against the above
philosophers and others such as Abel Rey and Benedetto Croce, because in
his eyes they conceived knowledge as something never fixed, but rather
always in evolution.

[22](#calibre_link-80){#calibre_link-54 .calibre4}. [Matière et memoire,
]{.i1}first published in 1896, was constantly reprinted. The two talks,
delivered in 1904 and in 1912, respectively, were published together
with other talks in Bergson[: L'énergie spirituelle. Essais et
conférences]{.i1}, Paris 1919.

[23](#calibre_link-81){#calibre_link-55 .calibre4}. Pierre Janet,
[L'évolution de la mémoire et de la notion du temps. Compte-rendu
intégral des conférences d'après les notes sténographiques]{.i1} (Paris:
Chahine, 1928).

[24](#calibre_link-82){#calibre_link-56 .calibre4}. Bachelard develops
the concept of rational memory in particular in [Le rationalisme
appliqué ]{.i1}(Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1986 \[1949\]),
ch.1; and in [L'activité rationaliste de la physique contemporaine]{.i1}
(Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1951), ch.1. In [Le
rationalisme appliqué]{.i1}, Bachelard counterposes 'rational memory' to
'empirical memory' and argues that the former, as 'memory of reason
\[and\] of coordinated ideas', follows laws which are different from
those of empirical memory (p. 2).

[25](#calibre_link-83){#calibre_link-57 .calibre4}. This is based on the
'rhythmanalysis' proposed by a certain Lucio Pinheiro dos Santos.

[26](#calibre_link-84){#calibre_link-58 .calibre4}. For a bibliography
of Bachelard, see: H. Choe, [Gaston Bachelard.]{.i1} [Epistemologie.
Bibliographie]{.i1} (Frankfurt am Main: Lang, 1994). For works on
Bachelard in English, see: Cristina Chimisso,[ Gaston Bachelard: Critic
of Science and the Imagination ]{.i1}(UK: Routledge, 2001); Mary Tiles,
[Bachelard: Science and Objectivity]{.i1} (UK: Cambridge University
Press, 1984); Mary McAllester Jones, [Gaston Bachelard, Subversive
Humanist: Texts and Readings]{.i1} (US: University of Wisconsin Press,
1991): Joanne H. Stroud, [Gaston Bachelard: An Elemental Reverie of the
World's Stuff]{.i1} (US: Dallas Institute Publications, 2015); Zbigniew
Kotowicz, [Gaston Bachelard: A Philosophy of the Surreal]{.i1} (UK:
Edinburgh University Press, 2016). For Bergson and Bergsonism:
[]{#calibre_link-373 .calibre4}[]{#calibre_link-374 .calibre4}P. A. Y.
Gunter, [Henri Bergson: a bibliography, ]{.i1}Rev. 2nd ed. (Bowling
Green, Ohio: Bowling Green State University, 1986); Gilles Deleuze,
[Bergsonism]{.i1} (New York: Zone Books, 1988); R. C. Grogin, [The
Bergsonian Controversy in France, 1900--1914]{.i1} (US: University of
Calgary Press, 1988); Leonard Lawlor, [The Challenge of Bergsonism]{.i1}
(US: Continuum, 2003).
:::

::: {#calibre_link-85 .calibre3}
[Chapter 1](#calibre_link-86){#calibre_link-6 .calibre4}

[**Relaxation and
Nothingness**](#calibre_link-86){.calibre4}^[1](#calibre_link-87){#calibre_link-94
.calibre10}^

[]{#calibre_link-256 .calibre10}'Who will tell me how, all through
existence, my whole person has been preserved? What was it that carried
me, inert, full of life and spirit, from one end of nothingness to the
other?'

Paul Valéry[,]{.cs-bl}[ ]{.cs-bl}[A.B.C.]{.i}

[I]{.b}

1

Bergson's philosophy is a philosophy of fullness and his psychology is a
psychology of plenitude. This psychology is so rich, so multifarious and
mobile that it cannot be contradicted; it makes repose active and
functions permanent; it can always draw on so many things that the
psychological scene will never be empty and success also will be
ensured. In these conditions, life cannot go in fear of some total
failure. If intellect dims then instinct awakens. Indeed human
beings---who in dedicating themselves to intellect have put so much at
risk---have at least held on to sufficient instincts to keep themselves
in ignorance and error. They will take decisions, clearly and
rationally, but in between these they move with all the confidence of a
sleepwalker. They move even faster when they do not know where they are
going, when they entrust themselves to the life force that carries
humankind along, when they turn away from personal solitude. Thus, our
life is so full that it is active when we do nothing. In a way, there is
always something behind []{#calibre_link-262 .calibre4}us, Life behind
our life, the life force beneath our impulses. Our whole past is also
waiting there behind our present, and it is because the self is old and
deep, rich and full that it can truly act. Its originality stems from
its origin, not a matter of some chance discovery but of memory. We are
bound to ourselves, our present action neither disconnected nor
gratuitous but always of necessity expressing our self, just as a
quality expresses a substance. In this respect, Bergsonism has the
facility of all substantialism and the ease and charm of all doctrines
of interiority.

2

While Bergson would doubtless refrain from inscribing the past in
matter, he does in fact inscribe the present in the past. Thus, the soul
is seen to be a thing behind the flux of its phenomena; it is not really
contemporary with its own fluidity. And the Bergsonism that has been
accused of a predilection for mobility has not however set itself within
duration's very fluidity. It has maintained the solidarity of past and
future and also the viscosity of duration, with the result that the past
remains the substance of the present or to put in another way, that the
present instant is never anything other than the phenomenon of the past.
And thus it is that in Bergsonian psychology, duration that is full and
deep, continuous and rich serves as the spirit's substance. In no
circumstances can the soul separate itself from time; like all that are
happy in this world, it is always possessed by what it possesses.
Ceasing to flow would mean ceasing to subsist; were we to leave this
world's ways we would leave life. When we come to a standstill we die.
Thus, while we think we have broken with the idea of the soul as
substance, we are in fact shaping our innermost being from the stuff of
an indestructible duration. Panpsychism is now nothing other than a
panchronism, and the continuity of thinking substance nothing other than
that of temporal substance. Time is alive and life is temporal. Before
Bergson, the equation of being and becoming had never been so well
established.

3

However, as we shall see at greater length in due course, for Bergsonism
the creative value of becoming is limited by the very fact of
fundamental continuity. Time has to be left to take its course if it is
to do its work. In particular, the present can do nothing. Since the
present carries out the past just as a pupil carries out a task the
teacher has set, the present can create nothing. It cannot add being to
being. Here again, Bergsonism has developed by following the intuition
of fullness. For this school of thinkers, the dialectic always goes
directly from being to being without nothingness being brought in
between []{#calibre_link-263 .calibre4}them. Jankélévitch has in fact
suggested that the famous disquisition on nothingness be regarded as the
basis of Bergson's philosophy. We know that for Bergson the idea of
nothingness is in the end richer than that of being, simply because this
idea would only be brought in and only become clear if an additional
function of annihilation were added to the different functions by which
being is established and described. In Bergson's view therefore, the
idea of nothingness is functionally richer than the idea of being. Thus,
with regard to the knowledge we have of them, no substance could have
any void and no melody be broken by an absolute silence. The substance
we know must always express itself. In a way, all the possibilities of
human thought and action inevitably become attributes of the substance
under consideration if we bear in mind an ingenious theory of negative
attribution. May we in fact subsequently come to deny a quality we once
attributed to substance? If so, we are expressing an error we have made
rather than a deficiency of substance. Thus conceived as a sum of
possibilities, substance is inexhaustible. The possible as a possible
can never fall because it remains possible; in the same way, the
probable that has been clearly seen to be such will always keep its
precise value. The possible and the probable therefore have perfect
continuity and it is for this reason that they are very precisely the
spiritual attributes of substance as it presents itself to our analysis
in the problem of knowledge. The significance of Bergson's subtle
critique can only be understood if we carefully take up position on
idealist ground where knowledge of being is concerned, and avoid
descending too quickly to the ontological domain. We shall then see the
full importance of problematic judgement. From this point of view, the
possible is a memory and a hope. It is what we once knew and hope to
find again. It is thus well suited to filling in at least the
discontinuities in knowledge of being, though maybe not the gaps in
being. In this way is the unending dialogue of mind and things prepared,
and the continuous fabric woven that lets us feel substance within us,
at the level of our innermost intuition, despite the contradictions of
external experience. When I do not recognise reality it is because I am
absorbed by memories that reality itself has imprinted in me, because I
have returned to myself. For Bergson, there is no wavering, no
interplay, and no interruption in the alternative we have between
knowledge of our innermost self and of the external world. I act or I
think; I am a thing or a philosopher. And through this very
contradiction, I am continuous.

4

[]{#calibre_link-253 .calibre4}The same comments would be made, Bergson
argues, about the psychology of a decrease in psychological intensity as
about the psychology of annihilation, since in his view the impression
that an intensity decreases while still remaining comparable to itself
is as artificial and misleading as the idea one might have of absolute
nothingness. For Bergson, when there is a decrease there is a change in
nature. Spiritual substance is thus enfolded in endless, prodigiously
diverse attributes, and all the degrees of attribution have an equal
force of attribution. The subtleties of psychological analysis have a
charm that can immediately be ranked among the soul's riches. Bergson
ascribes the emotion generated by his subtle psychological analysis to
the fundamental value of our feelings. For him, nuance is a colour. The
impression is given then that the Bergsonian soul cannot stop feeling
and thinking, that feelings and ideas are endlessly renewed on its
surface, glinting in the flow of duration like a river's water in
sunshine.

5

The impression of plenitude given by Bergsonian psychology can indeed be
increased by the perfectly complementary character of some opposition.
Not only is the absence of a form automatically the presence of a
different form, but the lack of a function is sure to activate a
function that is the very opposite of what was done initially and
failed. It would seem that without this immediate rectification of one
function by another, being is no longer of use to itself. An essential
failure would shatter being, breaking up the becoming that is totally
inseparable from being. Failure must thus remain partial, superficial,
and rectifiable. It must not prevent the continuous and deep success of
being. This in fact metaphysical success is so certain that failure in
one respect is more than compensated by success in another. In the
general theory of the life force, there is an entire argument for
ontological compensations that justifies, for the individual and above
all for the species, the most unfortunate initiatives. There is nothing
more Bergsonian than this idea of the plurality of different means to
reach the same goal, a plurality that gives all curiosity, all testing
and seeking out, an undisputed positive value. Life is never absolutely
and unconditionally at risk. Indeed Bergson, with his subtle analysis of
the risk which gave rise to intellect, always maintained that this risk
was active under the pressure of circumstance, in the struggle for life,
as it kept hold of the past as something stable and sure, desiring
repose, security and peace, in the secret ambition of being to acquire
more duration. He always maintained that behind intellect, instinct
stood guard. Should instinct fail, torpor would be there to keep
[]{#calibre_link-244 .calibre4}watch, so to speak, as a positive
function of the psyche that can oblige being to wait without destroying
it. Coming back to the life force and its bold innovations, Bergson has
no doubt shown very clearly that the greatest success is to be found
where risk is the highest, but once again risk, in his view, has an aim
and a function, in other words it has a history, a development, a logic,
a myriad empirical and rational guarantees that found the continuity of
the most adventurous of lives.

6

All these arguments do not however deal with the metaphysical essence of
risk and Bergson has written nothing on and for risk, nothing on
absolute and total risk, risk that has no aim and no reason; he has not
written about the strange emotional game that leads us to destroy our
security, our happiness and our love, nor about the sense of exaltation
that draws us to danger, newness, death, and nothingness. As a result of
this, the philosophy of the life force has been unable to give full
meaning to what we shall call the purely ontological success of being,
that is to say to the constant re-creation of being by itself, in the
spiritual act of consciousness in its purely gratuitous form, as
resistance to the call of suicide and triumph over the charms of
nothingness. Bergsonism positioned itself systematically in relation to
the evolution of species; the individual's free act, whose meaning and
place it had however better shown than any other school of philosophy,
was somehow eliminated in the whole evolution of the species. Lastly, in
Bergsonism the free act seems to lack that purely intellectual causality
that binds but does not constrain: it remains an accident. The theory of
creative evolution, based on purely biological evolution, on evolution
that is long, obscure and tenacious, thus discounted anything
corresponding to the will to destroy or struggle just for the sake of
struggle. It first and foremost attributed to being a continuum of
growth, to the species continual life through seeds, and to living
destiny a force that of necessity would never end, since any
interruption breaks up a force even more surely than it does a thing.
Bergson's thought is therefore always and everywhere guided by the same
fundamental idea: being, movement, space, and duration cannot receive
lacunae; they cannot be denied by nothingness, by repose, by points, by
instants; or at least such negations are condemned to remain indirect
and verbal, superficial and ephemeral.

7

To sum up, whether it be in our intuition of duration, our conceptions
of being, or even in the service of our functions, according to
Bergsonism we are given over to an [immediate]{.i1}, [deep
]{.i1}continuity which can only []{#calibre_link-245
.calibre4}superficially be broken by what lies outside, by appearance,
and by language that claims to describe it. Discontinuities,
fragmentation, and negation only appear to be devices which help
exposition; psychologically, they are in the expression of thought and
not in any way within the psyche. Bergson did not attempt to activate
dialectic at the level of existence nor even at that of intuitive, deep
knowledge; he considered that dialectic did not go beyond the dialogue
of the soul with reality, and that the experience that goes from things
to the self was an interplay of images which kept a fundamental
homogeneity.

8

This then, in our view, is how the metaphysical connection between
non-being and being can briefly be characterised in Bergsonism. We shall
now go on to criticise this school of thought on one specific point.
Since any critique is clarified by its end-point, let us say
straightaway that of Bergsonism we accept everything but continuity.
Indeed to be even more precise, let us say that from our point of view
also continuity---or continuities---can be presented as characteristics
of the psyche, characteristics that cannot however be regarded as
complete, solid, or constant. They have to be constructed. They have to
be maintained. Consequently, we do not in the end see the continuity of
duration as an immediate datum but as a problem. We wish therefore to
develop a discontinuous Bergsonism, showing the need to arithmetise
Bergsonian duration so as to give it more fluidity, more numbers, and
also more accuracy in the correspondence the phenomena of thought
exhibit between themselves and the quantum characteristics of reality.

[II]{.b}

9

There is no doubt that our critique must first be brought to bear on the
order of discourse and with reference in fact to Bergsonian proof. After
this, we can proceed to positive psychological investigations; we shall
then enquire whether Bergsonism has given their rightful place to
psychological negativism, coercion, and inhibition. Once we have made
this detailed study of the psychology of annihilation, we shall attempt
to establish that annihilation implies nothingness as its limit, in
exactly the same way that qualification implies substance as its
support. From the functional standpoint that we shall adopt, it will be
seen that there is nothing more normal or more necessary than going to
the limit and establishing the relaxation of function, the repose of
function, the []{#calibre_link-246 .calibre4}non-functioning of
function, since function must obviously often stop functioning. It is at
this point that we shall see the interest of taking the principle of
negation back to its source in temporal reality itself. We shall see
that there is a fundamental heterogeneity at the very heart of lived,
active, creative duration, and that in order to know or use time well,
we must activate the rhythm of creation and destruction, of work and
repose. Only idleness is homogeneous; we retain only what we reconquer;
we maintain only what we resume. Moreover, simply from the
methodological point of view, it will always be in our interests to
establish a connection between the dialectic of different entities and
the fundamental dialectic of being and non-being. We shall therefore
bring philosophy back to this dialectic of being and nothingness,
convinced moreover that it was not by some accident of history that the
first Greek philosophers were led to this problem. Pure thought must
begin by refusing life. The first clear thought is the thought of
nothingness.

10

Where discourse is concerned, Bergson's argument in [L'Evolution
créatrice ]{.i1}comes down to saying that there are no truly negative
actions and that, as a result, negative words only have meaning in terms
of the positive words they negate, all action and all experience being
unfailingly first expressed positively. Now it seems to us that the
priority thus given to the [positive misrepresents]{.i1} the perfect
correlation between words when they are, as they have to be, translated
into the language of action. A concept is formed by experience and
analysed by actions. It is for this reason that, for example, the word
[empty]{.i1}, taking its meaning from the verb [to empty]{.i1}, can be
said to correspond to a positive action. A well-trained intuition would
thus conclude that emptiness is simply the disappearance, whether
imagined or real, of a particular substance without it ever being
possible to speak of a direct intuition of emptiness. All absence would
thus be consciousness of departure. Such, in the end, is Bergson's
argument. Now, while it is very true that you can only empty what you
first found full, it is just as accurate to say that you can only fill
what you first found empty. If the study of fullness is to be clear and
rich, it must always be a more or less detailed account of filling
something. In short, there seems to us to be a perfect correlation
between emptiness and fullness. One is not clear without the other and
in particular, one idea is not clarified without the other. If the
intuition of emptiness is refused us, then we have the right to refuse
that of fullness.

11

[]{#calibre_link-247 .calibre4}Bergson has recently expressed an
objection to the facile clarity of intellectual methods but has not
convinced us.^[2](#calibre_link-88){#calibre_link-95 .calibre10}^ We see
the relations between intuition and intellect as more complex than a
simple opposition. We see them as constantly co-operating when they come
into play. There are intuitions at the root of our concepts: these
intuitions are unclear: they are wrongly thought to be natural and rich.
There are intuitions too in the way we put concepts together; these
essentially secondary intuitions are clearer: they are wrongly thought
to be artificial and poor. Let us look briefly at the psychology of a
scientific mind tormented by the idea of vacuum, of void and emptiness.
Such scientists have read the long history of these ideas; they can use
the difficult techniques of creating a vacuum, always concerned about
the possibility of a micro-leak; they doubtless know how fallacious this
idea is since suddenly, just when they thought they could define the
emptiness of matter, they have seen it inhabited by radiation. They are
therefore better prepared than anyone else to understand a theory
according to which emptiness from one point of view is automatically
fullness from another. But they are not satisfied with the idea of
something happening automatically. They sense a new problem: they try or
will try to create a vacuum from two combined points of view; they will
attempt to eliminate both matter and radiation. Their concept of
emptiness consequently becomes richer, more diverse, and because of
this, more clear. Indeed no scientist will claim a priori clarity for
their experimental ideas. They are as prudent as intuitionist
philosophers, whose patience they share. We can moreover bring these two
groups together in equal esteem: as Bergson has rightly said, a
philosophical intuition requires long contemplation. Such difficult
contemplation as this, which has to be learned and which no doubt could
be taught, is not far from being a discursive method of intuition. This
is what gives us grounds for attaching, as of prime importance, the
psychology of the clarification of ideas to the logical definition of
these ideas. A balance can therefore be established between the inverse
conceptualisation of emptiness and fullness and we can bring into
balance, not though as starting points but as summarising factors, the
contrary concepts of fullness and emptiness.

There is naturally the same detailed, discursive correlation set up
between being and nothingness when we really try to live the dialectical
oscillation of making and annihilating. If we say we are doing so on the
basis of a logical dialectic, an immediate dialectic, with being and
nothingness regarded straightaway as ready made [things]{.i1}, we shall
be []{#calibre_link-248 .calibre4}open to Bergson's criticism. There is
indeed a shocking lack of balance between these two ideas taken as
substitutes for two realities! Is it not glaringly obvious that
nothingness cannot be a [thing]{.i1}? That repose cannot be a kind of
movement? Is it not equally obvious that being is an asset we have
realised, the most solid, stable thing there is?

12

We shall not however let ourselves get involved in an a priori choice
and shall keep bringing our opponents back to the need for being to be
established, by them as well, by stages and discursively. By what right
could being be established in one go, beyond and above experience? We
call for complete ontological proof, for the discursive proof of being,
for detailed ontological experience. We want to touch both the wounds
and the hand. The miracle of being is as extraordinary as that of
resurrection. We shall be no more content with a sign in order to
believe in reality than are our opponents with a failure in order to
believe in the ruin of being. Indeed, this ontologising requirement will
be made the heart of our polemic. We believe moreover that we are thus
placing the problem where it ought to be posed: is not knowledge
essentially a polemic?

[III]{.b}

When Bergson compares the two judgements 'this table is white', 'this
table is not white', he underlines on the one hand the immediate and
determinate character of the first and on the other, the indirect,
indeterminate character of the second. He thus presents the second
judgement as marked by a verbal polemic and condemned to remaining
powerless in face of the decisive first intuition. In our view, however,
all the values of verification must be transmuted, the power of
conviction being given above all to negative judgements. In other words,
all effective judgements---that is to say all judgements that engage the
consciousness---are for us negative judgements; they are the decisive
arguments in a fierce polemic. It is not in fact a matter of [repeating
]{.i1}that the table is white but of [discovering ]{.i1}or [letting
others discover ]{.i1}that the table is white. You cannot really hope to
carry out a productive psychological investigation if you take an
example in which the impression studied does not provoke discussion. Let
us not therefore take our examples in those limp affirmations born of
habit and associated with []{#calibre_link-254 .calibre4}lazy
recollections. Let us try to grasp the mind in its essential act of
judgement.

13

Will you then take a judgement of discovery? Have you discovered a blue
dahlia? Do you therefore declare that this flower is despite this a
dahlia? This is an admission that previously you imagined that for this
flower such colouring was impossible. Your judgement of discovery, of
surprise and exclamation, is thus no more immediate and direct than any
negative judgement. It was preceded by the inverse judgement, by the
flimsy, irrational inverse belief that there is no such thing as a blue
dahlia\...

Will you now take an affirmative judgement that expresses for you
something that you have long known? It is very certain that this
judgement is only a psychological act if it is peremptory; it must not
be murmured half-heartedly or caught up in the prattle of reminiscence.
Do not forget that we are dealing with [proofs ]{.i1}of being, or better
with proofs of the real connection of being to itself; it is Being,
objective being as well as subjective being, it is your being and your
whole reason that you are engaging in this discussion. For discussion
there is since you are affirming forcefully; and since you are expending
nervous energy, a little of your living soul and duration, it means that
something or someone is obstructing you: you are contradicted and so you
affirm.

But is it perhaps in solitude that you pursue your thoughts, your
affirmations seeming to you full and tranquil, strong and fundamental?
This is because you score a cheap victory over the possible adversary
that you always do in fact imagine in order to personify the initial
negation. Back in his prison after having renounced his 'errors',
Galileo murmurs 'yet it does move'. He murmurs this in suffering, in the
rancour of defeat, in a stifled polemic. But all his thought is a
reaction against previous official denials.

Let us also go into the heart of a stubborn child; make this child be
quiet; make him, make her, recant their desire and this desire will
return, reinforced by resistance, fuelled by negation, in a soft,
tenacious affirmative judgement. Always and everywhere, we only affirm
psychologically what has been denied or what we conceive to be deniable.
Negation is the nebula out of which real positive judgement is formed.

14

There would perhaps be a method for legitimising the primacy of positive
judgement but it would not be very Bergsonian at all, since it would be
based on a kind of logical necessity: knowledge could be said to have to
begin by affirmations and express, in affirmative []{#calibre_link-309
.calibre4}forms, ingenuous first impressions. Indeed, this argument
amounts to a departure from concrete psychology, from psychology that
has proofs. Scientific psychology can in fact no more invoke a first
impression than astronomy can rely on the Book of Genesis. We neither
think with our first impressions, love with our original sensibility,
nor want with our initial and substantive will. There is the same
distance between our childhood and our present self as between dream and
action. After all, the wonder of first thought is perhaps grounded on
preceding doubt that is all the more methodical for being more natural.
Truth suddenly appears against a background of errors, and singularity
against one of monotony; temptation too is seen against a background of
indifference, and affirmation against one of negations. When affirmation
comes to have a psychological sense, it is because it is reacting
against negations or previous ignorance. Its energy is a function of the
number and importance of the negations it challenges.

15

To sum up, affirmation is by no means synonymous with positive
knowledge. It by no means has the privilege of fullness and certainty.
It is a mistake to see it as immediate and primary. We cannot agree with
Bergson when he wishes to unbalance the dialectic of positive and
negative judgements by in a way filling thought with affirmative values
that are themselves full and complete. We would prefer to break the
balance in the opposite way, struck as we are by the negating value of
all knowledge that is truly actual. In effect, psychological life must
be grasped in its acts, in its flow, and not in its source which is
always hypothetical and slight. All knowledge taken at the moment of its
constitution is polemical knowledge; it must first destroy in order to
make room for its constructions. Destruction is often total and
construction never completed. The only clear positivity of knowledge
there is can be found in consciousness of necessary rectifications, in
the joy of imposing an idea. And without going as far as the polemical
principle of knowledge, the whole psychology of insinuation, persuasion,
and polite discussion could show us the same waves of dialectical
thought, though slower and more gentle now. Here again, we must
patiently sketch in a blurred background for positive, clear thought.
Schopenhauer remarked ingeniously here that 'in order to get other
people to accept our contradiction of their ideas, there is nothing more
appropriate than the phrase "I used to think like that, but
etc."'.^[3](#calibre_link-89){#calibre_link-96 .calibre10}^ The better
to contradict, we pretend to accept; we 'pick up' what they have said in
order to prevent an unpleasant confrontation. Here we have an example of
[continuity []{#calibre_link-274 .calibre4}behaviour ]{.i1}which does
indeed underline the real discontinuity. Moreover in a feigned
affirmative judgement, do we not see psychological negativism's greatest
success? Were we to give it full affirmative value we would be fooled,
imitating the learned ignorance of mathematics teachers as they act out
for a moment their faith in the truly extraordinary hypotheses that will
lead them to an absurd conclusion.

16

There is lastly one other, rather paradoxical way of contradicting
Bergson's thesis, which is to generalise it. In effect, his proposal
that a destructive thought be brought in to account for the very
particular idea of [nothingness ]{.i1}seems to us to be what happens
with every concept. The psychological significance of a specific concept
cannot be better determined than by describing the process of
conceptualisation in the course of which it was formed. Now this
conceptualisation is the history of our refusals rather than of our
assents. A clear concept must bear the trace of all that we have refused
to incorporate into it. Generally speaking at the beginning of a
conceptualisation, the vague and variable hues of a phenomenon must be
erased so that its constant features can be drawn. All precise knowledge
leads to the annihilation of appearances, to the establishment of a
hierarchy among phenomena, and the attribution to them in some way of
coefficients of reality or if it is preferred, of coefficients of
unreality.

Reality is thus analysed by means of negations. Thinking involves
disregarding certain experiences and willingly casting them into the
shadow of nothingness. If it is objected that the positive experiences
we have erased still subsist, we shall reply that they subsist without
playing a part in our present knowledge. We shall therefore now look at
the problem from a functional point of view. We shall see that it is
from a simply functional, no longer ontological point of view, that
classification into affirmative and negative judgements has real
psychological value.

[IV]{.b}

17

Certainly, concepts only have meaning when they are incorporated into
judgements. This is a theory that has been developed at length by modem
psychology, and we only need to draw its metaphysical conclusions. As
Jean Wahl has put it, succinctly and subtly, 'as the mind moves towards
more precision, it turns facts into
factors'.^[4](#calibre_link-90){#calibre_link-97 .calibre10}^ It is
useless []{#calibre_link-249 .calibre4}to attempt, by virtue of some
kind of logical hierarchy of concepts, to place simple concepts endowed
with intrinsic clarity in an immobile empyrean, with at their apex and
in pride of place the concept of Being. The demand for precision is not
satisfied by immediate clarity. Concepts multiply and diversify as they
are applied, as they become factors of thought. Precise Being itself has
to give us many proofs; we only accept it after a process of
qualification that is diverse and mobile, tested and rectified. Thus,
what [is ]{.i1}must psychologically [become]{.i1}. We cannot think Being
without linking to it a gnoseological becoming. If it is taken in its
maximum synthesis, thought being must be an element of becoming. We
shall try to show this functional element at the centre of action, at
the centre of the verb.

Since our thought expresses virtual as well as real actions, its
culmination is the very moment of decision. There is in particular no
synchronism between thinking about acting and the real development of
action. Contracting an action to fit the limits of the decisive instant
thus constitutes both the unity and the absoluteness of that action. The
movement will be completed in some way or other, determined as it is by
subordinate, unsupervised mechanisms; for temporal behaviour, the
essential thing is to begin the movement or better, to permit it to
begin. All action is ours by virtue of such permission. Now this
permission, which reflects action and is wholly conceived as the
realisation of a possibility, develops in an atmosphere that is lighter
than real action. Realisation is less opaque than reality. There is
then, above lived time, thought time. This thought time is more aerial
and free, more easily disrupted too and resumed. It is in this
mathematised time that the inventions of being lie. It is in this time
that a fact becomes a factor. We do not describe this time correctly by
calling it abstract since it is in this time that thought acts and
prepares the concrete manifestations of Being.

18

Permission to act can however be more easily centred than action itself.
We therefore propose firstly to centre on the verb, the relations
expressed by a judgement, rather than looking for their roots in either
predicate or subject. We are, in our view, being faithful to Bergson's
teaching here.^[5](#calibre_link-91){#calibre_link-98 .calibre10}^ We
shall next propose, at the centre of the verb, to reduce all action to
its decisive, unitary aspect, which we can indeed take to be
instantaneous if we compare it with real development, slow and multiple
as this is. Here, we are breaking up Bergsonian continuity, preferring a
hierarchy of instants. Far from language having its roots in the spatial
aspect of things, its true mental function lies for us
[]{#calibre_link-282 .calibre4}in the temporal, ordered aspect of our
actions. It is the expression of our preferences. We shall then go on to
emphasise the ordering power of the life of the mind, following what
Paul Valéry says in [Monsieur Teste ]{.i1}and stressing 'duration's
delicate art, time, its distribution and its regulation---its
expenditure on things it has well chosen, in order to nurture them
particularly'. We shall thus see that the cohesion of our duration is
made from the coherence of our choices and of the system coordinating
our preferences. Yet this entire development will have no meaning unless
we can at this stage isolate the very essence of the idea of [permission
to act]{.i1}. This permission is attached to the verb through the
dialectic of [yes ]{.i1}and [no]{.i1}. It appears to be added on and
secondary to all theories of interiority which claim they can
immediately grasp thought that is necessarily synchronous with life,
rooted in life and proceeding at the same pace as life. This will not be
the case with regard to theories that put forward the idea of thought
freed from life, suspended above life and also able to suspend life. We
shall then understand that all judgements are judged, and that it is
this judging that prepares and gauges true psychological and biological
causality. Exceptional decisions direct the thinking being's evolution.
As regards judgement, affirmative or negative character is a functional
and indeed essential addition. Thus the most peremptory, the most
certain and most constant judgement is a conquest of fear, doubt, and
error. As Von Hartmann well understood 'even the wish to remain in the
present state assumes that this state can end and the fear that this
possibility will be realised: we see a double negation here. Without the
idea of ending, the wish to continue would not be
possible'.^[6](#calibre_link-92){#calibre_link-99 .calibre10}^ So
thought proceeds: a [no ]{.i1}counters a [yes ]{.i1}and in particular a
[yes ]{.i1}counters a [no]{.i1}. An object's very unity is the result of
our overall view of it, its diversity resulting from our refusal or our
scattered concentration. Unity can never be given to an object unless it
is grasped in the unity of an action, and our knowledge of an object can
never be diversified unless the actions in which it is involved are
multiplied, these actions being understood as separate. The schema of
the temporal analysis of a complex action is necessarily a
discontinuity.

19

There is in fact no other way of analysing an action than by beginning
it all over again. And we have to begin it again by 'disassembling' it,
that is to say by enumerating and ordering the decisions which
constitute it. Moreover, it would be fanciful to attribute an essential
role to the duration of an action that assembles. It would be futile to
[lengthen verbs []{#calibre_link-257 .calibre4}]{.i1}to enable them to
be better understood, since this lengthening would in no way concern the
verb's essential role. Saying that an action [has duration means]{.i1}
that we are still refusing to describe its detail. Were we to complete
an analysis of an action which has duration, we would see that this
analysis is expressed in separate phrases centred on instants of very
precise singularity. From this point of view then, actions that assemble
cannot be contiguous, and still less continuous. And what fragments
thought is not the handling of solids in space but the dispersion of
decisions in time. Once an action has been willed, once it is a
conscious action and one that draws on reserves of psychic energy, it
cannot flow continuously. It is preceded by hesitation, it is expected,
deferred, provoked, and these subtle distinctions prove that it is
isolated and that it appears in a dialectical wave-motion. Subsequently,
when actions have to be bound together, we shall see the superiority of
the mind to life in this respect; we shall see that, to preserve itself,
life has no choice other than to fend off anything that would unbind it.
The [wisdom of the function ]{.i1}will then be recognised. If we look to
the agreement of successive functions for what binds life, rather than
to a purely energetic propulsion, we shall soon accept the [reality of
the order ]{.i1}of decisive instants. We shall be obliged to say that
order is not in duration, that instead duration is indeed the
affirmation of a useful, psychologically effective order. We can no
doubt accept, as Bergson does, that in space disorder is but an order we
had not foreseen, and that the dialectic of order and disorder has no
spatial basis. But a temporal upheaval shatters life and thought, in
both their detail and their principle. We die of an absurdity. Here,
disorder is indeed a fact; it is a factor of nothingness. In order to
think, to feel, to live, we must bring order into our actions by holding
instants together through the reliability of rhythm, and by uniting
reasons for coming to a vital conviction. But this is a point that we
shall be looking at in detail later. For now, all we wish to do is to
prepare our opposition to Bergson's argument that language is rooted in
solids and that intellect learns its lessons from metric geometry. We
shall then go on to try to bring out the realising value of order when
order is taken to be a prime factor. It is therefore in [wise action
]{.i1}that we shall seek the principles of continuity.

20

[[]{#calibre_link-258 .calibre4}V]{.b}

Actions are not always positive and indeed from the standpoint of
psychological action, where psychological functions are concerned, we
can see there is a dialectic that again transposes the dialectic of
being and nothingness.

Before we examine this functional dialectic, it is again necessary to
show that for Bergson the constant action of functions corresponds to
the fullness of being.

21

Indeed, from the psychological point of view, one is struck as one reads
Bergson's work by the paucity of references which could provide the
elements of an analysis of coercion and inhibition. The will is always
positive and the will to live is, as in Schopenhauer, completely
permanent. It is truly a force. Being wishes to create movement. It does
not wish to create repose.

No doubt there are halts and there are failures; for Bergson though, the
cause of failure is always external. It is matter that opposes life,
colliding with life's momentum which it slows or deflects in a downward
curve. If ever life could develop in some rarefied place, sustaining
itself on essences that are the very staff of life, then it would rise
in a single movement to its culmination. Life is thus broken or divided
up when there is an obstacle to it. Life is a conflict in which you
always have to be wily and always have to diverge along indirect paths.
Such is the ancient image that came into being with [homo faber]{.i1},
overwhelmed as he was by his tasks.

Yet if we take matter with the many obstacles it constantly puts in our
path, matter around which we pick our way, that we assimilate and reject
in our philosophical attempts to understand the world, then the question
arises as to whether in Bergsonism matter really has enough
characteristics to meet the often contradictory diversity of its
functions. It seems not. On the contrary, one has the impression that
for Bergson matter is identical to the failures it brings about. It is
the substance of our disillusion, of our setbacks and mistakes. It is
encountered after failure, never before. It substantialises repose after
fatigue, and never repose that is finely constructed on a real point of
equilibrium.

Why then not look at failure in itself, when reasons for acting are
contradicted and a function which ought to act is non-functional? This
would have given us an example of fundamental disorder, of a disorder of
time and also of the mind.

[]{#calibre_link-250 .calibre4}

22

Moreover, we have only to go into the psychology of hesitation to reveal
the tissue of [yes's ]{.i1}and [no's]{.i1}. Life opposes life, the body
devours itself, and the soul gnaws itself away. It is not matter that is
the obstacle. Things are but opportunities for us to be tempted;
temptation is in us, it is both a moral and a rational contradiction.
Fear too is in us, obviously present before there is danger. How would
we understand danger without it? And the most insidious of worries is
indeed the product of a lack of worry. As Schopenhauer said, it worries
me when nothing worries me. We have only to dematerialise affectivity
just a little to see it ripple in waves.

And if we dematerialise the problem of adaptation we shall come to the
same conclusions. Indeed, if we take adaptation from the standpoint of
the human psyche, in our attempts to become rational and knowledgeable
beings, we see that it is distinct from the accidents of life. It is
instead the fruit of curiosity, of meticulous care in bringing the
harmony of being to completeness and in creating diversity in being. Yet
for this very reason, curiosity is straightaway bordered by loss of
interest: being wishes to change. The being that has succeeded has no
taste for maintaining itself in that success. Curiosity grows dull,
hopping hither and thither. And then the joy of discovery is countered
by a kind of need to destroy, in a kind of inverse curiosity. We have
only to point out this negating aspect of mental life for many
biological and psychological characteristics to be better understood. We
are aware of very many dark points that mark out all that would die in
us, the shadow of Death as it were permeating Life. We understand why it
should be that psychoanalysis has recently given great importance to the
death instinct, to necrophilia, and to the need to lose that gives a new
and very dialectical meaning to the need to gamble.

23

However, were all these psychological observations to appear secondary
and ineffectual, and were it not seen that what plays over the surface
of being reverberates down to its very principle, then we still have an
argument in reserve that we consider decisive. Indeed, where physiology
itself is concerned, the need for the non-functioning of function is so
obvious, so natural, that it does not even occur to us to point it out.
From the standpoint of energy, all functions are limited by thresholds
of action. In vain are functions thought to be damped down, sleeping, or
latent. Just slowing down is already a sign of discontinuity! If we take
as our starting point the function in its complex action, we should in
fact see that in slowing down it completely abandons certain of its
characteristics. Indeed, this slowing is a descent right down a very
[]{#calibre_link-264 .calibre4}real staircase which is marked by many
thresholds of differentiation. On the lowest of its steps the most
sharply distinct of all dialectics is clearly in play, the law of [all
or nothing ]{.i1}whose importance Rivers has demonstrated in some detail
in his book on the unconscious.^[7](#calibre_link-93){#calibre_link-100
.calibre10}^

[VI]{.b}

These brief notes will, we consider, be sufficient to draw attention to
the role of dialectic in psychological phenomena. Moreover, our reason
for drawing attention to this dialectical aspect in a book on
metaphysics is as follows: these dialectics are not, as followers of
traditional schools of thought would be inclined to think, logical in
nature. They are temporal. Fundamentally, they are successions. A
function cannot be permanent; it has to be succeeded by a period of
non-functioning since energy diminishes as soon as it is expended. As
regards the phenomena of life, it is therefore always in terms of
succession that contradictions in behaviour must be defined.

24

Indeed, so great is the heterogeneity of its terms that succession is in
effect discontinuity. Bergson often tones down this heterogeneity so
that as a result, succession seems like a change where things fade and
merge into one another. Thus, Bergson takes psychological intuition to
be a priori a continuous thread, imposing an essential unity on
experience as though experience could never be contradictory or
dramatic. 'A mind that simply and solely followed the thread of
experience... would see facts succeeding facts, states succeeding
states, and things succeeding things'. It seems to go without saying
that things remain beneath facts and states remain beneath becoming. Yet
how can we fail to see the isolation of essences, fixed in a way in
terms of the formula for their dimensions! Even in the most homogeneous
order of thought, you cannot go from one essence to another by
continuous thought. More generally, how can we fail to see that all
differentiation in appearance and pace is the sign of absolute
discontinuities, with the result that the discontinuity of an appearance
is immediately the appearance of a discontinuity.

25

But Bergson goes further in his intuition of overall homogeneity. As we
have said when outlining the arguments for Bergsonian continuity, he
accepts that there is a continuous movement of exchange between the two
distinct poles of subject and object, the absence of the one being
[]{#calibre_link-271 .calibre4}here again automatically the presence of
the other. We would only cease to think about ourselves in order to
think about things, and in exactly the same way, leaving things would
inevitably mean going back into ourselves. This indeed presupposes that
thought is a permanent being and a temporal substance. A more
functional, more phenomenist point of view would refuse to hide the very
clear duality of introversion and objective thought. Where functions are
concerned, in the exchange of functions discontinuity is the first
datum. We shall demonstrate in very many ways that the addition of the
idea of continuity to that of succession is gratuitous and without
proof, always and everywhere beyond the realm of both physical and
psychological experience. If we agree to examine continuity only when it
is observed, we see that it only comes about in a way that is factive,
belated, and recurrent. It is simply a paralysis of action that gives
this allegedly primary impression of continuity. Finely detailed
experience and the intuition of disorder in the mind will, though,
restore us to the rhythm of [yes's ]{.i1}and [no's]{.i1}, to life that
is tried out, that is ephemeral, refused, and taken up again. In other
words, through different transpositions we rediscover, spread out over
time, the fundamental dialectic of being and nothingness. We can thus
give full meaning, both ontological and temporal, to the following
Bergsonian formula: time is hesitation.

[VII]{.b}

Can the temporal continuum be saved by defining time as an a priori
form? This method amounts in a way to substantialising time from below,
in its vacuity, contrary to Bergson's method which, with duration,
substantialises time from above, in its fullness.

It is quite easy to see that directly formal intuition is a total
impossibility. Indeed, the prediction of the flow of time is based on
the lessons of memory, its a priori only appearing a posteriori, as a
logical necessity. The a priori was in fact established by Kant in a
logical demonstration. It is an analytical result that will always
suffer from an unresolved question: how does the synthesis of event and
form come about, how does a compact element become apparent in this
diaphanous environment?

26

We believe then that we must give ourselves rather more than just
temporal possibility characterised as an a priori form. We need to give
ourselves the [temporal alternative ]{.i1}that can be analysed by these
two []{#calibre_link-266 .calibre4}observations: either in this instant,
nothing is happening or else in this instant, something is happening.
Time is thus continuous as possibility, as nothingness. It is
discontinuous as being. In other words, we start from temporal duality,
not from unity. We base this duality on function rather than on being.
When Bergson tells us that dialectic is but the relaxation of intuition,
we reply that this relaxation is necessary to the renewal of intuition
and that, from the standpoint of meditation, intuition and relaxation
give us proof of the fundamental temporal alternative.

We are well aware that this dialectical function is especially
vulnerable when expressed like this, and that it will make it all the
easier to restate Bergson's criticism. Indeed the objection will be
raised that in this form, it seems perfectly obvious that as Bergson
argued nothingness is but the negation of a human expectation: when we
say that nothing is happening, we are obviously saying that nothing is
happening in an order of things that are more or less subjectively
defined. Here then, Bergson's argument is put forward once again. Yet we
shall always meet this objection with the same reply: in the order of
functions, [nothing ]{.i1}is not [another thing]{.i1}. When we say
nothing in reply to a disagreeable letter it really is of little
importance that we think something. In a kingdom, however many clerks
are kept up on duty at night, you cannot prevent government from being
suspended because the master is asleep or from always being a tissue of
authority and anarchy; you can then say equally well, according to
whether you are criticising or praising or to whether you are or are not
a Bergsonian from a social point of view, either that a monarchy is a
dispersed form of government or that a monarchy is an authority which is
always ready to make itself manifest. But it always has to be recognised
that continuity is a continuity which is postulated, that it takes
refuge in the potential, and that it is heterogeneous to what manifests
it.

27

This reply will not of course be accepted, and there will be the wish to
materialise time and to slip into the intervals measuring our moments of
weakness [things ]{.i1}that are given the task of having duration; we
shall be drawn on to the realm of abhorred space; matter will be shown
to us, placid, motionless, inert, always waiting, matter that [exists
]{.i1}comfortably settled in tranquil immortality. And continuous
Bergsonism will move imperceptibly and inevitably to an unforeseen
consequence: matter is said to fill time even more surely than it does
space. Surreptitiously, the phrase [to have duration in time ]{.i1}has
been replaced by the phrase [to []{#calibre_link-310 .calibre4}remain in
space]{.i1}, and it is the crude intuition of fullness that gives the
vague impression of plenitude. Such is the price we must pay for the
continuity established between objective and subjective knowledge.

28

Were you to relive precise objectivation---which is the only way in
which order, succession, and duration can be assessed in their relation
to a reality---you would see from the very first moment that this
objectivation unfolds in the discontinuity of dialectics, with all the
fits and starts of contrary experiences and reflections. Between
security and precision there is a dialectical relation that might
appropriately be called the psychological uncertainty relation: do you
wish to be sure of finding an object, in an objectivation that is
certain, by attributing to it absolute and enduring existence which is
entirely independent of your own duration? Are you condemning yourself
to a crude definition of this object, as a whole and as the symbol of
one single function? In that case, you can no doubt say that your hat is
certainly on its peg, that it remains there, and that is waiting for
when you go out. If it had been accidentally moved, you would at least
find it in your cupboard; no essential disorder can ruin its existence
or interrupt its duration. But do you wish to go deep into detail and
establish precision, not with regard now to pragmatic knowledge of a
particular object but rather to the scientific knowledge of a subtle
matter? Here, you are obliged to imagine experiments, to provoke
relations, to dynamise the multiple world of atoms. Matter crumbles away
as you act precisely on it and so ends up giving only ambiguous answers
to your enquiries. Its precise existence becomes as singular as your own
individual existence. The coincidences of subject and object will be
atomised. They will not have duration. You will no longer find subtle,
precise matter always there at the disposal of experiment. You have to
wait for it to produce its events. You are now in pure expectation and
nothingness is no longer a disappointed expectation, absence is no
longer a displacement. The microphenomenon is in fact only produced
where coincidences knot together, and does not appear along the whole
length of the thread. Outside these coincidences, there is no place for
any experiment.

This vacuity in the development of microphenomena is something we
propose first of all to record without any hesitation, taking it to be a
fact. We shall then advance a step further: we attribute this vacuity to
the facts in exactly the same way that modern physics attributes
indeterminacy to the facts. And we believe that, in doing so, we are
complying with metaphysical caution. Indeed, we do not feel we have the
right to []{#calibre_link-298 .calibre4}impose a continuum when we
always and everywhere observe discontinuity; we refuse to postulate the
fullness of substance since any one of its characteristics makes its
appearance on the dotted line of diversity. Whatever the series of
events that are being studied, we observe that these events are bordered
by a time in which nothing happens. You can add together as many series
as you like but nothing proves that you will attain the continuum of
duration. It is rash to postulate this continuum, especially when one
remembers the existence of mathematical sets which, while being
discontinuous, have the power of a continuum. Discontinuous sets such as
these can in many respects replace one that is continuous. But there is
no need to go into more detail here. Psychologically, everything can be
explained in discontinuity. Besides this, we do not even have the right
to add up all the series, all too often adding the known to the unknown.
Our philosophical duty is rather to remain in one particular series of
events and seek out links that are as homogeneous as possible, linking
mind to mind directly for example, without the biological intervening.

29

Thus, from a particular standpoint and with regard to a particular
function, there can no longer be any doubt that dialectic and not
continuity is the fundamental schema. As Rivers has said, 'the
alternative of two contrary reactions makes it essential to inhibit one
of them'. In other words, the contradictory interplay of functions is a
functional necessity. A philosophy of repose must have knowledge of
these dualities. It must maintain their equilibrium and their rhythm. A
particular activity must have in it well placed lacunae and must find
contradiction that is in a way homogeneous with itself. Repose, while
accepting contrary activities, must refuse a jumbled miscellany of
activities. It is not yet the moment to expand on these conclusions,
however. Let us for the time being stay with our temporal problem. Here
then is how we would summarise the results of our discussion of the
relations between being and nothingness.

30

If we take it in any one of its characteristics or in the sum of its
characteristics, the soul does not continue to feel, nor to think,
reflect, or wish. It does not continue to be. Why go further in search
of nothingness, why go looking for it in things? It is in us, scattered
all along our duration, at every instant shattering our love, our faith,
our will, our thought. Our temporal hesitation is ontological. The
positive experience of nothingness in ourselves can only help to clarify
our experience of succession. Indeed, it shows us a succession that is
plainly heterogeneous, clearly []{#calibre_link-267 .calibre4}marked by
occurrences of newness and surprise and by breaks, cut too by voids. It
shows us a psychology of coincidence. But where then is the real
psychological problem of [time]{.i1}? Where must we seek temporal
reality? Surely it must be in those knots that mark coincidence? And
there must surely be a plurality in the laws of succession? And if there
is plurality in the laws of succession, how can we not draw the
conclusion that there is a plurality of durations?

Before coming to metaphysics of time, we must therefore examine specific
durations. Let us first look at pure psychology, at psychology that is
simply temporal. We shall then return to the problem of objective
succession with an examination of the diversities of causality.

[notes]{.b}

[1](#calibre_link-94){#calibre_link-87 .calibre4}. Bachelard's title
refers implicitly to two Bergsonian concepts. His striking use of the
word 'relaxation' ([détente]{.i1}) in fact takes up Bergson's definition
of dialectic as only 'a relaxation of intuition' ('une détente de
l'intuition') in the concluding section of chapter 3 of [L'Evolution
créatrice ]{.i1}(Paris, 1907). The English translation of this book by
Arthur Mitchell (London: Macmillan, 1911) offers the same version of
this phrase while elsewhere preferring to translate'détente' as
'detension'. Bachelard's use of 'nothingness' ([le néant]{.i1}) refers
to Bergson's discussion of nothingness in the first section of chapter 4
of [L'Evolution créatrice]{.i1}. Arthur Mitchell's translation renders
'le néant' as 'the nought'.

[2](#calibre_link-95){#calibre_link-88 .calibre4}. Bachelard's footnote
(amended): see Henri Bergson, [La Pensée et le mouvant. Essais et
conférences ]{.i1}(Paris, 1933); Bachelard refers to the second part of
Bergson's introduction.

[3](#calibre_link-96){#calibre_link-89 .calibre4}. Bachelard's footnote
refers to a French translation of Schopenhauer, [Philosophie et science
de la nature.]{.i1}

[4](#calibre_link-97){#calibre_link-90 .calibre4}. Bachelard's footnote
(amended): J. Wahl, [Vers le concret ]{.i1}(Paris, 1932).

[5](#calibre_link-98){#calibre_link-91 .calibre4}. Bachelard's footnote:
cf. A. Koyré, 'Hegel à Iéna', [Revue d'histoire et de philosophie
religieuses ]{.i1}(1935), 445. 'Contrary to a thousand years of
philosophical tradition, Hegel thinks not in substantives but in verbs'.

[6](#calibre_link-99){#calibre_link-92 .calibre4}. Bachelard's footnote
refers to a French translation of Von Hartmann, [Philosophie de
l'inconscient]{.i1}.

[7](#calibre_link-100){#calibre_link-93 .calibre4}. Bachelard is
referring to W.H.R. Rivers, [Instinct and the Unconscious]{.i1}; [a
Contribution to a Biological Theory of the Psycho-neuroses
]{.i1}(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1920); he quotes later in
this chapter from the French translation of this
book.[]{#calibre_link-375 .calibre4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-101 .calibre3}
[Chapter 2](#calibre_link-102){#calibre_link-7 .calibre4}

[[The Psychology of Temporal
Phenomena](#calibre_link-102){.calibre4}]{.b}

[[]{#calibre_link-223 .calibre4}I]{.b}

31

For Pierre Janet, knowing always implies
teaching.^[1](#calibre_link-103){#calibre_link-111 .calibre10}^
Moreover, it is of little importance whether or not we communicate our
knowledge since our innermost thought is itself 'a way of talking to
oneself, a way of teaching
oneself'.^[2](#calibre_link-104){#calibre_link-112 .calibre10}^ Indeed
whatever its subject, teaching has in the end to be a matter of
suggesting a well-defined order for separate actions, by giving the
assurance that well-ordered actions will be either objectively or
psychologically successful. These actions that are [promised ]{.i1}by
teaching are expected without our being over-particular about the
intervals separating them, though we do insist on there being intervals,
and we are careful to protect the promised actions from any disruption
during an interval. This then is how we can schematise the trajectory
uniting dogmatic knowledge to knowledge that is proven and clear, to
knowledge that has indeed been confirmed by consciousness; it is in
effect the path taken by real teaching.

32

In this respect, knowledge of time is not by nature in any way
privileged. It cannot possibly be immediate and intuitive, for this
would mean it was condemned to be poor and rudimentary. For it to be
enriched, this kind of knowledge must, like all others, be
[expounded]{.i1}. Time must therefore be taught and it is the conditions
of its teaching which form not just the detail of our experience but
also the very phases of the temporal psychological phenomenon. Time is
what we know about it. Thus Pierre Janet has very clearly stated that
'if we are talking []{#calibre_link-255 .calibre4}about knowledge of
time, we have to arrive at ways in which we can protect ourselves
against time and ways in which we can make use of it' (p. 19). We do not
have the right to [realise ]{.i1}our ignorance and be too quick to base
the development of the temporal phenomenon within us in an objective
pattern. Our intuition of time is indeed too fleeting and too vague for
us to forsake too soon the great lucidities of thought time, of taught
time. Lastly, while the point of view adopted by Pierre Janet may at
first seem artificial, it can on reflection be seen as the mark of great
philosophical caution. It is good practice not to grant ourselves the
right to talk about knowledge that would not be communicable.

Furthermore, we note that the first characteristic encountered by a
psychologist who is expert in the study of temporal phenomena bears the
mark of the fundamental duality of duration. Indeed, from the very
beginning of his work in this field, time appears to Janet as either an
[obstacle ]{.i1}or a [help]{.i1}; you have to either protect yourself
against it or use it according to whether you are in empty duration or
in the realising instant. Psychologically, this is proof positive that
there is dual behaviour with regard to the phenomena of time. Being
alternately loses and wins in time; consciousness is either realised or
is dissolved in it. It is therefore quite impossible to experience time
totally in the present and to teach time in one single immediate
intuition.

33

Nor indeed can duration be taught to us [directly ]{.i1}by our past when
this past is taken as a single, uniform entity. If we adopt Pierre
Janet's point of view, we will be quick to accept in fact that memory
cannot be taught unless it has a dialectical support in the present; the
past can only be brought back to life by linking it firmly to an
affective theme that is necessarily present. In other words, in order to
gain the impression that we have had duration---an impression that is
always singularly imprecise---we must, as with real events, put our
memories back into an environment of either hope or disquiet, into a
dialectical wave-motion. There can be no memory without this wavering of
time, without this rippling of affectivity. Even in the past that we
believe to be full, evocation, narrative, and shared secrets put the
void of inactive times back in place again; as we remember, we
constantly mix useless, ineffectual time with time that has been useful
and fruitful for us. The dialectic of joys and sorrows is never as
absorbing as when it accords with the dialectic of time. We then know
that it is time that takes and that gives. We suddenly become aware that
time will take from us again. Thus, reliving time that has disappeared
means learning the disquiet of our []{#calibre_link-224 .calibre4}own
death. How striking and true is René Poirier's account of the sudden
awareness we have of these fragments of nothingness and death
encountered in our lives:

Expectation is a pretext for us to experience the past. Expectation is
of course disappointed desire, irritation and a feeling of
powerlessness, yet more than this, it is the bitterness of time that is
destroyed. Each one of the moments it erodes becomes a theme of regret.
Between the living past and the future lies an area of dead life and
nowhere are regret and the sense of the irreparable any stronger. It is
in this way that time can be sensed by us. And it can be sensed even
more in anguish and the thought of death. Not the anguish of some kind
of suffering or some kind of desertion, but of no longer being anything,
the anguish that a whole world is consequently destroyed. Who has not
felt this thought, entering the soul like a sharp blade? It cuts so
quickly that it does not even cause pain; but the heart perceives it
deeper down and feels itself grow faint; thus whoever truly thinks death
cannot do so without turning pale. This thought is brief, secret almost
and sharp as the swallow's cry or as the bow Odysseus draws sounds to
the suitors' ears, easing only when we have slowly grown inured to it or
when we have high hopes. For while we can put up with no longer being
ourselves, who can bear to be nothing at all if we have, just once, felt
all the pain of this? Just as a horse confronted with the dead body of
its fellow stops short in agitation, so our soul falters and refuses in
face of such desolation.^[3](#calibre_link-105){#calibre_link-113
.calibre10}^

34

In teaching us all that time can break, meditations like these lead us
to define time as a series of breaks. We can no longer really attribute
uniform continuity to time when we have had such a vivid premonition of
the weakening and failing of being.

35

On a gentler note, regret for missed opportunities brings us face to
face with temporal dualities. When we wish to tell someone else our
past, teach them our person, nostalgia for those durations in which we
were not able to live will deeply disturb our understanding of history.
We would like to have a continuum of acts and of life to narrate. But
our soul has not retained a faithful memory of our age or the true
measure of the length of our journey through the years; it has only
retained the memory of events that have created us at the decisive
instants of our past. When we confide, all events are reduced to their
root in an instant. Our personal history is therefore simply the story
of our disconnected actions and, as we tell it, it is with the help of
reasons and not of duration that we consider ourselves to be giving it
continuity. []{#calibre_link-225 .calibre4}Thus, our experience of our
own past duration is based on real rational axes; without this
structure, our duration would collapse. We shall be going on to show
that memory does not even give us direct access to temporal order; it
needs to be supported by other ordering principles. We ought not to
confuse the memory of our past and the memory of our duration. Through
our past, what we know, using this word as Pierre Janet defined it, is
at the very most what we initiated in time or what, in time, has
collided with us. We retain no trace of the temporal dynamic, of the
flow of time. Knowing ourselves means finding ourselves again in these
scattered personal events. It is on a group of decisions we have
experienced that our person rests.

Knowledge of duration to come would prompt the same observations; it is
only by being passed on that it can be constituted; it can be passed on
only by following Janet's modest but far-reaching method, translating
our momentum into the language of actions we anticipate and of behaviour
that is always more or less systematised. So the future we glimpse is
simply the programme of promised actions. It is only our actions that we
can really think in our personal future. It is impossible to realise a
passive experience satisfactorily. If we envisage obstacles, it is
always in terms of the reaction they will provoke in us; we always take
future time in its positive moments. Thus, every intuition of the future
is a promise of actions that takes no account of the duration of those
actions; this intuition is limited to imagining the succession and order
of active instants. Anticipating the future means fixing its pattern and
disregarding the intervals of laziness, fatigue, and leisure; it means
isolating its [centres of causalities]{.i1}, and admitting because of
this that psychological causality, as we shall subsequently establish in
detail, proceeds in leaps and bounds, leapfrogging over useless
durations.

36

In vain do we try to differentiate between understanding a process and
living it, for in what we call [living a time ]{.i1}we must always
distinguish between what we know and do not know, since our use of this
phrase implies that we have immediate and silent knowledge of duration.
We do not though [live ]{.i1}ignorance any more than we see darkness.
The psychologist who takes us into his or her confidence and tells us
that 'within myself, I [feel ]{.i1}time flowing without incident,
without break' can only impart to us a sense of our two obscurities
coming into contact, of the symphony of our two silences. This kind of
psychologist seems []{#calibre_link-238 .calibre4}to us just like those
bearers of secrets and mysteries who promise us treasure but only leave
us with a lot of mumbo jumbo. No! In order to refer to an innermost
experience, you have to be able to escape its vagueness; you have to
multiply and vary examples. As soon as you do this, confidences are
shown to be singular, the contingency of temporal experience is seen,
and centres of psychic crystallisation are isolated. In the experience
of fine detail, the very smallest of events is enriched:

 

Yet now as Fate

Approaches, and the Hours are breathing low,

The sands of Time are changed to golden
grains.^[4](#calibre_link-106){#calibre_link-114 .calibre10}^

A very particular characteristic of innermost observation is that a
judgement of value intervenes and clarifies what is simply a judgement
of experience. It is impossible to know time without judging it. It is
through this judgement that we constitute behaviour of different kinds
and it is by studying these that we can truly develop a psychology of
temporal phenomena.

[II]{.b}

37

Once the influence of active instants has been highlighted, we have a
clearer understanding of the subordinate character of the consequences
that may trail along, more or less, behind a decision. The durations of
constituting acts can be either lengthened or shortened but these
durations do not affect the essential character of behaviour. They are
not attached to the act but are only its contingent and variable
after-effects, with no quantitative objectivity. This lack of
quantitative objectivity is the sign of an essential relativism. Why see
it as the mark of a shortcoming of human reason, as the price to be paid
for using a method of intellectual scrutiny which does not suit its
object? When an action is properly studied in a project that is made
entirely explicit, the order of constituting acts dominates all else.
The idea of [length ]{.i1}of[ time ]{.i1}is secondary. Cooperations can
always shorten over-long times of execution. These cooperations give
time a new dimension, a dimension of depth and intensity which, through
well-regulated coincidences, gives effectiveness to instantaneous
decisions. There is even an inverse relation between the psychological
length of a period of time and its fullness. []{#calibre_link-239
.calibre4}The fuller time is the shorter it seems. This trite remark
should be given prime importance in temporal psychology. It should be
the basis of a key concept. The advantage would then be seen of
referring to richness [and ]{.i1}density rather than to duration. It is
through this concept of density that we can fully appreciate those
regular, peaceful hours when our efforts have real rhythm, hours that
give us the impression of normal time. It is to these regular rhythms in
a life both peaceful and active that, following a rationalised
dialectic, we relate the [length ]{.i1}of an inert period, of
ill-constituted repose that is marked by disharmonies and shapeless
becomings. Indeed, we only find that time has [length ]{.i1}when we find
it [too long]{.i1}.

The rhythm of action and inaction therefore seems to us inseparable from
all knowledge of time. Between two useful, fruitful events the dialectic
of the useless must be in play. Duration is only perceptible in its
complexity. However thin it may be, it at least establishes itself in
opposition to its limits. We do not have the right to take it to be a
uniform and simple datum.

38

Yet we do not expect to win this argument straight away. All we wish to
do for now is to secure one point in our argument, namely that duration
is metaphysically complex and the decisive centres of time are its
discontinuities. This is not undermined simply by saying that beneath
apparent discontinuities there is still continuity in itself. We have in
fact to remain at the level of consciousness. Here, discontinuous
temporal behaviour of all kinds is seen to be the simplest while all
continuous temporal behaviour is the most artificial.

If we examine the problem in this way from the standpoint of temporal
behaviour, we shall see straightaway that the systematic use of time is
hard to acquire and hard to teach. This explains then why we are often
content with temporal knowledge that is general and confused. Indeed,
Pierre Janet divides psychological behaviour into two very different
groups, primary and secondary kinds of behaviour, and he shows that the
psychology of temporal phenomena cannot be placed in the first group: 'I
do not think that a single primary act can be found that is related to
time . . . For there to be adaptation to time, there has to be something
new, something added on. There exists therefore what we call secondary
acts' (p. 53). Thus, any use of duration is difficult and unpredictable;
it is a risk. Far from innermost duration being a property we own, it is
a work we create and is always preceded by an action centred on an
instant. It is this initial action that has first to adapt more or less
precisely to spatial conditions. We must attach our time to things for
it to be effective and real.

[]{#calibre_link-226 .calibre4}

39

The objection will again be raised that an instantaneous action has a
duration which it brings along in its wake in order for it to be
completed. This though is a catagenic duration that is not interested in
the fate of the initial act and that expends itself, following lower
rhythms, in purely physiological or physical consequences. This
catagenic duration has nothing in common with the anagenic duration that
has to be maintained and
nurtured.^[5](#calibre_link-107){#calibre_link-115 .calibre10}^ It is
really not an ingredient of the act; from the psychological view point
which is ours here, it has no role to play; it can be eliminated. In any
case, the duration that fades away like this, that dawdles and just
follows, [is not a kind of behaviour]{.i1}; it cannot be taught; it
cannot therefore really be known.

In order to really [continue ]{.i1}an act initially adapted to space,
you must therefore make another effort and add a second act. This is one
of our main arguments and must, we consider, be emphasised. And once
again we find new support in Pierre Janet's arguments. Indeed for Janet,
effort is a superadded phenomenon of which only more developed beings
are capable. Effort is dependent on the brain, which is as much as to
say that it is dependent on the intellect. [Continuation ]{.i1}is not
natural at the level of reflexes. It is the brain that in bringing
reasons, adds a continuous sequence and places behind the causes of the
first, initiating act causes for the development of this sequence. And
this addition of reasons is what gives us strength to keep going. We
only persevere with an action through a judgement of value, and in a
secondary mode of behaviour. Janet writes that:

40

In both duration and the continuation of acts, there is a phenomenon of
effort. It may seem strange but it must be said that acts become
difficult because of the simple fact that they have duration. Performing
an action for a quarter of an hour is not the same thing as doing it for
half an hour . . . Time adds a difficulty. The first beings did not
react to this difficulty; they halted their action, no matter the
consequences . . . But an animal with a higher degree of development
adds effort and perpetuates the action. We can say that the beginning of
duration, the first act performed relative to duration, is the effort at
continuity, the effort at continuation (p. 55).

In this way then, the clear, far-sighted will opens duration like a
perspective; it places a sequence of supplementary acts behind the first
impulse; it shows itself to be a synthesising power determining
[]{#calibre_link-240 .calibre4}an organic convergence. We obtain
duration by progressively bringing more and more muscles into play. The
analysis of [continuity ]{.i1}of effort would lead us to repeat almost
term for term Bergson's detailed work developed with regard to the
[intensity ]{.i1}of effort.^[6](#calibre_link-108){#calibre_link-116
.calibre10}^ There is plurality in the development of continuity just as
there is plurality in an increasing intensity of effort. It can be seen
that this intensity and this continuity are in a way homologous, and
that the arithmetic sum of particular efforts which accumulate to give
an intensity is dispersed the length of a succession to give a duration.
Of course, if we look fairly closely at it, we shall see that a
continuation of this kind is made up of separate impulses. Any
psychology of effort must accede not just to the geometrisation of
effort Bergson indicates when he reads intensity in the volume of
muscles progressively brought into play but also to the arithmetisation
of effort that counts the muscles which are progressively alerted.

We are thus gradually led to separate very clearly, from a functional
point of view, the will that initiates the act and the will that
continues it. Before the will to have duration was added, all there was
to consider was the reflex act stuck in the instant and taking its whole
meaning from some spatio-temporal coincidence. Contrary to this,
thought, reflection, a will that is clear, and a persevering character
all give duration to an ephemeral act by learning to add to it
appropriate secondary acts. We can therefore grasp duration as
behaviour, as a work we create.

[III]{.b}

41

Furthermore, Pierre Janet's book devotes many pages to the psychology of
[beginning]{.i1}. This is a very particular kind of psychology that
could provide the key to many problems. The mind is perhaps essentially
a factor of beginnings. Janet singles out first of all what we might
call majestic beginnings, those that inaugurate duration but do not in
fact belong to that which has duration. A [foundation-stone ]{.i1}laid
by a government minister has nothing in common with the construction
work the builders do. This was not always the case. Certain religious
introits are real psychological preparations for mystical life, for the
continuity of religious emotion. Mauss has studied purification
ceremonies from this point of view. Simply from the psychological
standpoint, one can never over-emphasise the importance of this
consecration of beginnings. []{#calibre_link-241 .calibre4}Janet
concludes in fact that 'acts marking beginnings and ends have an
important part to play and are highly significant', also pointing out
that primitive tribes have no 'acts that introduce and that close' (pp.
62--63). Primitives limit themselves to explosive acts, that is to say
to acts that really do not [continue]{.i1}, psychologically speaking,
since their consequences are at the very most physiological ones. In
exactly the same way, some sufferers from neurosis lose continuation
behaviour in which the effort that begins and the effort that continues
need to be differentiated. As Janet goes on to say here, 'this is the
chief characteristic of the epileptic act, an explosive act that nothing
leads us to foresee, that the subjects themselves do not foresee, that
has no beginning, and that comes to an end without us knowing why'.

42

All well constituted duration must thus be given a clearly
differentiated beginning. How can it not be seen that in these splendid
and solemn beginnings, the causality of reason takes the place of what
was claimed to be the causality of duration? Here the supremacy of
willed time over lived time is plain. May we therefore be permitted to
use a paradox in order to underline effectively the causal and temporal
isolation of the initial act: what makes a train work is the
station-master's whistle. Conscious life is, in exactly the same way, an
activity consisting of signals. It is the activity of a master. A clear
intuition is a command.

Let us now though look at behaviour when for instance we are carried
away in an impetuous rush, when we are filled with enthusiasm or are
tempted, behaviour in which the beginning of the act appears to prepare
as is usual what follows the act. We shall see that this beginning is
however still not homogenous with what follows it. As Janet says, 'when
we perform an action, energy is expended in what we do, but there is
always too much of it and the excess we put in will play a part in
successive movements; this is what is called élan, that is to say an
impetus, an impetuous rush' (p. 65). If we look at it in this light,
élan is therefore a kind of lack of economy of effort. When we are thus
carried away in an impetuous rush, we think we can grasp hold of a
ready-made duration; in reality, we fail to command duration, and to
constitute a duration. Paradoxically, this élan brings passivity to
action. We can be sure of this, for whoever is thus carried away will go
astray. When later on we come to depict rhythmic life, closely bound to
the temporal dialectic of repose and action, we shall see that this élan
or impetus is temporal behaviour that is too simple, too ingenuous,
precisely because such behaviour removes the possibility of resumption,
[]{#calibre_link-284 .calibre4}the freedom of beginnings, and the
active, polymorphous grouping of realising instants.

43

Let us now summarise our view of this theory of beginnings. Pierre Janet
has indeed discovered a particular kind of temporal behaviour that is of
the very greatest importance. If we are to teach its full significance
and really master it, we have to isolate a beginning and regard it as a
pure event. In other words, we need the concept of the instantaneous in
order to understand the psychology of beginning. Moreover, many very
different kinds of behaviour regarding beginning are only elucidated by
reference to the psychology of beginning. Thus, we can only have some
knowledge of an élan if we take it back to its first impulse. The
conclusion must in any case be drawn that behaviour initiating duration
is not simple, since we can extract a few decisive events from it which,
in many respects, deserve to be described as primordial.

[IV]{.b}

44

We can perhaps also indirectly clarify behaviour relative to beginning
by linking it to the psychology of change. Beginning and changing are
far from being equivalent. A beginning can clearly be taught; a change
can merely be suggested. In fact, psychologists do not yet have good
knowledge of fundamental behaviour relative to change. Janet's frankness
here is most instructive as it proves that our knowledge of temporal
psychology is very poor. He concludes his third lesson like this:
'change is the starting point for all our knowledge of time. There must
therefore be behaviour that relates to change. We do not have knowledge
of this'. Janet refuses to follow Guyau and Fouillée when they refer to
a [sensation of change]{.i1}. 'Sensation', he objects, '. . . is a
static state . . . on the table we have some red and beside it some
green; we have two sensations, one red and one green. If we pass from
the first to the second, we have other sensations but we only have one
or another sensation' (p. 95). Here once again, it is impossible to fill
a void within alterity. True methodological caution means postulating a
discontinuity as soon as we are sure that a change has taken place. In
fact on this occasion, the usual tendency is on the contrary to
postulate an underlying continuum. Because changes lack synchronism, we
think that in different areas we can find intermediate elements which
make change fade and blur. Sometimes these added elements are, so to
speak, []{#calibre_link-259 .calibre4}factors of fuzziness. We have thus
overlaid melancholy on autumn so that slowly and imperceptibly, as they
die, leaves can change from green to gold. We mix theatrical genres so
that acting techniques can change. Yet in fact, transitions always
transcend the areas that are to be linked. The soul places the confusion
of its feelings beneath the mind's discontinuous determinations. We
cannot therefore over-emphasise the importance of Janet's observation
that 'change is nearly always consonant with feelings, and very often
with the feeling of sadness. Change is in fact quite sad; in all its
forms, it is nearly always a dying'. Thus, we base all the events in our
lives on the continuum of our sorrows; we translate into the emotional
language of continuity what would be more accurately expressed in the
clear and trenchant narrative of objective events. Continuity is but our
emotion, our unease, our melancholy, and the role of emotion is perhaps
only to blunt ever-hostile newness. From the standpoint of temporal
behaviour, we can thus conclude along with Pierre Janet that 'feeling is
a regulation of action' (p. 99).

[V]{.b}

45

It is not only change that allows us to accede to discontinuous
behaviour. Clearer psychological cases can be found that sanction the
teaching of a real [behaviour relative to nothingness]{.i1}. Pierre
Janet has in fact placed much emphasis on [deferred behaviour]{.i1}, on
the interruptions of an action whose consequences are postponed to the
future. Now, deferring an action means that its causality is suspended,
and that continuous duration has its chief function removed. No longer
does the stream impel the stream. We are free to decide what is urgent.

[]{#calibre_link-327 .calibre10}46

This is not isolated behaviour; it interferes with kinds of behaviour
that at first sight seem distant from it. Thus in Janet's theory, memory
is influenced by deferred behaviour. Janet argues quite rightly that
memory is a faculty that develops late, that is indirect and linked to
reason, and in step with social organisation: 'Bergson usually accepts
that an isolated person has memory. I do not share this view. A person
who is alone has no memory and does not need it' (p. 218). He goes on to
say that 'the act of memory is an act that is relatively rare . . . I
cannot argue that we have a universal memory, that in this memory we
embrace all that we have seen. This is entirely imaginary; here the
metaphysical principle has filled pure memory, and it is a totally
arbitrary supposition' (p. 255). We shall see memory constituted in a
truly reflective duration, in a recurrent time. Indeed, memory does seem
to become clearer through choices made, and to gain strength through its
framework, not through its matter. Memory uses the temporal enjambement
of deferred action. In other words, [we remember an action much better
by linking it to what follows it rather than to what precedes it]{.i1}.
This paradoxical conclusion has to be drawn if we accept that all clear
thought---thought that is therefore taught---has to be based on
behaviour. Now behaviour of different kinds is only possible if it gives
itself a future and makes its finalism explicit. Lived duration does
reveal the matter of memory to us but not its framework, and it does not
allow us to date and order memories. Yet an undated memory is not a real
memory. Far from being pure memory, it remains a reverie tinged with
illusions. It is in fact because we are able to create a void before our
action---in other words, because we can defer it, and to use still
another phrase, because we can shatter its catagenic causality---that we
have the means of giving our memories a framework. We keep coming back
to the very significant idea of the social frameworks of memory
developed by Halbwachs in an impressive
book.^[7](#calibre_link-109){#calibre_link-117 .calibre10}^ What makes
the social framework of memory, though, is not just history lessons but
far more the will to a social future. All social thought is pulled
towards the future. All forms of the past must, if they are to give us
truly social thoughts, be translated into the language of the human
future. As a result, even in individual terms, it is impossible to refer
purely and simply to an innermost intuition, to knowledge which the past
is seen as writing passively in our soul. Thus, Janet does not hesitate
to write that 'deferred action is in my view memory's true
starting-point' (p. 232).

It is in deferred action that we become clearly aware of negativism,
since here negation becomes a kind of behaviour. We really do create a
void before action that we defer. No doubt Bergson would say that we
hasten to fill this void by performing other actions. Yet the dialectic
is not so dense and the attitude of refusal can be seen organising
itself as refusal.

47

The problem of recalling memories would also be clarified by paying more
attention to the [instant ]{.i1}in which memories are really fixed. We
would then see the role played by the co-ordination of new events, the
almost instantaneous rationalisation of events that are linked together
in a complex memory. Before we deal with the preservation of memories,
[]{#calibre_link-242 .calibre4}we must study their fixing since they are
preserved in the actual framework in which they are fixed, as more or
less rational totalities. Thus, Pierre Janet proposes quite correctly
that the problem of amnesia be combined with that of [amnemosynia]{.i1},
in other words that more importance be attached to the [absence ]{.i1}of
memory than to [loss ]{.i1}of memory. We would then understand the role
played by dramatic thought in fixing our memories. We retain only what
has been dramatised by language; any other judgement is
fleeting.^[8](#calibre_link-110){#calibre_link-118 .calibre10}^ If there
is no spoken, expressed, or dramatised fixing, a memory cannot be
related to its framework. Reflection must construct time around an event
at the very moment when the event takes place so that we can rediscover
this event in the memory of time that has disappeared. Without reason,
memory is incomplete and ineffectual.

48

A study of the temporal conditions of the fixing of memories would also
show us the memorising power of an event that is expected and desired.
It seems that expectation creates a void in us, that it prepares the
resumption of being, and helps us to understand destiny; in short,
expectation makes temporal frameworks in order to receive memories. When
the event takes place that we have clearly expected---paradoxically
again---it appears to us as clearly new. Nothing happens as we had
expected it to; thus the event both satisfies and disappoints our
expectation, justifying the continuity of an empty rational framework
and imposing the discontinuity of empirical memories. All who are adept
at savouring expectation even when it is anxious will acknowledge its
skill in creating the picturesque, the poetic, and the dramatic. Out of
the foreseen, it makes the unforeseen. Oh the heady pleasures of
meetings we await! We only need love just enough, fear just everything,
and wait in quaking anxiety and the person who is late will suddenly
seem more attractive, more certain, and more loving. As it bores into
time, expectation deepens love. It places the most constant love in the
dialectic of instants and intervals. It restores to faithful love the
charm of newness. The events we anxiously awaited are thus fixed in
memory; they take on meaning in our lives. The clearest memories are
thus the ending of a day's drama, of an hour's drama. They are the
reward for our earlier refusal to live anything other than what we
desire. It is by deferring mediocre actions and by being utterly intent
on foreseeing the unforeseeable that we prepare ourselves for being
thoroughly contradicted by happiness. In contradicting us, the event is
fixed in our being. Dialectical assimilation is the very basis for the
fixing of memories. []{#calibre_link-329 .calibre4}There can be no
emotional memory without an initial drama, without surprise by
opposites.

49

Although our argument that a framework is preliminary to memory has been
intentionally developed first of all in the domain of affectivity which
least favours our point of view, it will be clearer in the domain of
purely intellectual memory. All acts of memory are inseparable from a
schematisation that, by dating events, isolates them. It empties them of
their duration in order to give them a precise place. This
schematisation is like a rational canvas, like an outline for the
narration of our past. This outline is thought to link facts; in
reality, it separates them. When for instance narration shows two events
to be in a logical sequence, it demonstrates that the second is produced
from the first by deferred behaviour. In exactly the same way, if we are
really to understand the duration that lies open before us, we must live
the promises of the future through thought; in the place of the very
vague and meagre impression of lived experience we must set our decision
to follow a life-plan. Our feeling of duration is in proportion to the
number of projects we have. True possessions, those we believe to be
substantial, are those we can carry forward to the future. This carrying
forward cannot be done according to a schema of homogeneous continuity,
since everything that secures it has a reason producing it. I am
perfectly happy to say that tomorrow I shall enjoy such and such if
reason proves that tomorrow my enjoyment will be the greater. The
organisation of memory is parallel to this organisation of present
duration. Conditions of recall are the same as the conditions that
construct fixing. It is an intolerable misuse of analysis that makes us
separate the fixing and the recalling of memories. Memories are fixed
only if they first comply with the conditions of recall. We therefore
only remember by making choices, by filtering out the lees of life, by
cutting facts from the current of life and putting reasons there
instead. Facts remain in memory thanks to intellectual axes. This
insight of Janet's is very profound: 'what has created humanity is
narration, and not by any means recitation' (p. 261). That is to say, we
do not remember simply by repeating but we have to [compose ]{.i1}our
past. Character is a biased story of the self. Moreover, Janet makes it
very clear to us that the work of memory does not finish with the act of
memory:

it is not over when the event ends, because memory is perfected in
silence. A young child tries out the romance he or she is getting ready
to tell their mother . . . This is the gradual perfecting of memories
that takes place []{#calibre_link-322 .calibre10}little by little. This
is why a memory is better after a few days than it was at the beginning,
it is better made, better wrought. It is a literary construction that is
made slowly and is gradually perfected (p. 266).

50

Events do not therefore settle along the length of duration like direct
and natural gains. They need to be ordered in an artificial system---a
rational or social system---that gives them meaning and a date. This is
why delirium that is not sufficiently systematic leaves no trace at all.
Janet in fact observes that 'after even complex epileptic delirium,
there is no memory. This is not because it is complicated but because
sufferers have not constructed the act of memory, being too stupid to do
so in their delirium' (p. 224).

Thus, memory is a work that is often difficult, and is not a datum. It
is not a possession we have at our disposal. We can only realise it by
starting from a present intention. No image arises without a reason,
without an association of ideas. A more complete psychology ought, it
seems, to emphasise the rational or occasional conditions of a return to
the past. Psychoanalysis in particular would benefit from stressing the
[present ]{.i1}importance of past traumas. As Janet might say, when we
think we are telling our dream by [repeating ]{.i1}it we are in fact
[narrating ]{.i1}it. This is not far from being a justification, a
proof. To psychoanalysis we could therefore add another aspect. It asks
why the patient had this dream. To this we should add: why does the
patient tell the dream? This would bring us back to the study of the
present conditions of psychosis.

Indeed for Janet:

the problem of recall is above all a problem of initiating something and
stimulating it. Why indeed should the person who has deferred an act
cease to defer it? . . . The merit and miracle of memory is to have
constructed an act that is initiated by something that is not precise,
that has not yet happened. It is preparation for obeying a signal other
than the familiar ones.

51

It is a mechanism waiting to be set in motion by a future coincidence.
Memory is therefore not realised all on its own, through an inner surge.
It must be differentiated from reverie precisely because true memory
possesses a temporal substructure that reverie lacks. The images of
reverie are gratuitous. They are not pure memory because they are
incomplete, undated memories. There is no date and no duration where
there is []{#calibre_link-227 .calibre4}no construction; there is no
date without dialectic, without differences. Duration is a complex of
multiple ordering actions which support each other. If we say we are
living in a single, homogenous domain we shall see that time can no
longer move on. At the very most, it just hops about. In fact, duration
always needs alterity for it to appear continuous. Thus, it appears to
be continuous through its heterogeneity, and in a domain which is always
other than that in which we think we are observing it.

Always and everywhere, the phenomena of time appear first of all in a
discontinuous progress. They reveal to us an order of succession.
Nothing more and nothing less. In particular, the way they are linked is
never immediate. In many respects, succession is free; it accepts
suspensions of action, it accepts clear heterogeneity, as we shall see
when we look closely at the problem of causality in relation to time.

[notes]{.b}

[1](#calibre_link-111){#calibre_link-103 .calibre4}. Marie-Pierre-Félix
Janet (1859--1947), on whom Bachelard draws extensively in this chapter,
was at the time a leading authority in France in the study of mental
illness, neurosis, psychological medicine, and the development of
intelligence. After studying at the École Normale Supérieure in Paris,
along with Bergson, Durkheim, and Jaurès, he directed the
neuro-pathological service at Le Havre hospital while teaching at the
local [lycée]{.i1}; he went on to study medicine, taking his doctorate
in medicine in 1893. With Charcot, he directed a laboratory in
experimental and comparative psychology at La Salpêtrière hospital in
Paris; he taught at medical schools in London, Harvard, Mexico City, Rio
de Janeiro, and Buenos Aires, and received honorary degrees from
sixty-three universities. He was publicly honoured in France, becoming
president of the Académie des sciences morales et politiques in 1925 and
Commander of the Légion d'honneur in 1927.

[2](#calibre_link-112){#calibre_link-104 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote (amended): P. Janet, [L'Evolution de la mémoire et de la notion
de temps ]{.i1}(Paris: Chahine A, 1928), p. 22. All Bachelard's
quotations from Janet in this chapter are from this book; he sometimes
omits page references.

[3](#calibre_link-113){#calibre_link-105 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote: R. Poirier, [Essai sur quelques remarques des notions d'espace
et de temps]{.i1}, p. 64.

[4](#calibre_link-114){#calibre_link-106 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote refers to the French translation of E. A. Poe's
[Politian]{.i1}. I quote from the original text of Poe's play here
(scene 6, lines 39--41).

[5](#calibre_link-115){#calibre_link-107 .calibre4}. A reminder of the
etymology of catagenic and anagenic may help to clarify Bachelard's
meaning: their prefixes are formed from the Greek words for 'down' and
'up' respectively, 'genic' being derived from the Greek verb 'to
[]{#calibre_link-268 .calibre4}be born', 'to become'. Bergson in fact
uses both words in [L'Evolution créatrice ]{.i1}(chapter 1, section 2)
when discussing the development of living things, taking these terms
from a contemporary American biologist, Cope.

[6](#calibre_link-116){#calibre_link-108 .calibre4}. See in particular
Bergson's [Essai sur les données immédiates de la conscience
]{.i1}(Paris, 1889), chapter 1.

[7](#calibre_link-117){#calibre_link-109 .calibre4}. Maurice Halbwachs
(1877--1945) published in the field of sociology; Bachelard would appear
to refer here to his book [Les Cadres sociaux de la mémoire
]{.i1}(Paris, 1925). Influenced by Durkheim and Bergson, Halbwachs first
taught philosophy at Caen University and then sociology at Strasbourg
University; he took up a chair in sociology at the Sorbonne in 1935, and
a chair in 'collective psychology' at the Collège de France in 1944. He
was arrested by the Gestapo in 1944 and deported to Buchenwald, where he
died the following year.

[8](#calibre_link-118){#calibre_link-110 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote: as Jerusalem says in [Urtheilsfunction, ]{.i1}'language always
dramatises the simplest judgements' (p. 9).[]{#calibre_link-376
.calibre4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-119 .calibre3}
[Chapter 3](#calibre_link-120){#calibre_link-8 .calibre4}

[[Duration and Physical Causality](#calibre_link-120){.calibre4}]{.b}

[[]{#calibre_link-277 .calibre4}I]{.b}

52

In actual fact, all causality is displayed in the discontinuity of
states. We show one phenomenon to be a cause and another to be an effect
when we draw a line round each of them which defines and isolates them,
giving each the unity of a name, and revealing the essential organic
character of each. If we refer to a clearly defined effect, then what we
are wanting to do is rid ourselves of the accidental. If we refer to a
cause as being certain, then our wish is to establish a hierarchy of
appearances in the phenomenon. A Bergsonian will no doubt see this
static double designation as simply proving that linguistic and
spatialising needs dominate our intellect. He will call on innermost
intuition to follow the causal continuity from one phenomenon to
another. Yet this continuous and wholly inner link will, in its turn,
only be expressed by a general word, and without objective proof We
shall never succeed in [unrolling ]{.i1}the sequence of causality. As
soon as we analyse a cause of this sequence, as soon as we specify its
development, we are dividing up this cause of a sequence into successive
states; and in affirming that these states are linked, we are oddly
enough eliminating the duration linking them. We have made the cause
into so complete a phenomenon that it seems the cause must take place
all by itself and bring about the effect in a time which may be short or
long, but whose length we have little interest in determining.

53

We trust people will not be too quick to accuse us of abstraction! We
trust that, in particular, this will not be seen as surreptitious
support for []{#calibre_link-260 .calibre4}Bergson's thesis of a
mathematical time that can only represent the flux of phenomena by a
series of cross-sections! No, cause and effect are neither of them
simply temporal breaks. They both have a particular temporal structure.
For each of them, this structure constitutes duration. What we are
affirming though is that this duration, which is in some way immobilised
so as to constitute cause and effect separately, cannot in any way
succeed in linking the effect to the cause. We do not have to take
account of the duration in the cause or of the duration in the effect in
order to link them temporally. Within the cause, duration is simply
preparation. Beyond the effect, duration is simply a damping down,
abatement. A phenomenon that was prepared at great length does not react
any more strongly than one whose preparation was rushed. Physical
causality is not quantified by duration. We must always reach the point
at which we establish the phenomenon cause and the phenomenon effect as
two separate states, and since their particular duration is ineffective
we should, as it were, empty them temporally. We are moving towards the
rationalisation of causality. We very gradually come to regard the cause
as a principle and the effect as a consequence. The link between them is
thus as contemporaneous as it is deferred. Rationalised cause and effect
are fixed in their individuality. From the moment we deduce one from the
other, we get rid of the irrationality of their temporal link; this link
is only contingent, only an initiating act. We nearly always have means
at our disposal with which we can accelerate the effect when we have
really understood a cause. If we prepare sugar in granulated form for
the lecturer, we are giving him or her, as an initiating act, the means
to drink a glass of sugared water without having to wait for it to
dissolve.^[1](#calibre_link-121){#calibre_link-123 .calibre10}^ There is
nothing really objective in time other than the order of succession. In
any case, coming back to the firm ground of real proof, in the realm of
objectivity that is discussed and experiment that is demonstrated,
phenomena are presented as successive and discontinuous. A historical
account of physical phenomena is full of interregnums that scientists
quite correctly ignore; they can be ignored and therefore they must be
ignored.

54

[II]{.b}

We shall now go on to see that the verification of causality comes in an
atmosphere of negations, in a kind of logical void, which again stresses
the isolation of cause and effect.

[]{#calibre_link-330 .calibre4}Let us establish this proof with an
example that is as simple as possible, and where the positive aspect is
at first sight particularly clear and obvious. Kant takes the following
judgement as an example of a close synthesis: the sun warms this stone.
However, this positive form conceals a countless number of negative
judgements. Indeed, the judgement of experience is not simply a
posteriori; it comes late. It closes a polemic. And it is indeed what is
absolute in negation that gives the principle of causality here its
necessary character: we are only sure of what we negate. Let us try to
follow once again here the polemic of refusal that prepares our support
for causality.

Generally speaking, before all else the application of the principle of
causality comes down to negating the activity of substance. Far from the
category of substance being, as Schopenhauer argued, a replica of the
category of causality, the category of causality fulfils its function by
negating the causal action of substance. A phenomenon is the cause of
[another ]{.i1}phenomenon. Things pass the cause to each other; they do
not give rise to it. A cause of itself is either a tautology or else a
god. It is perhaps in this way that [causality ]{.i1}and [participation
]{.i1}will most clearly be seen as contradictory. In so far as a quality
is thought of as participating in the activity of substance, it eludes
causal analysis.

In addition, the affirmation of the action of something [alien ]{.i1}is
still not entirely positive or at least, it is only positive in so far
as it is imprecise and general. As soon as this affirmation becomes
precise, it brings negations into play. A phenomenon's features can only
be distinguished by differentiating. When we postulate the effectiveness
of a cause, we are noting the ineffectiveness of various supposed
causes. Thus, saying that the sun warms this stone means proving firstly
that it does not warm up all by itself, due to the activity of
substance, and then secondly that it is not warmed by another source of
heat.

55

Furthermore, our argument would be more pertinent if it could be
developed with reference to a more scientific example since this would
then give us a better sense of the indispensable polemical role played
by false hypotheses. There is however a methodological interest in
approaching the problem through an example that is as familiar as the
one chosen by Kant. Indeed, familiarity increases the falsely positive
appearance of our experience. In our dealings with the slow, drab world
of crude experience, we soon unlearn how to be surprised. We come to
think symbolically because the phenomena manifesting the whole have the
immobility of symbols. We rely on sensory wholes because we imagine that
these wholes are syntheses. It is in this spirit []{#calibre_link-328
.calibre4}that the following objection to our ideas will again be
raised: is there not the synthesis of the phenomena of light and the
phenomena of heat when the selfsame ray touches both our hands and our
eyes? Or again, expressed in more realist language, is it not obvious
that the wave's vibration [is ]{.i1}at the same time both heat and
light? Now, this sensory combination sets us on the path towards
identity and in so doing invites us to intellectual inertia. By
eliminating differences, the declaration of identity terminates this
experience. Yet who does not see that such an experience is far from
being even half-begun? The reply is so clear though that it seems
definitive. It is made so quickly that it seems immediate.

56

On the contrary, active reflection ought to lead us to draw the
conclusion that a synthesis based on experience cannot be an immediate
datum. This experimental synthesis is not simply a posteriori from the
rational point of view, because of the gratuitousness of experience. It
is also a posteriori because of the intervention of polemical reason. At
the very root of heuristics there lies a whole eristic, and there is a
whole dialectic of the true and the false at the origin of our
judgements of experience. An attempt at synthesis always lays the
foundations for its success by opposing previous failures. The cause
cannot, in essence, be the subject of an intuition since, given that the
idea of an effect should be more complex than the idea of a cause, the
differential of newness evident between cause and effect should be the
subject of discursive thought, of thought that is essentially
dialectical. Intuition can doubtless shed light after the event, and it
then has the force of rational habit; it cannot however illumine the
initial quest. Before intuition, there is surprise.

57

Thus, eliminating errors reveals the cause. It is in this elimination,
which has been made a very conscious process, that the real pedagogy of
causality lies. In order fully to understand the cause of a phenomenon,
it is indeed in our interest first of all to refuse explicitly the
various causes that might occur to us. In reality, in the history of our
learning, there has never been an immediate phenomenon that could be
attributed to a precise cause. A precise cause is always a hidden cause.
And this observation will appear all the more important as we grow more
aware that the search for causes always has a reaction on the task of
description. In discerning a cause, we are distinguishing between the
characteristic features of the phenomenon we are studying. Every
efficient cause becomes a reason for explaining a structure. We often
only []{#calibre_link-217 .calibre4}understand the structure through the
cause. It is often the propagation of physical agents that draws the
lines of matter. Thus, structure is as much efficient cause as formal
cause. There is therefore a kind of correspondence between form and
development. A geometric hierarchy is in command of a temporal order of
succession. And vice versa, causal discipline requires a spatial order.
A complete phenomenology is one that is both formal and causal.

58

The regularity of phenomena therefore entails a logical preparation of
experiment. A causal law can only proceed safely in so far as it is
protected from disturbance. There can be no detection without
protection. In order to follow the logical isolation of cause and
effect, we need only reflect on any law of physics. We shall see that
thought that is entirely verbal, that is condensed into the identity of
a commonplace phrase, will be segmented into two distinct images
whenever there is the slightest attempt at precision. And this
segmentation will appear to be the two phases of a process which has a
before and an after. For example, if I declare from the outset that a
falling stone is attracted by the earth, I have the impression of a
unified phenomenon. However, in this dogmatic response, intuitive
thought is not really active. As soon as I wish to make my thought
precise, I shall be drawn along a discursive path and it will not take
long for me to see the time of explanation polarise and gather around
two distinct centres. Along with my thought about the real action of the
earth on the moving body there will in fact be at the same time thought
about potential action, action entirely preliminary to real action. I
shall analyse reality---what everyday language calls reality---through
possibility. I shall then bring in the static idea of the gravitational
field. I shall understand the influence of the earth in its possibility
rather than in real causal development. In particular, it is by going
more deeply into this idea of field, an idea that is wholly
intermediate, that I shall gain better understanding of the detailed
phenomenon of gravity. It will also give me a better grasp of this
phenomenon's conditions of differentiation, for example sensitivity to a
change in gravity with altitude and also the correct definition of the
vertical, a definition in which I shall give the centre of the earth a
role to play. This gives us a pretty good idea of how the cause is
fleshed out, of how it is organised and completed. Only when I have
studied the field in this way, determining the conditions and the limits
of its uniformity, will I introduce the stone into this particular
field. And through the cooperation of the moving body's mass, the
[]{#calibre_link-299 .calibre4}field will become a force. The synthesis
giving the effect will then be seen as having in a way one more
dimension than the cause. The cause will only act when something is
added, and this will be to the benefit of a convergence of conditions.
The realisation of the cause in order to give its effect is therefore an
[emergence]{.i1}, a composition. Thought that is subtle and detailed,
proved and taught will lead us to establish the heterogeneity of cause
and effect. The better we teach, the more we shall differentiate. The
pull of gravity will be analysed in two
phases^[2](#calibre_link-122){#calibre_link-124 .calibre10}^ by relating
two objects, the moving body and the earth, And also by distinguishing
between the time of the possible and the time of the real. And the
possible opens up a discursive enquiry in which polemical reason is
given full scope. The study of the potential mathematical functions
which are the basis of the mathematical physics of fields is, like it or
not, founded on the metaphysical idea of the potential. We rediscover
the ancient way of thinking that is seen in the passage from the
potential to the actual, with initially the metaphysical heterogeneity
of the potential and the actual, cause and effect. It is perhaps by
going more deeply into a theory of causality of this kind that [minimum
emergence ]{.i1}could be found, to be precise that which appears in time
as the first action of time, as a slight accentuation of reality that
produces a definitive effect.

[III]{.b}

59

So far, we have only discussed the problem of causality with regard to
its application or indeed, to put it even more simply, with regard to
its explanation and the way it is presented to us. In the end, what we
have done is indicate how causal relations are [taught]{.i1}; we have
not determined what these causal relations are in themselves. There is
no doubt in our view that teaching conditions are eminently conditions
of objective thought. This however is not the place to develop this
personal theory and we know readers have long been nursing an objection:
what does it matter how causality is proved, since beyond the
discontinuity of proofs there will always be the continuum of the real
cause that operates in the double continuity of space and time. It is
this key objection that we must now confront.

60

Let us first of all observe that when we think causal development in a
continuum which we cannot exhaust, we are seeing mystery in this
[]{#calibre_link-218 .calibre4}development and exaggerating the richness
of becoming in exactly the same way that naive realism exaggerates the
richness of substance. In other words, we ascribe too much action to
time when we make it the support and the substance of action. If
temporal action really [formed]{.i1} the phenomenon, we would not
understand the resistance that forms put up to deformation. In fact,
causality and form unite and dominate time and space. René Poirier put
this very well when he wrote that 'time and space are thus imbued with
causality; causality is a natural part of them and transfigures them'
([Essai sur quelques remarques des notions d'espace et de temps]{.i1},
p. 17). Indeed, causality in its many forms brings many reasons for
relations, links, and successions, and by doing so makes time and space
organic. In this way too we see how causality imparts knowledge of
varied time to us. This is of course by no means the conclusion drawn by
Poirier. His analysis leads him instead 'to restore the time and space
in which things are to their task of being impassive spectators, and to
despair of becoming and of our understanding of becoming'. Yet this
despair does not afflict the agent of scientific change, the scientist
who by associating the different forms of causality comes to construct
from nothing phenomena which are precise and predicted. Contemporary
science has time as well as space as a variable; it can make time
effective or ineffective with regard to qualities that have been
differentiated. When we have a better understanding of how to produce
frequencies, we shall gradually be able to fill time discontinuously in
the same way that atomism has filled space.

From a certain point of view, a technique that produces becoming should
be able to suspend the action of time. In order to have the same effect,
there must be the same cause. In order to have the same cause, time must
not act on the well-defined phenomenon; we must be able to restore the
cause in its identity in order for the effect to be restored in its
identity. Now, the permanence of the cause can only be clearly and
certainly realised if we start from rationalised phenomena. We can only
completely define that which we understand. Only the truly organic cause
is able to give a well-defined effect. The principle of causality is
always seen as playing between two distinct and very clear-cut figures,
eliminating both accidents and details.

61

In other words, there is a hierarchy in becoming just as there is a
hierarchy in the essence of being. The more purely a cause realises its
essential scientific schema, the more regularly will it determine its
[]{#calibre_link-285 .calibre4}effect. The experiments that work best in
physics are not the simplest ones but the most organic. They are those
in which experimental precautions have been taken [systematically
]{.i1}and detail has been confined to its role as detail, and where we
are sure of the [non-causal character of detail]{.i1}. When the polemic
of precaution has been carefully conducted, we feel safe from accidents;
we feel able to initiate behavior relative to scientific beginnings and
to postpone the rationalised phenomenon to a time we have determined. We
have only to compare the continuous waves used in radio to the always
irregular, always accidental sparks eighteenth-century electric machines
produced in order to understand what makes for a phenomenon that is
mastered by time. The modern system seems in a way like a temporally
closed system, one which is represented in its rhythms just as a thing
is represented in its spatial limits.

Having thus made a kind of relative assessment of the temporal
effectiveness of a phenomenon's diverse causes, we are now entitled to
reconstruct complex becoming without basing ourselves on an absolute
time which is external to the system and which claims to be valid for
all parts of the system. Each part of a system has its own appropriate
temporal rhythm specific to the variables as they change and develop. If
we do not see this, it is because we most often conduct an experiment
from one particular point of view and affect only one particular
variable. And we think everything else has been left as it was. Temporal
correlations are evident however in very many cases and they prepare a
pluralist theory of time.

62

On other occasions, we go to the opposite extreme and introduce
continuity of development in order to link two different states. This
continuity of development should make clear to us the heterogeneity of
durations affecting different features of the phenomenon. In actual
fact, we postulate continuity between two slowly modified aspects of a
phenomenon because from other points of view, it is not hard to see
rapid modifications. These rapid modifications act as a transition; they
are examples of transitive states. However, heterogeneous development is
not a real link. It is very instructive to see that development is the
price we have to pay for a complexity we have not analysed. Thus, we
only need to [complicate ]{.i1}a kaleidoscope by adding many smaller
fragments to the larger ones for it to seem to change and develop
continuously. The jerkiness of events will then dissolve and fade away
because they are so numerous.

[]{#calibre_link-233 .calibre4}In what way then can an experiment
dealing with fine detail be helped or clarified by the postulate of
temporal continuity? A duration that nothing analyses can always be
accused of only being valid as 'duration in itself'. It will not be the
phenomenon's duration. Microphenomenology ought not to attempt to go
beyond describing the order of succession or more simply still, beyond
enumerating possible cases. This enumeration will then require a time
that is purely and simply statistical, having no more causal
effectiveness. This brings us to one of the oddest fundamental
principles of contemporary science: statistically, the different states
of a single atom in duration and a group of atoms taken at a particular
instant are exactly the same. If we reflect on this principle, we ought
to be persuaded that in micro-physics, antecedent duration does not
[propel ]{.i1}the present and that the past does not weigh upon the
future. Since there is complete geometrical homology between an
individual's [development ]{.i1}and the [state ]{.i1}of a society,
conditions of structure can be exchanged with conditions of development.
In other words, here once again causality is efficient causality just as
much as it is formal causality. There is another conclusion to be drawn,
for according to this principle the atom's becoming is obviously applied
on to a number and not on to a continuum; the atom's becoming just hops
about since this becoming finds its equivalent in a countable plurality
of atoms in different states, and since the successive states of an atom
are found when we go from one atom to another. The temporal dialectic is
therefore simply the development of the ontological dialectic.

[IV]{.b}

63

Furthermore, there is a break between an experiment taking an overall
view and one that goes into fine detail and this break radically alters
the conditions of objectivity. Let us clarify this alteration. When I
say that a phenomenon taken as a whole [changes ]{.i1}from state A to
state B, what I mean is that between A and B there are myriad details
and accidents which I ignore but which it is always in my power to
indicate. If, though, I study fine structures at the limits of
experimental accuracy, I must take a new postulate into account: [the
detail of detail has no experimental meaning]{.i1}. The detail of detail
falls in fact into the absolute nothingness of systematic error, of the
error imposed by the []{#calibre_link-311 .calibre4}requirements of
detection. It is at this point that the dialectic of detection comes
into play, with the rhythm of all or nothing. Discontinuous number
replaces continuous measurement. There is no longer anything continuous
apart from error; error is simply a halo of possibilities surrounding
measurement. And as for determinations, these are quantified. We can
thus understand that when we take causality in the forms in which it is
experienced in fine detail, it is fragmented. Indeterminacy is an almost
immediate consequence of the quantum character of measurement. There is
nothing that permits us to put a temporal continuity into place in order
to analyse discontinuous transitions. If we do so, we are taking
duration [from the outside]{.i1}, regarding it as a useful function, a
synthesis that is more or less arbitrarily imposed on the dispersion of
phenomena. Duration certainly cannot be read in a real analysis of
phenomena.

64

There is even a kind of contradiction in postulating the inexhaustible
diversity of a phenomenon along with the rigorous identity of detection.
We have in fact attained a level of knowledge at which scientific
objects are what we make them, neither more nor less. We have mastery
over objectivity. The history of the laboratory phenomenon is very
precisely that of its measurement. The phenomenon is contemporaneous
with its measurement. Causality is in a way solidified by our
instruments. Objectivity becomes the purer as it ceases to be passive in
order to become more markedly active, as it ceases too to be continuous
in order to become more clearly discontinuous. We [realise ]{.i1}our
theoretical thought by degrees. We end by extracting complex phenomena
from their own particular time---a time that is always vague and
indistinct---in order to analyse them in an artificial time, a time we
determine, the time of our instruments. We are able to slow down,
accelerate, or immobilise the most varied temporal phenomena. With
stroboscopy, we can detach and select particular instants in a rhythmic
phenomenon. We can produce an accurate history of these elements that
have been isolated from their context, by linking them to elements taken
from outside the whole contexture of reality. The continuity we make in
this way has very plainly no connection with a real continuity; it has
however all the attributes of a real continuity. Philosophers should
reflect on the ease with which the time of instruments can thus be
substituted for the time of phenomena. This ease of correspondence
between the 'real' phenomenon and the instrumental phenomenon of
stroboscopy should suggest the idea that the essential function of
duration is doubtless purely and []{#calibre_link-286 .calibre4}simply
'correspondence'. When we make two orders correspond, we are giving them
the same order of succession. Once the correspondence has been
completed, duration is no longer of much use. This is why the temporal
homologies outlined by stroboscopy are accurate and conclusive. They
shatter duration. They retain causality however. If lastly we observe
that from some points of view our senses are more or less well-adjusted
stroboscopic instruments, then knowledge of duration can more easily be
ascribed to a construction. Our everyday knowledge of temporal phenomena
is produced by an unconscious, lazy kind of stroboscopy. Duration is the
stroboscopic aspect of a general change; it is the separation of fluid
elements from stable ones. If we believe in the permanence of things, it
means that we always open our eyes at the same phase of their rhythm.

65

Thus, a detailed study of causal relations teaches us to exercise choice
in the succession of phenomena. Our action on the temporal
characteristics of a phenomenon is far more effective than it would
first seem. If we have the ability to associate the spatial and temporal
characteristics of a phenomenon, then through material intermediaries we
can, as it were, frame temporal phenomena. Rhythm is imprisoned in sound
boxes. When we see a rhythm preserved in a radio aerial, we cannot stop
the image of a reciprocal action between the geometric and the temporal
from intruding into our thought. It is therefore in our best interests
to regard things as truly the products of stationary waves. Periods are
spatio-temporal functions. They are the temporal face of material
things. As it vibrates, a thing reveals both a temporal and a material
structure.

66

If we now add to this that periods are immediately translated into the
language of frequencies and that frequencies appear as relative to one
another, we see the absoluteness and the continuity of time not just
fade but disappear. In any case, the continuity of absolute time that
might serve as a basis for differentiating between periods is no longer
the immediate continuity yielded by crude observation. The causality
studied on the basis of frequencies is indeed in play [above ]{.i1}the
continuity that is [postulated ]{.i1}as fundamental to the duration of a
period. In particular, the study of this causality through periods and
frequencies could, in our view, be limited to statistics of periodic
events. The [regularity ]{.i1}of an isolated vibration is postulated
perfectly gratuitously, for in fact it is only the [frequency ]{.i1}of
groups of vibrations that is used. Moreover, it must be noted that most
phenomena which are explained by frequency []{#calibre_link-234
.calibre4}are explained by a fairly large number of frequencies. The
slow periods of astronomy do not serve here as an explanatory motive. If
the earth is considered as it moves in its orbit, it does not 'vibrate'.
It follows its path. The time of astronomy is therefore not yet
'structured'. If we consider the monotony of planetary motion, we can
well understand how a uniform, continuous time came to be ascribed to
it. It is precisely a time in which nothing happens. It is an inadequate
schema for establishing the realism of rhythm.

When we go deeply into the finely detailed forms of multiple causality,
we become aware of the value of temporal organisations. We are less and
less tempted to regard causes as just breaks in a general Becoming.
These causes constitute wholes. They act as wholes, spanning useless
intervals, without regard for images representing time as a flux whose
entire force lies at its limits. Causal energy is not located on a
causal wave front. The cause requires organic conventions. It has a
temporal structure, a rhythmic action. It belongs to a spatio-temporal
structure.

Alongside the cause's organic character and in connection with this
character, we must also make way for the kaleidoscopic and discontinuous
character of material change. Causal relations can thus gain in clarity
when we study them from the arithmetical standpoint. There must be an
advantage in [arithematising causality]{.i1}. In this respect, the new
quantum science is preparing for us special ways of studying that must
sooner or later come together in an arithmetic of effective instants.

[notes]{.b}

[1](#calibre_link-123){#calibre_link-121 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
implicit reference here is to Bergson's use of the example of a sugar
lump in [L'Evolution créatrice ]{.i1}(Paris, 1907) in support of his
argument that time is 'lived': the time I wait for the sugar to dissolve
is 'my impatience', 'my duration'; it is not mathematical time
([L'Evolution créatrice]{.i1}, chapter 1). Bachelard argues against
Bergson's interpretation in [L'Intuition de l'instant ]{.i1}(Paris,
1932), chapter 1; his argument is presented and discussed in M.
McAllester Jones, [Gaston Bachelard. Subversive Humanist. Texts and
Readings ]{.i1}(US: University of Wisconsin Press, 1991), pp. 29--35. It
should be noted that in Bachelard's phrase 'sugar in granulated form'
there is an implicit cultural reference: in France in his day, lump
sugar was more usual and he thus differentiates []{#calibre_link-377
.calibre4}himself clearly from Bergson by using this phrase. In
[L'Intuition de l'instant]{.i1}, Bachelard had in fact referred to
Bergson's sugar ('le sucre') as a lump of sugar ('un morceau de sucre').

[2](#calibre_link-124){#calibre_link-122 .calibre4}. Bachelard's phrase
here 'en deux temps' is an example of his humorous---and
untranslatable---word-play since it refers to a two-stroke internal
combustion engine, while also enabling him to maintain his focus on the
discussion of time.[]{#calibre_link-378 .calibre4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-125 .calibre3}
[Chapter 4](#calibre_link-126){#calibre_link-9 .calibre4}

[[Duration and Intellectual
Causality](#calibre_link-126){.calibre4}]{.b}

[[]{#calibre_link-280 .calibre4}I]{.b}

67

Our intention in taking the problem of temporal effectiveness into the
domain of physics was simply to confront possible objections and to
conform to philosophical custom: it is in fact usual to want time to be,
to begin with, an objective power and to see movement as giving us the
clearest measure of duration. It seemed to us that in this domain
itself, temporal links were neither as strong nor as uniform or general
as they are said to be. The thread of time has knots all along it. And
the easy continuity of trajectories has been totally ruined by
microphysics. Reality does not stop flickering around our abstract
reference points. Time with its small quanta twinkles and sparks.

68

It is not though by reflecting on physical phenomena that we can really
feel the metaphysical duality of duration. In objects, in fact, breaks
remain accidents and elude all attempts to systematise them. In higher
psychic activity, breaks are on the contrary inseparable from reasons;
or better, the small variations in energy involved in higher psychic
activity bring about new ideas. Here we can say that small variations
have great effects. Our mind, in its pure activity, is an
ultra-sensitive time detector. It is very good at detecting the
discontinuities of time. For this to happen, all we need do is turn
aside from all practical chores and all social cares, and listen to
time's cascades within us.

[]{#calibre_link-343 .calibre4}Furthermore, physical or physiological
phenomena would always teach us to submit to time and be an object among
objects. A whole aspect of the phenomenology of time is obscured when we
limit ourselves to reflecting on the development of phenomena. Their
kinematics can so easily be described that we come to believe that their
dynamic character is less certain, less general, and more concealed. In
actual fact, the history of science shows fairly clearly that dynamics
is added to kinematics as secondary and derived knowledge, which is
harder and more fallacious.

Yet if we leave objective reflection and come to our own innermost
experience, everything changes and what was obscure becomes clear; the
experience of inner dynamics now moves to the fore while that of our
movements seems derived and secondary. From this standpoint, movements
seem to us to be simply the consequences of our decisions, taking into
consideration---which is very important---the [difficulties ]{.i1}of
carrying out our decisions. We must not neglect this very first and
wholly intellectual aspect of the difficulty of our acts. It is this
aspect that can best teach us about active time. In any case, when the
dynamic and the kinematic are studied in ourselves they should give two
very different impressions of time.

69

And there is more besides. In us, the dynamic initially appears in the
form of impulses, jerks, and rushes of feeling, in short in a
discontinuous form. And to illustrate the dialectic of the continuous
and the discontinuous in relation to time, the simplest is perhaps to
confront our movements and the original order of the will that governs
them. The dualism of the continuous and the discontinuous is then
homologous with the dualism of things and the mind. Having already
argued in a previous chapter that continuous effort is behaviour that is
secondary, learned and difficult, we need only look now at the impulse
in its dynamic aspect as an active element. Yet if continuous movement
is a physiological consequence and if the essential element of an act is
the impulse, is it not in the organisation of impulses that the control
of intelligent action must be sought? We should therefore establish, as
Paul Valéry has so well put it, [an algebra of acts]{.i1}. An action
thus appears as having a necessarily complex formula with many
articulations, and having between the impulses well-defined dynamic
relations. Intensity then has a primary meaning and no longer just one
that is derived, as in Bergsonian theories. Quantification happens at
the level of the will and no longer at that of the muscles. In
[]{#calibre_link-228 .calibre4}this indirect way, the intellect acquires
real causality. It is the intellect that turns away contradictory
actions and determines active convergences. This intellectual causality
must doubtless take account of both physical and physiological
causality, but there is even so a place for psychological
rationalisation that will give particular effectiveness to the
intelligent act.

[II]{.b}

70

It is by analysing the complex of strength and skill that in our view a
first assessment can most easily be made of this clearly determined
effectiveness, which is already visible at the level of the will. A
skilful psyche is one that has been educated. It manages energy. It does
not allow it either to flow away or explode. It proceeds by making
small, very separate movements. With consciousness of skill there comes
an entire geometry that is necessarily composed of straight lines and
edges, in contradiction to the sweet unconsciousness of
grace.^[1](#calibre_link-127){#calibre_link-131 .calibre10}^ Grace must
not be wished; it has lines, not axes. It is pure quality; it condemns
quantity. It does its best to erase the discontinuities of the learning
process and gives unity to the most varied actions. Skill must on the
contrary keep the fundamental hierarchy of many movements. It is
kaleidoscopic. It is strictly quantitative. Grace has the right to make
mistakes; for grace, error is often a whim, embroidery, a variation.
Skill must not amuse itself. And why should skill seek to combine
together the decisions composing it? It indeed runs a risk in moving
away from the pure arithmetic of separate wills. From its standpoint,
these curves with their lazy inflections are lines of lesser thought, of
lesser mental life. They appear when there is a subsiding, when the
conscious being is returning to reverie, allowing itself to be overcome
and vanquished by external resistances. These curves could doubtless be
regarded as more [natural]{.i1}; but this is precisely the proof that
they require less consciousness, less supervision, and less mental
input. For skill, nature both within us and outside us, is first and
foremost an obstacle. It is the innermost obstacle especially that makes
skill a real energetic controversy, a real dialectic.

Rignano has very perceptively indicated this fundamental dualism in the
perfecting of certain skilful movements. Let us for instance look again,
as he does, at the skills involved in a game of billiards; we shall
[]{#calibre_link-229 .calibre4}see this psychologist concerned not with
peripheral descriptions of effort, but instead with describing the
[central ]{.i1}structure, just at the level of the dialectic of more and
less:

71

The billiard player who has already aimed his cue at the ball is
impelled above all by the desire to make his stroke and he prepares
himself for this. But too much tension in his arm muscles leads him to
fear making too strong a stroke as he has already done a short time
before this; then, thanks to this antagonistic activity, his muscles
relax a little. But the lessening of tension that the player then feels
taking place which, in its turn, is linked to the memory of some
previous stroke he bungled by not giving the billiard-ball a sufficient
turn of speed, awakens the contrary fear in him of using too weak a
force. The to and fro movements as his arm brings the tip of the cue
either closer to or farther from the ball before the stroke is made will
be seen by someone watching the game as reflecting the very swift
succession of conflicting feelings produced one after the other. These
feelings grow weaker or stronger by turns in order to reach the end
result of imparting the required force to the
ball.^[2](#calibre_link-128){#calibre_link-132 .calibre10}^

72

Rignano has only studied the quantitative framework of muscular energy
here; but he has clearly shown that the intelligent use of strength
needs [two ]{.i1}contrary reference points, more and less. He has also
clearly shown that the impression carried to the centre for an
over-tense muscle determines, through reflection, a relaxation that is
exactly the opposite of the action prepared by physiological causality.
Physiological causality ought not to wait; it ought to initiate the
stroke that is too strong. Yet reflection imposes an interval of
inaction and then an opposite conclusion. The action takes place through
a contradiction. Skilful will is never good will; in order to act,
skilful will has to go through bad will. Skill can really not be
conceived as something unitary, taking place in an unbroken duration. We
do not really have at our disposal a substantial, positive, and unified
memory that would allow us to reproduce exactly a skilful action. We
must first weigh up contradictory memories and achieve the balance of
opposite impulses. These discursive operations make time uneven; they
break the continuity of natural development. There can be no real
certainty in the success of a skilful action without consciousness of
errors that have been eliminated. Then thought time takes precedence
over lived time and the dialectic of reasons for hesitating is
transformed into a temporal dialectic.

[[]{#calibre_link-340 .calibre4}III]{.b}

73

If we do not always see the importance of the role played by the
hesitation imposed by reflection at the threshold of actions, this is
because we rarely study the psychology of actions which have been well
learned and well understood, and which are fully conscious of their
success. Usually in fact, we endeavour above all to link the psychology
of intelligent behaviour to that of behaviour that is more or less
instinctive, more or less natural. This is no doubt a useful thing to
do. Yet in making it the only thing psychology does, we may be led to
disregard the specific meaning of certain problems. In particular,
artificial action, action that is marked by reflection, is often action
with no stimulus or even against the stimulus, or simply when there is a
stimulus. It therefore introduces a whole range of stimulating events in
which the most diverse causalities interfere. We thus begin to see how a
whole psychology of mental liberation could be worked out by
disentangling all these interferences. In order to study the first stage
of this liberation from the stimulus, we could look again at everything
Rignano has to say about senses that act without making any contact, far
from the insistent hostility of the world of objects. We would see that
these senses 'most often give rise to the particular state of an
affective tendency that is initiated and held in suspense' (p. 45). Here
we have a kind of false equilibrium uniting opposites and permitting
almost instantaneous effectiveness to be given to a decision that has
been well prepared, but left waiting to be implemented. Starting from
this stage, which is still entirely physiological, we realise that what
initiates action is not just the effectuation of physiological
coincidences. There has to be permission to act, and the mind must lend
its full support to being. We only feel this support, we only feel the
mind's presence, in the repose that precedes action, when the possible
and the real are clearly compared. The mind's support is therefore
strictly contemporaneous with an impulse or better, with a kind of
impulse, the impulse of an absolute beginning. Consequently, while in
its elementary form behaviour relative to beginning was still dependent
on objective signs, in a purely intellectual form the will to begin
appears in all its gratuitousness, and is fully conscious of its
supremacy over the mechanisms that have been set in motion. The
physiological causes of the sequence of actions cannot therefore be
confused with the psychological causes of its initiation. A philosophy
[]{#calibre_link-335 .calibre4}that erases this duality in causes is
based on a dangerous metaphysics, on a unity that is not sufficiently
discussed.

Were our criticism accepted, we would suggest that a schema of
initiating acts should double every motor schema. The psychology of a
composite action could not in fact be taught unless the order and
dynamic importance of decisive instants had first been fixed. The action
will then be executed more or less swiftly. Order thus dominates
duration. Order really gives us the algebra of action: the figure
follows from it. An [analysis situs ]{.i1}of active instants can
disregard the length of the intervals just as the [analysis situs
]{.i1}of geometrical elements disregards their
magnitude.^[3](#calibre_link-129){#calibre_link-133 .calibre10}^ The
only thing that counts is the way they are grouped. There is thus the
causality of order, the causality of the group. We are all the more
aware of the effectiveness of this causality as we move higher up
towards actions that are more composite, more intelligent, and that we
keep under close surveillance.

74

When a motor schema is seen to be dominated by its schema of initiating
acts, it is soon nothing more than an unconscious system. Its
functioning can be slowed down or impeded by tiredness, wear and tear,
and illness, and Bergson has proved with great clarity that these kinds
of destruction do not in any way entail the ruin of pure memories. Our
conception of a rationalised memory, made more alert by the elimination
of all memories of duration so that only the memory of the order of
elements is preserved, would lead us to conclude that pure memories
remain valid not just in themselves but in their grouping. The schema of
initiating acts would allow us to become aware of the preservation of
composite memories, of functional memories. We can also understand that
a schema of initiating acts is able to transfer its power from one mind
to another. Through this schema, we suggest, we keep close watch and we
command. The importance of this action of interpsychology must not be
underestimated since this aspect is reflected in every human being, and
an inner dialectic of command and execution makes us see very clearly
within ourselves the supremacy of willed time over lived time.

[IV]{.b}

75

It is in fact when we become aware of the order of initiating acts that
we achieve self-mastery in a complex, difficult action. When we entrust
[]{#calibre_link-341 .calibre4}ourselves in this way to the supremacy of
intellectual over physiological causality, we are protecting ourselves
from indecision and mastering the hesitation to which every detail of
the act could give rise. The whole is in command of the parts. Rational
coherence gives cohesion to development. For instance, a long speech
will be held together by the rational coherence of its well-ordered
reference points. Should there be a moment when language is unclear, or
when an obscure detail or an
anacoluthon^[4](#calibre_link-130){#calibre_link-134 .calibre10}^ in
expression occurs, the confusion will only be short-lived and will not
destroy the continuity of the whole. The plan of this speech acts as a
unifying principle, as a formal cause. It is a schema of initiating
acts. It is held in the mind through a whole which is made up of brief,
simple signs.

Moreover, this oratorical schema provides an excellent illustration of
the causality of order. We also know that a whole speech can be
distorted when the order of two arguments is reversed, even when these
arguments are very independent of one another. In the same way, we
realise when we think about it that what makes the best links is not a
continuity that advances by degrees, that is contemporaneous with real
and more or less contingent development. Looking for this gradual
continuity would mean putting ourselves on the level of an inattentive,
unintelligent audience that cannot really appreciate intellectual
continuity. No, good links are those established between arguments which
are clearly distinguished and carefully categorised, in accordance with
the admirable principle of dialectical rationalism so well expressed in
Jacques Maritain's maxim: 'Distinguish in order to unite'.

76

When action, thought, and speech are gathered in this way on their
successive summits, they therefore take on a continuity of composition
that very obviously commands the subordinate continuity of execution.
Yet this continuity is even more appreciable and appears even more
effective when we are no longer content to present it as a gradation
that is entirely logical and static. It has indeed a dynamic quality. It
brings with it [rapidity]{.i1}. This is a point of view we too often
fail to study. Experimental psychology no doubt takes many measurements
of reaction times, but these always concern reflex acts or simple acts.
It does not turn its attention to the duration in which rather more
complex problems are resolved. This duration of composition seems in
fact to have no objective meaning; a thousand incidents may occur which
slow it down, and in particular intervals of leisure or nonchalance
between the composing acts seem to go on [ad libitum]{.i1}. In short,
the [continuity []{#calibre_link-292 .calibre4}]{.i1}of composition
remains logical and we do not think of bringing out its psychic value as
we ought to do when we consider the psyche as clearly engaged in an
effort to attain maximum consciousness. And yet if we are willing to
reflect on ourselves, we shall soon be aware of a very particular
characteristic given by the [rapidity ]{.i1}of discursive thought as it
links the stages in a well-made argument. This rapidity is not just
speed. It also has the characteristics of ease, euphoria, and momentum,
characteristics which could give a very precise meaning to a truly
specific kind of energy that might well be called rational energy. This
dynamism of understanding requires consciousness of the possession of a
form. We are not aware of it at a first attempt and do not at first see
its value. Intellectual causality must indeed be set in place. This
dynamism is contemporaneous with a new beginning. It is therefore
structure and construction. It is a cause that has the ability to start
all over again after it has had its effect. It is a rhythm. We master it
by preparing the succession of intellectual events, attaining in this
way what is truly succession in itself, totally emptied of the durations
of development and expression and relieved, as far as it is possible to
be, of the burden of all physiological obligations.

77

All psychological durations, clearly represented as they are in
carefully thought out convictions, are constituted in this way, thanks
to the heterogeneity of form and content and to a rational law that
experience endlessly confirms. Durations are first of all [formed]{.i1}.
They are fleshed out and filled later. What is in them is not always
what really constitutes them. At the very most, the apparently
continuous duration of the subordinate psyche, the monotonous and
formless psyche, consolidates the more broken form of intelligent
thoughts and actions, broken by all its lacunae. Yet willed order
remains quite plainly the antecedent temporal reality. When we ignore
this essential distinction, we lack the hierarchical principle we need
in order to analyse temporal knowledge correctly. We do not see that the
story of a journey is a function of its geography. It is not possible to
describe something properly if we do not already possess a pre-existing
principle for finding reference points. Nor is it possible to describe
temporal psychology if we do not give decisive instants their major
causality.

A theory of filling of this kind does not moreover mark a return to a
metaphysics of fullness, since there is always the heterogeneity of
container and contained and also the supremacy of the form. The
fundamental nature of this duality will perhaps be better understood
[]{#calibre_link-269 .calibre4}from examples of temporal consolidation
in which the heterogeneity of container and contained is especially
clear. In dealing with this problem, we shall draw on a theory of
consolidation developed by Dupréel in work that is of great
significance. This theory provides us with good examples of the active
constitution of duration. It shows very clearly that duration is not a
datum but something that is made. We shall devote a chapter to this
theory in order to preserve its unity.

[notes]{.b}

[1](#calibre_link-131){#calibre_link-127 .calibre4}. With this reference
to grace, Bachelard reminds readers of Bergson's view of grace,
developed in the first chapter of his [Essai sur les données immédiates
de la conscience ]{.i1}(Paris, 1889), implicitly arguing against him.

[2](#calibre_link-132){#calibre_link-128 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote: Rignano, [La Psychologie du raisonnement]{.i1}, p. 51.

[3](#calibre_link-133){#calibre_link-129 .calibre4}. [Analysis
situs]{.i1}, meaning 'analysis of place', was the traditional name for
what is now known as topology, the geometry of place which studies the
qualitative and the relative positional properties of geometric objects,
irrespective of their form and magnitude. The homology to which
Bachelard refers in this book is an aspect of topology.

[4](#calibre_link-134){#calibre_link-130 .calibre4}. An anacoluthon is
defined as a lack of grammatical sequence.[]{#calibre_link-379
.calibre4}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-135 .calibre3}
[Chapter 5](#calibre_link-136){#calibre_link-10 .calibre4}

[[Temporal Consolidation](#calibre_link-136){.calibre4}]{.b}

[[]{#calibre_link-296 .calibre4}I]{.b}

78

Dupréel's argument starts from the same point as ours, from the
opposition of instants and intervals. In other words, he distinguishes
between the time we refuse and the time we use, between on the one hand
time which is ineffective, scattered in a cloud of disparate instants
and on the other, time which is cohered, organised, and consolidated
into duration. Dupréel rightly takes it to be a fact both fundamental
and patent that when we describe the psyche temporally, we have to
postulate lacunae. We can subsequently study how these lacunae are
filled, and we can claim that they were made to be filled; obviously
though, a void must be postulated between the successive states
characterising the psyche's development, even if this void may be simply
a synonym for the difference between states that are differentiated.
There is moreover a metaphysical reason that backs up this
methodological need for intervals: directly or indirectly, we must give
way to finality, that is to say to the determination of the present by a
future which is by no means close and to which we ascribe above all a
certain depth. If we are ready to accept the existence of a hierarchy of
active instants we shall come, quite naturally, to accept the
fundamental reality of a temporal framework. The adaptation of
subordinate psychic events to this framework will thus be a recurrent
adaptation. This kind of adaptation with its orderly sequence and strict
hierarchy will not be subject to the objections raised to an adaptation
that is continuous and obscure, in which there is nothing to
[]{#calibre_link-265 .calibre4}indicate the importance played by
instants that are really active. It is akin to that adaptation through
the formal cause which is fundamental to Bergson's theory of creative
evolution. And it is this recurrent adaptation that Dupréel so aptly
describes as [consolidation]{.i1}, studying it in a most
thought-provoking book.^[1](#calibre_link-137){#calibre_link-141
.calibre10}^ Anyone reflecting on Dupréel's method will soon be
convinced by the clarity that familiar examples bring. We ourselves have
been encouraged by our reading of his works to go on with our own
apparently perilous method, which amounts to explaining the lower by the
higher and lived time by thought time. If Dupréel takes certain social
forms to be 'the biological in its nascent state', then we may be
correct in carrying out a similar reversal with reference to the
psychology of duration and in affirming that thought time is lived time
in its nascent state; in other words, thought is always in some respects
a trying-out of or a first move towards a new life, an attempt to live
differently, to live more or even, as Simmel has argued, a will to go
beyond life. If we think time, it means that we place life in a
framework; it does not mean we take a particular aspect of life that
will be better understood the longer we have lived. This almost always
means intending to live differently, to rectify life first and enrich it
later. Thus criticism is knowledge, and criticism is reality. We shall
see these two moments of a meditation on time clearly apparent as we
follow Dupréel's philosophy of time which is so simple yet at the same
time so profound.

79

[II]{.b}

80

If we are to understand Dupréel's book properly, the best thing is to
start with the image he has suggested in order to define 'that which
coexistence consolidates' since the latter will also be very helpful in
enabling us to grasp the reality of 'that which succession consolidates'
in which we are especially interested:

Generally speaking, whenever something is made there are two very clear
successive states: first of all, the parts of the object to be
constructed are assembled and placed in the order in which they should
remain. At this point though, this order is only maintained by external
and provisional means. Only in a second, definitive state will the parts
themselves, through an internal adjustment, keep the position in
relation to each other that is in the finished object. When for instance
a crate is to be made, for []{#calibre_link-323 .calibre10}a few moments
it is the maker's hands which hold the pieces of wood against each other
that he is going to nail. Once these have been hammered in, the crate
holds together all by itself: it has gone from the first to the second
of the two states to whose succession we have just referred. This is
clearer still in the moulding process; the duality of time in this
process is marked by the duality of the mould and the object that is
moulded. Before the cement is poured in, the object's parts are already
placed in the correct order, but the force maintaining this order is
external to them, it is the solidity of the mould (p. 11).

We thus pass from an ephemeral order to one that lasts, from an entirely
external and contingent order to one that is internal and necessary.
Dupréel therefore puts forward his argument concerning [that which
succession consolidates]{.i1}:

81

Is it not the case that what happens with regard to spatial relations
also happens with regard to temporal ones? Are not certain orders of
succession first secured by an external cause and then later come to
hold together, that is to say come to reproduce themselves, through an
interaction of conditions which is less foreign to them, through a cause
which has in some way become internal? (p. 16).

This very pertinent question immediately suggests to us the possibility
of a theory of the gradual interiorisation of life and thought. In our
view, this kind of inside made from the outside---the very opposite of
what happens when a substance expands---is particularly suited to giving
us the schema of a duration that is enriched with events and that
constitutes distinct temporal realities.

Let us therefore see the constitution of all that succession
consolidates, of all these [objects ]{.i1}of the psychology of duration;
let us see how duration is moulded in precise temporal forms. Here
again, the best thing is to start with the very simple, very clear
example that Dupréel gives:

Industry in the true sense of the term, the activity of humans who are
associated and directed by aims, furnishes us at once with examples of
[things that succession consolidates]{.i}. A clock is simply and solely
one of these. By the time the person who made it thinks about setting it
correctly it is already something that coexistence consolidates and that
in addition has now to be made into something succession consolidates.
For the finger of []{#calibre_link-288 .calibre10}the clock to move
round the dial twice every day, no more and no less, the clock-maker
must speed up or else slow down the clock's ticking in accordance with a
chronometer that is itself adjusted to the earth's rotation. Here, the
external order of support is the earth, the chronometer, and the
clock-maker all combined. Once the movement has been duly perfected, the
order to which it corresponds has become internal to the mechanism; the
operation that transfers and fixes has been completed and an order of
succession has been [consolidated]{.i}.

This order has indeed been brought from the outside, going from the
whole to the part.

82

We can now find this process of temporal consolidation every time an
order stabilises, be this in society, memory, or reason. Thus Dupréel
shows us that the transition from a social custom to a truly moral
dictate takes place through consolidation: 'the external order of
interests has been replaced by the internal order of conscience'.
Interiorisation is again seen very clearly here. When we move on to the
psychology of individuals, interiorisation may well be harder to
discern, but if Dupréel's schema is kept in mind we shall, even so, be
able to see it at work. For example:

When children learn a fable by heart, they first find the order of its
lines on the pages of their reader. Every time memory fails them, they
glance at the text; they read and bit by bit every lacuna disappears
from their memory. The order of the printed word is banished. [Knowing
]{.i}means that we have learned; the order of what we know was first
upheld by a force external to our understanding, the latter having
consolidated this order for itself, thus making any external pattern
superfluous (p. 19).

We can see very plainly here that order is not purely and simply
registered but reconstructed with a faithfulness which has been thought
out and willed, and sustained by reasons for coherence which are
specific to the learner. Were we to take examples where the mind is more
free, we would see that consolidation takes place on more subjective
hierarchical bases.

83

A whole theory of knowledge could easily be developed by emphasising the
process of consolidation. We would see in particular that, as Dupréel
points out in a note, induction is a consolidation of experience and
deduction a consolidation of induction. This general application would,
we believe, also lead to a conclusion we wish to indicate: all the
[]{#calibre_link-326 .calibre4}means by which we consolidate, however
[artificial ]{.i1}they may appear, are in the end entirely
[natural]{.i1}. They seem artificial to us because we still see in them
the mark of our own effort; we indeed feel that the given comes to us in
temporal and spatial disconnectedness, or at least that its original
solidity is shattered by the very slightest precise use; we therefore
come to consolidate the given; we consolidate it in our own way, using
mnemonic methods and rational ones equally. We readily accuse these
attempts to consolidate of deforming nature. In making this kind of
criticism, we do not see that nature always needs to be [formed
]{.i1}and that it seeks forms through human activity, in fact. If, as we
ought, we put human activity back into nature's line of action, we shall
acknowledge that intellect is a natural principle and that what is
formed by reason is quite obviously formed by a force of nature.

We can therefore affirm that consolidation applies naturally in the
realm of knowledge as in the realms of life and social activity. This
consolidation really does govern the constitution of forms. To be very
exact, it is the sum of formal and material causality. We shall
understand it still better when we have reflected on this highly
significant corollary stated by Dupréel: ['there is only growth through
intercalation]{.i1}'. It is impossible to attach too much importance to
this principle which in our view casts an unexpected light on all
theories of evolution. All that grows is first enriched within itself.
It is this inner enrichment that determines growth. Growth is but a
consequence. As Dupréel says very perceptively:

84

Life has not moved from an original nucleus towards an indeterminate
development; it seems to have resulted from an advance from the external
to the internal, from a state of dispersal to a final state of
continuity. It has never been like a [beginning ]{.i}from which a
[consequence ]{.i}results, but it was from the first like a framework
that is filled, or like an order that has gained in consistency through,
if we may be permitted to use the expression, a kind of gradual
stuffing . . . Life is certainly [growth]{.i}, but all growth that is
[in extension]{.i}, like fabric that stretches or individuals that
proliferate, is only a particular case; life is essentially growth
through [density]{.i}, an [intensive progress ]{.i}(pp. 38--39).

One might be tempted to see this intensive progress as a
substantialisation of intensity, but we must be very clear that in
Dupréel's theory there is nothing at all mysterious about it. Indeed,
this intensity is []{#calibre_link-300 .calibre4}analysed from a
standpoint that is clearly formal and, so to speak, geometrical. Its
development is presented in a totally discursive way, in both its detail
and its rectification.

If we thus consider a temporal movement in its analytical aspect, it
will not at first be correct to describe it as continuous; or at least
if the continuity of a temporal movement is to be truly reliable, truly
real and sure, then the intervals must be properly organised. Without
this internal organisation, the form will not hold; it will disappear
like some failed first attempt at something. Continuity must therefore
always be upheld by solidity. We shall then come to discover variety in
continuity itself, just as there is variety in the process of
consolidation. For example, we shall give continuity to a temporal
movement either by increasing the density of intercalary acts or else by
regulating when these intercalary acts appear. Basically, rich duration
and regular duration are two very different types of continuity. If our
argument is correct, disturbances of temporal psychology may be of two
principal kinds according to whether the frameworks of temporal
consolidation are affected or, on the other hand, to whether the
internal organisation of intervals is disturbed. There will thus be two
kinds of bradypsychy^[2](#calibre_link-138){#calibre_link-142
.calibre10}^ according to whether the cells remain empty or are
shattered by a disordered organisation.

85

In any case, it seems to us that this metaphysics of consolidation and
intercalation legitimates and completes our fundamental intuition that
all progress takes place in two times: the posing of a form and material
intercalation are the two inevitable moments of all coherent or rather
cohered activity, of all activity that is not purely and simply made of
accidents. Only this kind of cohered activity can be renewed and can
constitute a precise temporal reality.

[III]{.b}

In addition to this attempt to describe the constitution of something
succession consolidates, that is to say the determination of a real
temporal [object]{.i1}, Dupréel's philosophy also examines the precise
nature of the fabric of time. Here, Dupréel develops a critique of
causality and reveals that it is, of necessity, full of lacunae. He then
shows the intervention of probability in the lacunae of the causal
sequence. He thus prepares a renewal of probabilism to which we wish to
draw attention. []{#calibre_link-305 .calibre4}The foundations of this
new probabilism will be found in two works, a book and an
article.^[3](#calibre_link-139){#calibre_link-143 .calibre10}^

86

Dupréel in fact argues that between cause and effect there is always a
necessary distinction; even when this distinction would simply be the
result of the need to put forward two definitions to determine the two
phenomena under consideration, it would nonetheless still establish the
existence of a logical distance. To this logical distance there always
corresponds an interval of time. And this interval, even where causality
is concerned, is fundamentally different in essence from causality.
Indeed, it is in the interval of time that impediments, obstacles, and
deviations [can ]{.i1}intervene and these will sometimes shatter causal
chains. This possibility of intervention must be wholly regarded as a
pure possibility and not as a reality we do not know. It is not because
we do not know what will intervene that we fail to predict the absolute
effectiveness of a given cause; rather, it is because there is between
cause and effect an entirely probable intervention of events which are
not in any way at all connected to the causal datum. In particular, we
shall never have the right to [give ourselves ]{.i1}the interval. In
science, we can construct certain phenomena, we can protect the interval
from certain disturbances, but we cannot get rid of every intervention
of unforeseen phenomena in the interval between cause and effect.

We are well aware, up to this point, of the close connection between
Dupréel's ideas and those of
Cournot.^[4](#calibre_link-140){#calibre_link-144 .calibre10}^ But in
Dupréel there is an added nuance which is decisive. Here, what
determines chance is not, as in Cournot, the [accidental ]{.i1}crossing
of two causal lines which each have rigorous continuity. Indeed, chance
conceived according to Cournot's intuition would not in any way be open
to probability information; it would be pure accident. Dupréel's theory
sheds light which helps us to understand that the probable already stems
from any causal chain taken in isolation:

87

Cournot's way of speaking is too dependent on traditional language and
still gives the impression that chance or the fortuitous [is itself only
an accident]{.i}, and that as the exception to the rule there are
sequences of facts that are possible without it intervening, and that
are complete without it. The fortuitous fact is for him constituted by
two elements of another nature, by facts that are caused and by their
encounter. This is the preconception we must avoid; the fortuitous is
not a parasite of causality, it is by rights in the very texture of
reality . . .

[]{#calibre_link-306 .calibre10}In fact, all known reality is known in
the form of a series of successive or concomitant events, that are
perceived as regular terms of a same order and between which there is an
interval that is always taken up by events of some kind or other. If
events are only considered at the ends of the ordinal series, we in no
way reach [a reality ]{.i}but only an abstract schema, since it is bad
metaphysics to postulate [an ad hoc bridge]{.i}, as causality in itself
would be, which would join the ends of the series closely together by
missing out the interval of time or space that is always there between
them. If on the contrary we say we can reach and define the pure
interval, that is to say a kind of reality beyond any ordinal series in
which it is framed or with which it contrasts, then this would mean we
were chasing shadows: we cannot grasp hold of the indeterminate as such
([La Cause et l'intervalle]{.i}, p. 23).

Thus, Dupréel has no trouble proving that his argument takes proper
account of [all ]{.i1}reality, that is to say of, at one and the same
time, cause and obstacle, fact and possibility, what happens and what
could happen. If we only stress the necessity of causes and mentally get
rid of accidents that really do hamper the development of this
necessity, then we are indeed going in for scholasticism and realising
an abstraction. If we take a cause that is as effective as we could
wish, there will always in the development of its effectiveness be free
scope for possibilities of halts or deviations. We must take account of
these possibilities where they are encountered, in the forms in which
they are encountered, and in the intervals in which they intervene so as
to modify the expected effect statistically. Even more important, we
must take account of them in the description of reasoned behaviour in
which possibilities become the elements of decision.

88

Lastly, to take a new concept of Dupréel's, this possibility which is
taken in the causal sequence without going outside the causal chain
appears as a very simple, very pure probability, as [ordinal
probability]{.i1}. A purely ordinal probability is intrinsically marked
by the simple interaction of plus and minus signs. The event it
indicates just seems more probable than the opposite event. It is not
quantified. The quantification leading to the calculus of probability
only appears when we can enumerate possible cases, for example in the
case of the most schematised phenomena such as those produced by
combinations of inter-actions. Where phenomena separated by a great
logical distance are concerned, as in the phenomena of life and of the
psyche, the question arises as to whether it will ever be possible to
calculate them. []{#calibre_link-243 .calibre4}In fact, it is [ordinal
probability ]{.i1}that determines the processes of an individual psyche.

With just this ordinal probability, we have the link that will enable us
to understand temporal sequences in higher and higher 'emergence'.
Indeed, whenever an emergence, a phenomenon that goes beyond its given,
makes its appearance, we can see that evolution is ever more clearly
determined by probability and not by causality alone. In other words, we
see that the living being and the thinking being are less involved in
necessities than in probabilities. And this involvement safeguards
freedoms precisely because it is only ordinal probability that is
concerned here. Quantified probabilities, accounting for results in
retrospect, can be expressed in the form of laws which are apparently
necessary. Before a decision is taken, ordinal probability faces the
alternative presented by behaviour that is still to be initiated: it
inclines, but does not necessitate.

89

Once probability in this very simple form of ordinal probability has
been re-established in behaviour, then as Dupréel has in fact said,
considerations of finality are no longer to be banished from ideas about
life. Even when the end may not be clearly seen, ordinal probability is
clarified to some degree by the end we glimpse. The end has an ordinal
probability that is stronger than just any chance whatsoever, and a
stronger ordinal probability is already an end. The two concepts [end
]{.i1}and [ordinal probability ]{.i1}are closer to one another than
[cause ]{.i1}and [quantified probability ]{.i1}are. With this new
concept, many contrasts between vitalism and mechanism grow blurred.
Followers of Dupréel's philosophy find it gives them schemas that are
sufficiently flexible for them to understand the connections at the
different levels of emergence. We shall now pose the problem in a
slightly different way by studying temporal superimpositions.

[notes]{.b}

[1](#calibre_link-141){#calibre_link-137 .calibre4}. M. Dupréel,
[Théorie de la consolidation. Esquisse d'une théorie de la vie
d'inspiration sociologique ]{.i1}(Brussels, 1931). Bachelard's
quotations in sections I and II of this chapter are from this book; he
omits some page references.

[2](#calibre_link-142){#calibre_link-138 .calibre4}. 'Bradypsychy'
appears to be one of Bachelard's neologisms; 'brady' is derived from the
Greek 'bradus', meaning slow, Bachelard's word being modelled on French
terms such as 'bradycardie' (bradycardia, a slowing of the heart) and
'bradypepsie' (bradypepsy, a slowing of the digestion).

[]{#calibre_link-307 .calibre4}[3](#calibre_link-143){#calibre_link-139
.calibre4}. M. Dupréel, [La Cause et l'intervalle ou ordre et
probabilité ]{.i1}(Brussels, 1933); 'La Probabilité ordinale',
[Recherches philosophiques]{.i1}, 4 (1934--1935). Bachelard's own
article 'Idéalisme discursif' appeared in the same volume of this
journal. [Recherches philosophiques ]{.i1}was founded in Paris in 1931
and set out to encourage new directions in philosophy, giving
preferential treatment to phenomenology in the wake of Husserl's Paris
lectures of 1929 and the publication of his [Méditations cartésiennes
]{.i1}in 1931. Bachelard contributed to volumes 1, 3, 4, and 6, and
there are several references in his books to articles published in this
journal: see, for example, chapter 6, notes 3, 4, and 8.

[4](#calibre_link-144){#calibre_link-140 .calibre4}. Bachelard refers
here to the applied mathematician and philosopher of science
Antoine-Augustin Cournot (1801--1877), who is best known for his work on
the interpretation of the calculus of probability.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-145 .calibre3}
[Chapter 6](#calibre_link-146){#calibre_link-11 .calibre4}

[[Temporal Superimpositions](#calibre_link-146){.calibre4}]{.b}

[[]{#calibre_link-287 .calibre4}I]{.b}

90

If we study the aesthetics of music and poetry from the stand-point of
time, we shall come to recognise the multiplicity and truly reciprocal
correlation of rhythms. In exactly the same way, if we make a purely
temporal study of phenomenology we shall come to consider several groups
of instants, several superimposed durations, which sustain different
relationships. While it may until now have seemed to physicists that
there is one single, absolute time, this is because they initially took
up a particular experimental stance. With relativity has come temporal
pluralism. For relativity, there are several times that doubtless
correspond to one another and conserve objective orders of sequence but
that do not however keep [durations ]{.i1}which are absolute. Duration
is relative. Even so, the conception of durations in relativity theory
still accepts continuity as an obvious characteristic. This conception
is in fact based on intuitions of movement. The same is not true in
quantum physics. Here, physicists are on a new level and what determines
their intuitions is not [movement ]{.i1}but [change]{.i1}. All the
problems we encounter in assimilating quantum theory stem from the fact
that we are explaining a change in quality with intuitions of a change
in place. If we try to think about pure change, we see that here
continuity is simply a hypothesis---and a very bad hypothesis---since a
continuous change can never be experienced. It can therefore be presumed
that the development of quantum physics will necessarily lead to the
conception of []{#calibre_link-235 .calibre4}discontinuous durations
which will not have the linking properties illustrated by our intuitions
of continuous trajectories. Qualitative becoming is very naturally a
quantum becoming. It has to move through dialectic, going from the same
to the same via the other.

91

Were we able to found a wave and quantum biology on the basis of wave
and quantum mechanics, we would soon find ourselves confronting
pulverisations of time which, in order to determine temporal
effectiveness, would require special statistics relative to the
microphenomena of life. Lecomte du Nouy's book has a number of
interesting suggestions to make regarding
this.^[1](#calibre_link-147){#calibre_link-156 .calibre10}^ For Lecomte
du Nouy, the time of physics is simply what enwraps individual
biological times in the same sense that a light wave enwraps a multitude
of elementary wavelets. Continuity would therefore be the result of
temporal superimpositions. We could go further and say that the time of
a tissue is continuous because of the statistical regularity of the
necessarily irregular times of its cells.

92

Yet philosophers do not have to go deep into these provisionally
forbidden regions in order to accept both temporal pluralism and
temporal discontinuity. The difficulty they have in keeping to one
particular line of thought shows them fairly clearly a time that is made
of accidents and far closer to quantum [inconsistencies ]{.i1}than to
rational [coherence ]{.i1}and real [consistencies]{.i1}. This mental
time is not, we believe, just an abstraction from life's time. The time
of thought is in fact so superior to the time of life that it can
sometimes command life's action and life's repose. Thus, the mind's time
pursues its action deep down, acting at levels different from its own
level of sequence. It also of course acts at a purely mental level, as
we have tried to establish in our study of intellectual causality. These
small glimmers of light do not indeed suffice to clarify for us the
multiplicity of our experiences of time. They can though let us glimpse
an aspect of our argument: time has several dimensions; it has density.
Time seems continuous only in a certain density, thanks to the
superimposition of several independent times. In the same way, all
unified temporal psychology is necessarily full of lacunae, necessarily
dialectical. This is what we shall again try to prove in this chapter,
using new arguments.

[II]{.b}

Were we to venture to relate our own views to a major theory, it is here
that we should recall a number of Hegel's themes. Our wish having
[]{#calibre_link-294 .calibre4}been to write as a teacher, teaching how
to make a first attempt at sketching temporal waves, we did not want to
start with metaphysics as difficult as Hegel's. We also feared that we
would be accused of tending towards logicism and of having a dialectic
that was more logical than temporal. And yet how inappropriate such an
accusation is when we turn to Hegelian method! This is what Koyré has
recently shown in a short article that is as good as a whole
book.^[2](#calibre_link-148){#calibre_link-157 .calibre10}^ The concrete
character of Hegelian idealism has never in fact been so well and so
quickly established:

93

What Hegel seeks to give us . . . is by no means an analysis of the
[idea ]{.i}of time. Quite the opposite, it is the [idea ]{.i}of
time---an abstract, empty idea---that Hegel undertakes to destroy by
showing and describing to us how time is constituted in the living
reality of the mind. Is this the destruction of time? Is it its
construction? Both these terms are inappropriate. It is not a matter of
destroying, even dialectically, or of constructing. It is a matter of
bringing out and discovering---and not postulating hypothetically---in
and for consciousness itself, the moments, stages, and mental acts in
and through which the concept of time is constituted both in and for the
mind ('Hegel à Iéna', p. 444).

Koyré goes on to show the actual, active character of Hegelian
dialectics. The latter are not logical terms limiting one another and
offering us, as from the outside, the contradiction of their aims. It is
indeed the mind that grasps itself in the two associated dialectical
actions. This being so, we can understand that in trying to move up to
pure mental time we reach the regions of both inner contradiction and
the contraction of being and nothingness. As the soul thinks of itself,
it makes itself adopt the attitude of refusal since it rejects objective
kinds of thought; it therefore goes back to nothingness within itself,
returning to that fundamental disquiet of the mind which Hegel has so
clearly described. A further lesson of Hegelian metaphysics is that in
giving ourselves being by refusing being, our restoration is assured,
together with the automatic recovery of minimum repose. Lastly, the
whole problem of the aggregation of dispersed and disparate mental acts
is posed in Koyré's striking conclusion here. In describing 'the
constitution of time or more accurately the self-constitution of the
concept of time', Hegel does not envisage:

94

an analysis of the idea of time, an abstract idea of an abstract time,
of the time we find in physics, Newtonian time, Kantian time, the
strictly linear []{#calibre_link-230 .calibre10}time of formulae and of
watches. Something else is in question here. Time itself is in question,
along with the mental reality of time. This time does not flow in a
uniform way, nor is it a homogeneous medium through which we would
ourselves flow; it is neither the number of movement nor the order of
phenomena. It is enrichment, life, and victory. It is itself mind and
concept.

Here we glimpse the superimposition of concept and life, of thought and
time. Were we able to make beautiful temporal figures from our psychic
activity, if we could in other words [really consolidate ]{.i1}the
temporal structures of the mind, there is no doubt that we would ease
that Hegelian disquiet born at the level of mental time with the
awareness of how difficult it is to remain at this level. This disquiet
does not have its roots in life, for submission to life at a lower
level, to the flimsy continuities of instincts, would at once erase it
and would give us that lower form of repose in which we cannot remain
when once we have left it. It is indeed the prerogative of thought to
ease this disquiet and grant us true repose. Our sense of a duty to seek
the higher, rare and pure rhythms of mental life is therefore
reinforced.

[III]{.b}

We shall therefore try to explore superimposed times psychologically.
Simply because they do not have the same principles of sequence, thought
time and lived time cannot be postulated as being naturally synchronous.
There is a kind of vertical relativity that gives pluralism to mental
coincidences and that is different from the physical relativity which
develops at the level where there is the passage of things. It is very
hard to define this cohesion of coincidences but a number of
psychologists do have some inkling of it. Thus, Alexandre Marc writes
that:

95

Pragmatists are apt to proclaim the primacy of action while in reality
subordinating action to the category of the useful, or else---which
amounts to the same thing---reducing the person to life alone. From this
point of view, no [essential ]{.i}distinction can be established between
humans and animals. Now, what is in fact missing in animal 'action' is
this possibility of 'deepening', this ability to make breaks and to
oppose, in a word this [vertical ]{.i}dimension---which is also the
dimension of the intellect---that []{#calibre_link-295
.calibre10}appears as both the particular attribute of humans and the
indelible quality of the real present: [even 'in' time, humans remain
upright]{.i}.^[3](#calibre_link-149){#calibre_link-158 .calibre10}^

This line running perpendicular to the temporal axis of life alone in
fact gives consciousness of the present the means to flee and escape, to
expand and deepen which have very often led to the present instant being
likened to an eternity.^[4](#calibre_link-150){#calibre_link-159
.calibre10}^

Work by Straus and Gebsattel, to which Minkowski has so effectively
drawn attention, clearly shows certain consequences of this temporal
superimposition. Basing himself on Höningswald's distinction between
immanent time and transitive time, or more simply between the time of
the self and the time of the world, Minkowski establishes the duality of
sequences as well as the very variable relations of dependence going
from one time to the other. Even in normal life:

there may be discord between them. Sometimes the time of the self seems
to go faster than the time of the world and we have the impression that
time is passing quickly, life smiles at us and we are full of joy;
sometimes on the contrary the time of the self seems to run more slowly
than that of the world, time therefore drags on forever, we are gloomy
and world-weariness takes hold of
us.^[5](#calibre_link-151){#calibre_link-160 .calibre10}^

96

Were we to see this as but a trite analysis of the feeling of languor
that makes us 'find time too long', we would not have fully grasped
Minkowski's intuition. We are not in fact dealing with an [illusion
]{.i1}here but with a psychological reality evident in the analysis of
pathological cases. Thus, in some states of endogenous depression:

the contrast between the two modes of time becomes striking. Here,
immanent time seems to go markedly more slowly and even to stop, and
this modification of temporal structure comes to be inserted between on
the one hand the underlying biological disturbance and on the other the
current clinical symptoms; in Straus's view, this modification is the
direct consequence of the biological disturbance, which here consists of
an inhibition.

It seems that in some way, such patients are disconnecting. They make a
perpendicular escape from the duration of the world. In order to set
immanent time in motion, particular rhythms of transitive time are then
needed. The case of a woman patient of Straus's is very instructive in
[]{#calibre_link-318 .calibre4}this respect, for she 'only felt time
move forward when she was doing her knitting'.

[IV]{.b}

97

Let us now offer an example of superimposed time taken from our own
experience; it comes from a dream in whose structure we can distinguish
between the different kinds of superimposed time and the parts they each
play. I had bought a house, and I fell asleep one night thinking of some
of the things still to be done. In my dream, my continuing worries meant
that I met the owner of my old home. I took the chance therefore of
telling him about my new acquisition. I spoke kindly as I was about to
give him a piece of bad news; could anyone fail to regret the loss of a
philosopher-tenant, one who is ever content and uncomplaining, who
combines all the integrity of a moral principle with a hermit's
frugality! Then slowly, and with a skill that revealed the striking
continuity of capitalist time within me, of which I was entirely
unaware, I suggested to my landlord all the many ways in which we might
mutually agree to end the contract binding us. I spoke at some length,
with sweet words of courtesy and persuasion. My little speech was well
organised: the fact that my aim was clear meant that my arguments were
produced at exactly the right moment. Suddenly, I looked at the person
to whom I was speaking; he was now listening to me very calmly, and he
was not my landlord. He had certainly been my landlord to begin with,
this I realised through some strange kind of recurrence; he had then
been my landlord in his younger days, and afterwards had turned into
someone progressively more different until I suddenly realised that I
was telling all this to a complete stranger. This piece of bungling on
my part annoyed me so much that I flew into a temper over this fresh
evidence of my absentmindedness and of the temporal discords that I had
allowed to occur within me as a result of my having 'super-imposed
time'. I was awoken by the anger that so often, in our dreams, disrupts
and shatters time.

Do we need any further proof that verbal time and visual time are in
fact only superimposed and that, in all our dreams, they are independent
of each other? Visual time passes more swiftly, and it is for this
reason that they fall out of step. Had I been able not only to free
myself of my financial worries but also to speed up what I was saying, I
would have maintained complete synchronism with what was happening
visually. []{#calibre_link-319 .calibre4}Dreams are indeed extremely
changeable horizontally, that is to say along the plane of the normal,
everyday incidents of life, yet even so, my dream would at least have
retained its vertical coherence, that is to say the form of normal,
everyday coincidence. In my conversation with the stranger who took my
landlord's place, I would have chosen words which were
[appropriate]{.i1}. I would not have [continued with ]{.i1}my story: I
would have [modified ]{.i1}my confidence the moment my confidant began
to change.

98

If we agree to analyse complex dreams from the standpoint of these
differences in temporal rate, we shall see that there is much to be
gained from the concept of superimposed time. Many dreams will seem
incoherent simply because there is a sudden, instantaneous loss of
co-ordination between the different times that we are experiencing. It
would appear that when we sleep, our different nerve centres pursue
their own autonomous development and that they are in effect time
detectors, each with its independent rhythm. Let us say in passing that
these isolated detectors are particularly sensitive to temporal
parasites. Indeed, often in the peaceful repose sleep brings I have the
feeling that parts of my brain are crackling, as if the cells were
exploding or some kind of partial death were rehearsing its disasters.
If we consider time in the context of cellular activity, we must see
that it is closer to the time of a moth or an amoeba, any coincidences
there being exceptional. When like a beehive, the whole of our brain
comes to life; it is statistical time that restores both regularity and
slowness. Moreover in waking life, reality offers grounds for agreement.
Reality makes what we see wait for what we say, and as a result of this
we have objectively coherent thought, a simple super-imposition of two
terms which mutually confirm one another and usually suffice to give an
impression of objectivity. We then say what we see; we think what we
say: time is truly vertical and yet it also flows along its horizontal
course, bearing with it the different forms of our psychic duration, all
according to the same rhythm. Dreaming is the very reverse of this, for
it disengages these different kinds of superimposed time.

[V]{.b}

We have probably now adduced sufficient evidence, evidence drawn
moreover from sufficiently heterogeneous sources, to have some kind
[]{#calibre_link-290 .calibre4}of certainty that with this temporal
superimposition, we are touching upon a natural problem. Let us suggest
then how we personally would wish to direct research in order to solve
this particular problem.

99

The temporal axis that lies perpendicular to transitive time, to the
time of the world and of matter, is an axis along which the self can
develop a formal activity. It can be explored if we free ourselves from
the matter that makes up the self and from the self's historical
experience, in order to consolidate and sustain aspects of the self
which are progressively more formal, and which are indeed the truly
philosophical experiences of that self. The most general and the most
metaphysical method of approach would be to build up tiers of different
kinds of cog ito. We shall return later to particular examples of this
that are closer to everyday psychology. Let us now turn without further
delay to this attempt to create a compound metaphysics, a compound
idealism, which will put in the place of [I think, therefore I am
]{.i1}the affirmation that [I think that I think, therefore I am]{.i1}.
We can see even now that [existence ]{.i1}as it is averred by the
[cogito cogitem ]{.i1}will be much more formal than existence as it is
implied by thought alone; if eventually we can manage to reveal what we
really are when we first establish ourselves in the [I think that I
think]{.i1}, we shall be less inclined to say that we are 'a thing which
doubts, understands, conceives, affirms, denies, wills, refuses, which
also imagines and feels'.^[6](#calibre_link-152){#calibre_link-161
.calibre10}^ We shall thus avoid settling into a phenomenal existence
which needs permanence in order to be confirmed. The Cartesian cogito is
necessarily discursive for it is entirely horizontal, and this fact has
been made abundantly clear by Teissier du Cros in an article that we
consider to be quite unusually profound. He argues that:

between the [I ]{.i}and the [am]{.i}, there is the relation of
affirmation and confirmation. Where the self is concerned, the judgement
of existence is, in the end, a [repetition]{.i}: if we take both of them
from the same standpoint, that of realities, and compare the specific
experience of the self with the specific experience of things, it will
be said to be the same thing as
this.^[7](#calibre_link-153){#calibre_link-162 .calibre10}^

If however we can rise to the [I think that I think]{.i1}, we shall
already be free of phenomenological description. If, continuing a little
further, we reach the [I think that I think that I think]{.i1}, which
will be denoted by (cogito)^[3](#calibre_link-149){.calibre10}^, then
separate, consecutive existences will appear in all their formalising
power. We have now embarked upon a noumenological []{#calibre_link-251
.calibre4}description which, with a little practice, will be shown to be
exactly summable in the present instant and which, by virtue of these
formal coincidences, offers us the very first adumbration of vertical
time.

100

What we are doing here is not in fact thinking ourselves thinking
[something]{.i1}, but rather thinking ourselves as [someone ]{.i1}who is
thinking. Indeed, with this formalising activity, we watch the person
being born. This formal personalisation takes place along an axis whose
direction is entirely opposite to substantial personality, the
personality that is supposedly original and deep, although in reality it
is encumbered and weighed down by passion and instinct, and imprisoned
by transitive time. Along the vertical axis we are suggesting, being is
made mind in accordance with the degree of its awareness of this formal
activity, of the power of the cogito it is using, and also of the
highest exponent of the compound cogito to which it can go in its
attempted liberation. Were we to overcome the difficulties surrounding
the first severance, and then reach for example
(cogito)^[3](#calibre_link-149){.calibre10}^ or
(cogito)^[4](#calibre_link-150){.calibre10}^, we should immediately
recognise the great value of this strictly tautological psychology in
which being is really and truly self-concerned, that is to say the value
of repose. Here, thought would rest upon itself alone. [I think the I
think ]{.i1}would become the [I think the I]{.i1}, this being synonymous
with [I am the I]{.i1}. This tautology is a guarantee of instantaneity.

It will however be asked in what way this sequence of forms can acquire
a specific temporal character. It can do so because it is a becoming.
This becoming is doubtless peripheral to the becoming of things and
independent of material becoming. Clearly then, this formal becoming
rises above and overhangs the present instant; it is latent in every
instant that we live; it can shoot up like a rocket, high above the
world and nature, high above ordinary psychic life. This latency is an
ordered succession. Any alteration in the order of the various tiers is
inconceivable. It is, we can be sure, a [dimension ]{.i1}of the mind.

101

Someone is bound to ask whether this dimension is infinite. To draw such
a conclusion would be to yield far too quickly to the seductions of
logic and grammar. We therefore refuse to go on lining up our
subjunctives indefinitely. In particular, we refuse to imitate those
writers who talk so vaguely about [knowledge of knowledge]{.i1} . . .
precisely because the subjective factor of formalisation is not always
clearly implicit in [knowledge of knowledge]{.i1} . . . , in
(knowledge)^n^. We ourselves have found it exceedingly difficult,
psychologically speaking, to attain to
(cogito)^[4](#calibre_link-150){.calibre10}^. We believe that the true
region of formal repose in which we would []{#calibre_link-281
.calibre4}gladly remain is that of
(cogito)^[3](#calibre_link-149){.calibre10}^. From the researches into
compound psychology which we shall be outlining later on, we shall see
that the power of three corresponds to a state that is sufficiently new
for us to have to exert ourselves considerably and for a long time there
before we can go beyond it and proceed with our construction.
(Cogito)^[3](#calibre_link-149){.calibre10}^ is the first really
unballasted state in which consciousness of formal life brings us a
special kind of happiness.

These different temporal levels can, in our view, be rather
schematically and crudely characterised by a number of different mental
causalities. Thus, we consider that if
(cogito)^[1](#calibre_link-147){.calibre10}^ is implied by efficient
causes, then (cogito)^[2](#calibre_link-148){.calibre10}^ can be
ascribed to final causes, since if we act with an end in view, then we
are acting with a thought in view while being at the same time conscious
that we are thinking that thought. Only with
(cogito)^[3](#calibre_link-149){.calibre10}^ will formal causality
appear in all its purity. This division into things, ends, and forms
will of course seem artificial to any linear psychology that seeks to
place all entities on the same level, making them part of a single
reality, beyond which there can only be dreams and illusions. Yet the
discursive, hierarchical idealism for which we are arguing is not
limited to this one realist point of
view.^[8](#calibre_link-154){#calibre_link-163 .calibre10}^ If we take
Schopenhauer's fundamental axiom as our starting point and say that the
world is my representation, then it seems acceptable to attribute ends
to the [representation of representation ]{.i1}while forms that are
constituted in those mental activities which imply both things and ends
must be attributed to the [representation of the representation of
representation]{.i1}. Psychologically speaking, if we follow the axis of
liberation and free ourselves of all things material, we shall then no
longer determine our own being by referring to things or even to
thoughts, but rather by reference to the form of a thought. The life of
the mind will become pure aesthetics.

102

Finally, the time of the person, vertical time, is plainly
discontinuous. Were we to attempt to describe the passage from one power
of the cogito to the next as a continuous process, we should realise
that we were placing it along the familiar axis of time, and by this we
mean vulgar time. This would lead to a complete misunderstanding of
temporal superimposition. We would be starting from the mistaken belief
that all psychological analysis is necessarily temporal, in other words
that all psychological description is historical, and that it is because
we are following the hands of the clock that we can successively
[think]{.i1}, then [think that we think]{.i1}, and then [think that we
think that we think]{.i1}. We would be []{#calibre_link-291
.calibre4}disregarding the principle of the fundamental instantaneity of
all well-ordered formalisations. If we take psychological coincidences
not simply in the instant but also in their hierarchical form, we shall
receive far more from them than potential linear development. We remain
entirely convinced that the mind thrusts far beyond the line of life.

103

Let us live temporally at the power of three, at the level of cogito
cubed. If this third state is examined temporally in relation to the
first state, that is to say in relation to transitive time, it will be
full of lacunae, broken up by great intervals of time. Here, quite
unmistakably, we have the dialectic of time. And once again, continuity
must be sought elsewhere, in life perhaps or perhaps in primary thought.
Yet life and primary thought are so devoid of interest for anyone grown
familiar with that formal state in which we seek repose from life and
thought that as a result, this purely material continuity will pass
unnoticed. What we need then is some kind of rational coherence to
replace material cohesion. In other words, if we wish a purely aesthetic
thought to be constituted, we must transcend the temporal dialectic by
means of forms, by means of the attraction of one form to another. Were
we to retain our ties with ordinary life and thought, this purely
aesthetic activity would be entirely fortuitous, lacking any coherence
or any 'duration'. In order that we may have duration at the third power
of the cogito we must therefore seek reasons for restoring the forms we
have glimpsed. This will come about only if we can teach ourselves to
formalise a wide variety of psychological attitudes. We shall now
outline some applications of this compound psychology, emphasising the
homogeneity of certain textures of time that are very full of lacunae.

[VI]{.b}

Let us first consider an intellectual attitude in which there are a
large number of periods of inhibition and few really positive actions.
Let us for example study the temporal texture of pretence and see that
this has already become detached from the continuous pattern of life:
pretence is already a temporal superimposition. Indeed, even when we
first consider it, we cannot but be struck by the fact that the texture
of pretence is full of lacunae. A continuous pretence cannot really be
imagined. Moreover, we must not exaggerate if we wish to pretend
successfully. The principle of necessary and sufficient reason is
carefully applied []{#calibre_link-321 .calibre4}when we pretend, with
the result that we try to balance inhibitions and actions. Pretence
curbs natural expansiveness and cuts it short; it obviously has less
density than a feeling that comes straight from the heart. Pretence is
no doubt inclined to make up for what it lacks in number by intensity.
It reinforces certain characteristics and increases susceptibilities. It
brings both invariability and inflexibility to attitudes that are
naturally more mobile and more flexible. In short, the temporal texture
of pretence is both full of lacunae and also uneven.

104

If we are to pretend successfully, we must indeed make what is
essentially discontinuous and disparate appear to be continuous. The
density and regularity of its temporal texture must be increased or, as
Dupréel would say, this texture must be consolidated. Acting
appropriately does not suffice for this to happen. It only leads us to
use circumstance, to constitute from the standpoint of worldly
convention and with the world's time an emotional form that cannot
really be described as psychologically 'consolidated'. Successful and
active pretence that is no longer fortuitous requires that it be
incorporated into the 'time of the self'. For it to be truly constituted
the following paradox must be resolved: pretence has to be attached to
the 'time of sincerity', to the time of the person almost to the point
when we are deceived by our own deception. It is in this way, in fact,
that some pretences at neurosis do in reality come about. More simply,
it is by attaching them to the 'time of the person' that we can pretend
to feel those false rushes of enthusiasm that sweep others along
synchronically with our dynamism. For lying to have its full effect, the
different kinds of personal time must as it were mesh with one another.
In the absence of this application on to our own rhythm, pretence cannot
be given dynamic conviction.

105

These observations may well seem both superficial and artificial. Where
the psychology of an attitude as precise as pretence is concerned,
people want psychologists to depict a particular kind of pretence and
not 'pretence in itself', and especially they want psychologists to
describe to them how truth is turned into falsity and also to let them
experience the ambiguity of meaning. We ourselves though are looking for
grounds for establishing an abstract psychology and thus in our view, it
is precisely because meaning is ambiguous that we can cut ourselves off
from it more effectively; pretence seems to us a good example of
abstract psychology, of psychology that is formal and artificial, in
which time will show itself to be an important characteristic. Indeed,
if we take away the double meaning of pretence and consider neither what
we are []{#calibre_link-339 .calibre4}pretending nor why we are
pretending, then what is left? Many things: there is still the order,
place, density, and regularity of instants in which the person who is
pretending decides to exaggerate nature. The schema of initiating acts
is all the more important here because it is artificial. The purely
temporal aspect of deceit must catch the attention of deceivers
themselves. Those who pretend must remember they are pretending. They
must feed their pretence. Nothing urges them on or forces them to act,
but they still know that it is once again time to pretend. Missing a
chance to pretend sometimes---not always---means that pretence is
shattered. However full of lacunae it may be, pretence would by virtue
of this partial forgetting lose its 'continuity', proving fairly clearly
that there can be 'continuity' without a real continuum. In the context
of the artificial feeling of pretence, continuity does not need the
entirely natural continuity of life that natural feelings have.

When we arrange all that can connect us to others in a close series,
when we carefully adapt to fit the time of other people and if at all
possible predict others' capriciousness, then all this does not require
that we and others share the same substance. Enabling us to share the
same time is now though one of interpsychology's main aims. Once this
synchronism has been achieved, that is to say when correspondence has
been established between two superimpositions of two different psyches,
we realise that here we have nearly all the substitutes for a sharing of
substance. The time of thought marks thought deeply. We may not perhaps
be thinking the same thing but we are thinking something [at the same
time]{.i1}. What an amazing union! All interpsychology ought first to
pose the problem of temporal correspondence and not take synchronism to
be an effect without discussing it. It is often a convention; it is
sometimes calculated; it can always be something that is well made and
economically organised. In any case, for artificial feelings, for all
feelings we pretend to have, the problem of synchronism is in our view a
primary one: time must not be allowed to destroy the work of time. Nor
indeed must time be forced.

106

With pretence, we have seen an attitude which is sustained in a time
full of lacunae and already very free of all the obligations of the time
of life, a time that is in a way superimposed on the time of life. To
give a better idea of our dialectical stance and of the importance of
inhibitions that intervene and refuse life's suggestions and
connections, let us ask ourselves whether we could by increasing the
actions of inhibition reach attitudes which are ever more full of
lacunae, in times []{#calibre_link-317 .calibre4}that are superimposed
on one another. Could we for example pretend to pretend, and if the
answer is yes, then what would be the temporal form corresponding to
pretence at pretence which we shall denote as
(pretence)^[2](#calibre_link-148){.calibre10}^?

It would not be difficult to find a good number of literary texts to
show that pretence at pretence has not escaped novelists' attention.
George Sand refers to it explicitly in chapter 13 of her [Horace]{.i1}.
We would find that it has left its mark on very many pages of
Dostoyevsky's work, to the extent that the question arises as to whether
his psychology is not a systematically 'compound' one, a psychology that
reflects back on itself and is made up of feelings which are raised to
'exponents'. We have only to reread [Crime and Punishment ]{.i1}in
particular to see many examples of
(pretence)^[2](#calibre_link-148){.calibre10}^, and if we agree to use
the schemas of temporal analysis suggested here we realise that these
schemas can bring out characteristic features. Thus,
(pretence)^[2](#calibre_link-148){.calibre10}^ will appear as much
fuller of lacunae than pretence pure and simple. This will be seen if we
make even the very slightest attempt at statistics and compare among the
instants of pretence those that go from
(pretence)^[1](#calibre_link-147){.calibre10}^ to
(pretence)^[2](#calibre_link-148){.calibre10}^.

107

Yet the problem is not of course just a problem of literary psychology.
In speaking to different people---to women especially---about the
pretence of pretence, we have been surprised at how quickly they
understood us. The question as to whether one can pretend to pretend
elicited the immediate response: but of course. On the contrary, as soon
as we asked the question whether you can pretend to pretend to pretend,
everything grew confused and brought on a kind of mental vertigo. Simply
because of this confusion,
(pretence)^[3](#calibre_link-149){.calibre10}^ poses an interesting
problem for compound psychology and temporal superimposition. However
hard it may in fact be to establish oneself in this very unstable state,
we believe that with a little experience it can be studied. We must not
of course put our trust in a purely verbal process and imagine it is
enough to give a name to a state for it to be known. For anyone who
thinks this can be done, it will be an easy matter to define
(pretences)^[4](#calibre_link-150){.calibre10}^,
(pretences)^[5](#calibre_link-151){.calibre10}^ and so on. In our own
personal experience, we have never really been able to go beyond
(pretence)^[3](#calibre_link-149){.calibre10}^. Pretences that go beyond
this seem to us to go through grammatical intermediaries that have no
psychological value. They cannot in our opinion become temporal in the
sense we shall shortly explain.

Having rejected states with too high an exponent, we must now respond to
objections we have come across from those who refuse to
[]{#calibre_link-337 .calibre4}accept the psychological reality of
psychology to the power of three.
(Pretence)^[3](#calibre_link-149){.calibre10}^ is often attacked using
the objection that since (pretence)^[2](#calibre_link-148){.calibre10}^
is already a return to what is natural,
(pretence)^[3](#calibre_link-149){.calibre10}^ is therefore just
pretence. Objections like these amount to psychology being associated
with logic. Pretence is seen as related to definite truths and two
negations are too quickly thought to make one affirmation. Once we have
freed ourselves from these automatic inversions and reached real
psychological inversions, then many interacting nuances appear and give
sufficient pretexts for diversity. We had only just finished giving a
lecture on (pretence)^[3](#calibre_link-149){.calibre10}^ when a number
of those present were kind enough to give us some interesting notes. One
set of notes from Mr. L. Thiblot seems so clear to us that we reproduce
it here without making any changes:

A first hypothesis. Simple pretence. A lecturer's class is boring me
stiff. But as I am keen for this lecturer to have a good opinion of me,
I simulate great attention while he is speaking. I hope he will be duped
by my pretence.

108

A second hypothesis. Pretence to the power of two. The lecturer's class
is boring me stiff and as I have reasons for wanting to be nasty to this
lecturer, I simulate such exaggerated attention and enthusiasm that he
is obliged to say to himself 'this is too good to be true; this student
is making fun of me!'. I therefore only pretend to pretend. I pretend
but hope the lecturer will not be duped by my pretence.

A third hypothesis. Pretence to the power of three. I am finding the
lecturer's class very interesting. Yet as I have had a bet with other
students that I shall be nasty to him, I want him to think his class is
of no interest to me. I use exactly the same means I have just described
in order to do this. I make the pretence of such exaggerated attention
and enthusiasm that he is obliged to take them by antiphrasis, as it
were. Here there is pretence to the power of three: I [give a semblance
]{.i}of working so as to [make a pretence ]{.i}of having a feeling (the
lack of interest is itself only a [sham]{.i}).

If moreover we consider the problem from a temporal point of view, we
shall see that the accusation of being merely logical artifice does not
hold water. Indeed two negations would make one affirmation if all the
first states were to be transposed. This would be the case if we only
had one temporal level, one single texture, with everywhere the same
continuity. But just as (pretence)^[2](#calibre_link-148){.calibre10}^
is more full of lacunae than
(pretence)^[1](#calibre_link-147){.calibre10}^, so
(pretence)^[3](#calibre_link-149){.calibre10}^ has even more lacunae
than (pretence)^[2](#calibre_link-148){.calibre10}^. In order for the
[]{#calibre_link-320 .calibre4}influence of the rare and chosen instant
to be fully understood, let us adopt a totally analytical approach that
should help us learn the art of pretending to pretend to pretend. Since
everyone has knowledge of pretence at pretence, let us entrust this
(pretence)^[2](#calibre_link-148){.calibre10}^ to speech and then ask
the eyes to take charge of
(pretence)^[3](#calibre_link-149){.calibre10}^. This they do, as they
wink or flash at the right moment. Here again we see the same temporal
dissociation, only this time deliberate, that we pointed out with regard
to a dream of ours. Superimposed times can each be consolidated by
particular kinds of behaviour in which different emotional processes may
be involved.

109

Lastly, those present at this lecture made other suggestions, most of
which amounted to bringing more and more speakers into play. We would
thus have the opportunity of varying our social times as much as we
wished, attaching a time to each distinct society. Every state of
pretending would be determined by one particular witness. A would not be
the same for B as for C or D. Temporal superimpositions would be easily
obtained but they would not really be in a hierarchy. Finally, we do not
accept those different pyramidal constructions that are all too easily
made; we ourselves return again to an entirely temporal superimposition
in which emotions that come into some kind of combination with each
other appear as real 'formalisations'. It is a process that can only be
fully clarified by real reflection in which form recognises its
independence from matter. Then the temporal schema truly marks the form
and appears as a characteristic aspect of the psychological element
envisaged.

[VII]{.b}

Many other psychological compositions could of course be studied: the
joy of joy, the love of love, the desire for desire, and many more
superimpositions too, a large number of examples of which could be found
in the contemporary philosophy of emotion. In particular, it seems to us
that a study of Paul Valéry's work from this standpoint would be
fruitful. Jean de Latour's fine book on him gives rethought values,
re-evaluated values, and re-formed forms their rightful
place.^[9](#calibre_link-155){#calibre_link-164 .calibre10}^ This truly
is the dynamic secret of Paul Valéry's active idealism.

110

In such psychological compositions, difficulties will again appear
starting from the power of three; we in fact attain pure idealism
starting from the power of three. Thus in
(love)^[3](#calibre_link-149){.calibre10}^ the ever fickle, the
systematically fickle pleasure of
(love)^[2](#calibre_link-148){.calibre10}^ is seen to disappear.
Moreover, this (love)^[2](#calibre_link-148){.calibre10}^
[]{#calibre_link-283 .calibre4}is still involved in varieties of
(love)^[1](#calibre_link-147){.calibre10}^. Adherence to the [object
]{.i1}only disappears with (love)^[3](#calibre_link-149){.calibre10}^
which is at last free and faithful, and the pure art of love.

111

Our task though is not to make a thorough study of exponential
psychology, and these brief notes are only intended as suggestions for
future work. What we would like to draw attention to in concluding this
discussion is the value for those conducting work of this kind of taking
temporal characteristics as their starting-point. This is where we
ourselves would begin such a study: it is obvious that attitudes at the
power of two are temporally more full of lacunae than are primary
attitudes. Generally speaking, when coefficients are raised we move into
times which are increasingly full of lacunae. We believe that despite
these increasing voids, a psyche can maintain itself in exponential
attitudes without being dependent on the primary psyche. [Idealised
times are therefore consistent without however having continuity]{.i1}.
This is one of the principal arguments of the philosophy of time that we
are proposing. It would no doubt seem simpler to postulate the
continuity of the primary attitude as being fundamental and to consider
escapes from this as like rockets which are separate from it, shooting
up from time to time along the length of natural development. But this
simplest of solutions is not ours. It does not take into account the
fact that some minds can maintain themselves in exponential thought, in
thought of thought for example and even in
(thought)^[3](#calibre_link-149){.calibre10}^. It therefore seems to us
that time in the second or third superimposition has its own grounds for
making a sequence. Everything we have already said about psychological
causalities being regarded as different from physiological causality
could be repeated here in order to prove that reasons and forms can
stabilise attitudes which do not really rest on any deep foundation. In
superimposed temporal developments we see that, if we examine the higher
lines of our mind, events that are very infrequent indeed do suffice to
sustain a mental life and to propagate a form. Unfortunately
psychologists have no interest in working in this field---'up in the
clouds', as malicious critics will say. Contemporary psychology prefers
to follow Freud in his acherontic explorations, seeking to feel thought
at the sources of life and from the standpoint of life's urgent flow.
Even though pure thought is revealed as clearly discontinuous while at
the same time remarkably homogeneous, psychologists still want the
psyche to be a form which is equivalent to life and always
contemporaneous with a development of life. And yet the more full of
lacunae a psyche is, the clearer it is; []{#calibre_link-231
.calibre4}the more concise its orders, the more they are obeyed. Times
that are truly active are times that have been emptied out in which
conditions of execution only appear as subordinate conditions. When we
have studied artificial psychology and exponential attitudes, we shall
see that the times of action are isolated and that their repetition is
not totally conditioned by execution but indeed first of all by higher
and more mental necessities. The coherence of reasons for acting will
determine the cohesion of real actions. Continuity at the higher levels
of time will become a metaphor. It will be all the clearer for this,
more thought-provoking too and finally more easily restored.

This admission that continuity is a metaphor should not, in our view, be
seen as an objection to our argument since this is in fact the case for
all durations. To prove this, we shall now study some of the most common
metaphors serving to depict the constant action of duration. We shall
see from these metaphors that continuity is always bound up with a point
of view, or in other words that it is purely and simply a metaphor.

[notes]{.b}

[1](#calibre_link-156){#calibre_link-147 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote: Lecomte du Nouy, [Le Temps et la vie ]{.i1}(Paris: Gallimard,
1936); see in particular chapter 9.

[2](#calibre_link-157){#calibre_link-148 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote (amended): A. Koyré, 'Hegel à Iéna', [Revue d'histoire et de
philosophie religieuses ]{.i1}(1935).

[3](#calibre_link-158){#calibre_link-149 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote (amended): A. Marc, '[Le Temps et la personne]{.i1}',
[Recherches philosophiques]{.i1}, 4 (1934--1935), 132; for information
regarding this journal, see chapter 5, note 3.

[4](#calibre_link-159){#calibre_link-150 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote (amended): cf. A. Rivaud, 'Remarques sur la durée', [Recherches
philosophiques]{.i1}, 3 (1933--1934), 19ff.

[5](#calibre_link-160){#calibre_link-151 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote: E. Minkowski, [Le Temps vécu ]{.i1}(Paris, 1933), p. 278.

[6](#calibre_link-161){#calibre_link-152 .calibre4}. Haldane and Ross,
[The Philosophical Works of Descartes ]{.i1}(New York, 1955), 1, p. 153.
Bachelard refers here to Descartes's [Méditation II]{.i1}.

[7](#calibre_link-162){#calibre_link-153 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote: Ch. Teissier du Cros, 'La Répétition, rythme de l'âme, et la
foi chrétienne', [Etudes théologiques et religieuses]{.i1} (Montpellier,
May 1935).

[8](#calibre_link-163){#calibre_link-154 .calibre4}. There is an
implicit reference here to Bachelard's article on discursive idealism,
'Idéalisme discursif', first published in [Recherches
philosophiques]{.i1}, 4 (1934--1935), 21--29, and subsequently published
in G. Bachelard, [Etudes ]{.i1}(Paris, 1970), pp. 87--97.

[9](#calibre_link-164){#calibre_link-155 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote (amended): J. de Latour, [Examen de Paul Valéry]{.i1} (Paris:
Gallimard, 1935).
:::

::: {#calibre_link-165 .calibre3}
[Chapter 7](#calibre_link-166){#calibre_link-12 .calibre4}

[[Metaphors of Duration](#calibre_link-166){.calibre4}]{.b}

[[]{#calibre_link-232 .calibre4}I]{.b}

112

If readers have followed our argument that connections between truly
active instants are always made at a level different from that at which
action is executed, they will not be far from concluding as we do that,
strictly speaking, duration is a [metaphor]{.i1}. This makes the ease of
illustration that is one of the charms of Bergson's philosophy much less
surprising. Indeed, it is not in the least surprising that metaphors can
be found that illustrate time if we make them the single connecting
factor in the most varied of domains, in life, music, thought, emotion,
and history. We think that by superimposing all these more or less
empty, more or less blank images, we can make contact with the fullness
of time and the [reality ]{.i1}of time; from a blank, abstract duration
in which just the possibilities of being would be found, lined up one
after the other, we think that we can move on to duration that is lived,
felt, loved, sung, and written about in literature. Let us again outline
these superimpositions: when duration is regarded as life, it is the
inseparability and organisation of a succession of functions---life when
continuously conscious of something is reverie---reverie itself is a
melody of the mind, its constituents paradoxically both free and merged
together. If we go on to add that in the same way melody 'can be
compared to a living being',^[1](#calibre_link-167){#calibre_link-182
.calibre10}^ we have created a whole family, an entire closed cycle of
metaphors that will constitute the language of continuity, the song and
indeed the lullaby of continuity. Tranquil duration, life that is well
balanced, music []{#calibre_link-301 .calibre4}that sweeps us along,
sweet reverie, clear and fruitful thought, all of these offer us
experiences 'proving' time to be continuous. These are all happy
experiences: duration is a synonym of happiness or at the very least,
the synonym of a possession, a gift. The clear fact of possession helps
to uphold the promise of duration.

113

There is just one snag in all this: no experience is self-sufficient; no
temporal experience is really pure. We need only look closely at any one
of the images of continuity and we shall always see the hatched lines of
discontinuity present there. These hatched lines cast a continuous
shadow only because of heterogeneities that have become blurred. This is
an argument that we have already put forward several times. We shall
give it a new direction here by examining one particular metaphor and
attempting to analyse the [density ]{.i1}of music and poetry. With music
for example, we shall have to show that what makes for continuity is
always a hidden dialectic evoking emotions with regard to impressions,
and memories with regard to sensations. In other words, we shall need to
prove that the continuum of melody and also that of poetry are emotional
reconstructions which come together beyond the real sensation, thanks to
emotion's vagueness and torpor and to the hotchpotch of memories and
hopes; as a result of this, they come together on very different levels
from the one we would be confined to by a scientific study of
contextures made of sound
alone.^[2](#calibre_link-168){#calibre_link-183 .calibre10}^

114

Let us first emphasise this reflux of impression flowing from the
present to the past and giving to rhythm, melody, and poetry the
continuity and life they lacked when first produced. A lapse of our
attention to melody would be enough to end this reflux. Successive notes
then no longer [sing ]{.i1}but remain in the qualitative and
quantitative discontinuity in which they are produced. Sensations are
not connected; it is our soul that connects them.

The continuity of the fabric of sound is so fragile that [a break in one
place sometimes causes a break in another]{.i1}. In other words, step by
step connection does not suffice; this partial connection is dependent
on a loose-knit association, on the continuity of the whole. We must in
fact [learn ]{.i1}the continuity of a melody. It is not [heard
]{.i1}straightaway, and it is often the recognition of a theme that
makes us aware of melodic continuity. Here as elsewhere, recognition
takes place before cognition. Lionel Landry has rightly said that 'a
rhythmic pattern does not take on its full qualitative value for the
person hearing it just once'.^[3](#calibre_link-169){#calibre_link-184
.calibre10}^ Initially when sounds []{#calibre_link-278 .calibre4}first
developed, temporal structure was not really [formed]{.i1}; the
causality of music was not yet established. Structure and causality were
postulated in the domain of possibility rather than in that of reality.
And everything remained disconnected and gratuitous. Then comes the
recurrence of impression, bringing formal causality. For a
metaphysician, this formal causality corresponds to that [qualitative
value ]{.i1}referred to by Landry.

115

This reform that does indeed give form can create symmetries in poetry
and music from a starting-point in subordinate dissymmetrical forms.
This is what Raoul de la Grasserie has noted: 'two lines follow each
other and I assume that within each of them, there is in the two halves
of the line an unequal number of syllables; if this inequality is
reproduced in the second line and in the same sense, then the same
rhythmic pattern will reform, [internal inequality ]{.i1}having now
become [external
equality]{.i1}'.^[4](#calibre_link-170){#calibre_link-185 .calibre10}^
In other words, the identity of the complex entity will transcend the
diversity of detail; something will in a way be completed by their
symmetry. It is thanks to the group that there will be continuity. Thus
poetry, or to be more general melody, [has duration ]{.i1}because it
[begins again]{.i1}. Melody duets dialectically with itself, losing
itself so that it can find itself again, knowing it will be absorbed in
its first theme.^[5](#calibre_link-171){#calibre_link-186 .calibre10}^
In this way then, it gives us not really duration but the illusion of
duration. In some respects, melody is a kind of temporal perfidy. While
it promised us development, it keeps us firmly within a state. It takes
us back to its beginning and in doing so, gives us the impression that
we ought to have predicted where it was going. Yet strictly speaking,
melody does not have a primary source, a central point from which it
spreads out. Its origin is revealed by recurrence and just like its
continuity, this origin is a composition.

116

If we now examine this dialectical deletion of the first theme, we shall
be persuaded that a [repeat ]{.i1}cannot really be seen as melodically
linked to the effect it first had on us. Between one refrain and the
next there is less than a latent memory, and less still than a very
particular expectation. Expectation is never as plainly negative as it
is in music, for it will in fact only become conscious expectation if
the phrase we have heard is repeated. We shall not remember having
expected it; we shall simply recognise that we ought to have expected
it. Thus, what gives melody its light, free continuity is this wholly
virtual expectation which is real only in retrospect, and just a risk to
be run, a possibility. As Maurice Ravel once said, 'comparisons with
architecture are absolutely pointless: there are rules for making a
building hold together but []{#calibre_link-279 .calibre4}none for
linking musical transitions'.^[6](#calibre_link-172){#calibre_link-187
.calibre10}^ In reality, this linking is upheld by extramusical
intermediaries, by emotional, dramatic, even literary values. Were we to
stem the flood of emotion accompanying melody, we would realise that
melody as just a sense datum would cease to flow. Continuity does not
belong to the melodic line itself. What gives this line consistency is
an emotion more vague and viscous than sensation is. Music's action is
discontinuous; it is our emotional resonance that gives it continuity.

Music's emotions are thus an attempt at a temporal synthesis, an attempt
which is never fully realised because music's causality is always
deferred, always systematically deferred. Its action is not one that
advances by degrees. Raoul de la Grasserie has clearly understood the
importance of this causal deferment which is fundamental to what he
calls [discordant harmony]{.i1}:

117

Harmony in music is not always achieved immediately; in modern music
especially, harmony is often delayed for a while so that it produces a
much greater effect after it has been waited for. A note is produced,
then another follows it; if we stopped there, there would be absolute
discord, music that is out of tune, and an absence of rhythm; the ear is
not yet injured but it is already anxious, it is in pain and feels
something similar to what at a lower level is the sensation of hunger.
Were this state to go on too long, exasperation would set in; the
musician acts in time though, producing the note that [resolves the
discord in a final chord]{.i}, in a harmony both desired and sought, and
because of this all the more
astonishing.^[7](#calibre_link-173){#calibre_link-188 .calibre10}^

We thus place drama above the sound, and the unity of this drama---a
unity we understand in retrospect---makes the melody flow backwards and
brings continuity to sensations first felt in their more or less
complete isolation. We then go over the whole page again, restoring the
finality of music that really does provide the only possible proof of
melodic causality; in this way we attain 'that special, purely musical
tranquility which transcends both heaviness of mind and also sleep; this
repose that music produces comes when disymmetries open elsewhere are
closed, made now into
symmetries'.^[8](#calibre_link-174){#calibre_link-189 .calibre10}^ To
sum up then, the impression of fullness and continuity given by music is
due to the mixture of feelings it evokes in us. Once we have observed
melody's exact relation to time, we realise that embroidery distorts the
canvas and that as a result of this, music is a metaphor which is often
misleading for a metaphysical study of duration. We shall be persuaded
that this is so if we now turn to consider the very perceptive studies
written by Maurice Emmanuel.

[II]{.b}

He is a technical expert who, in his book on the history of musical
language, has no hesitation in refusing to give primacy to techniques of
measurement, that is say to techniques relying simply and solely on
objective ways of measuring time. In his view, only what is written down
can be regarded as measurable, proving that precise duration is not the
essential [substance of music]{.i1}. Measurement was initially a
representation more to do with mnemonics than reality. In modern
techniques, measurement allows us to 'read and directly express rhythm's
movement and pace'.^[9](#calibre_link-175){#calibre_link-190
.calibre10}^ Metronomes are crude instruments, however. They are the
magnifying glasses with which weavers count the threads, not the looms
themselves. Metronomes do not even describe the fabric of time very
successfully. They cannot control the music that flows from inspiration,
new, fresh, ethereal, made only of movement. Emmanuel shows the
exaggerated role attributed to the bar line: we must, he says 'close the
door in its face when it seeks to enter the sanctuary of rhythm. Its job
is just a lowly one; it works like a metronome, regularly marking out
the way, and it has no right to claim it represents the landscape any
more than a milestone does' ([Histoire de la langue musicale]{.i1}, 2,
p. 442). He gives examples in which fine
anapaests^[10](#calibre_link-176){#calibre_link-191 .calibre10}^ are
'hacked to bits' by bar lines. In the present period itself, 'the bar
line, having become an indispensable aid to polyphony, does not in any
way indicate the rhythm, nor is it in any way linked to it; the
constituent parts of the rhythm only rarely correspond to the dividing
spaces of the bar lines' (p. 563).

[]{#calibre_link-324 .calibre10}118

In Lionel Landry's book which is so subtle and so very far from fixed
and preconceived ideas, the primacy and intransigence of the absolute
temporal framework is also rejected: 'the idea must also be dismissed
that there is a primary and indivisible time fundamental to every
rhythm. While it is true that rules are found in ancient prosody, we can
be sure that beyond the recognised exceptions there are to these rules,
variations in pace of delivery were enough to remove their absolute
value' ([La Sensibilité musicale]{.i1}, p. 25). In other words, the
temporal relation that gives rhythm a pattern can accept very many
deformations. []{#calibre_link-312 .calibre4}Moreover, were music a
matter of counting up different durations, making it therefore a
rigorous chronometry, we would find a new melody by moving backwards
through this collection of temporal fragments that have been very
carefully shared out. This idea could only occur to someone who
transcribes music. As Landry says, 'this proves . . . that the
spatialisation of the musical phrase is not natural, it is
irreversibility that the temporal flow of music seems to present to us:
for example, in fugue, while listeners may easily accept the [inversion
]{.i1}of a theme, they at the same time find [retrogression]{.i1}, the
retrograde movement heard in [canon
cancrizans]{.i1},^[11](#calibre_link-177){#calibre_link-192 .calibre10}^
artificial, academic, and only perceptible on paper' (p. 29).

119

Yet once rid of this regular, objective framework of measurement,
rhythmic movement will appear in a continuity that is more metaphorical
than real. Between rhythm's different movements, the dialectic will be
more free and the time of music will, as it develops, be affected by an
essential relativity. Thus, all the slow passages are [ad libitum]{.i1}.
They are more subjective than objective. Now, these slow passages are
important areas, areas in which deferred emotion is realised. They are
periods of melodic relaxation, and in the end there are far more of them
than the written page shows. A soul with some expertise in music feels
and lives this dialectic of regularity and freedom, of emotion which,
deferred and then realised, moves in a wave all along the melody.

120

If we now go into more detail here, we see that in music, the 'duration'
of a note is not the pure and obviously primary element that teachers of
music theory would have us believe. Maurice Emmanuel in fact notes that
'in principle . . . intensity is connected to length, in the sense that
when there are two unequal elements of duration, it is the longest that
is considered [loud]{.i1}. Length and loudness are related: in primary
rhythmics, this is a kind of necessity. In rhythmic versification,
loudness calls for length' ([Histoire de la langue musicale]{.i1}, 1, p.
526). Later, he writes that 'the principle set down by the Ancients was
still true in the fifteenth century and will remain so: it is that
unless there are particular indications or rules, the relationship
established between the duration and intensity of sounds is a direct
one' (2, p. 577). For our argument, the fact that this relationship is
direct deserves the very greatest attention since it clearly shows
intensity as giving duration, and duration as---once again---just a
consequence. The melting, fading, indistinct character of melodic
connections can thus be derived from the []{#calibre_link-289
.calibre4}momentum imparted by sounds. It is a kind of acoustic penumbra
that does not enter into the precise arithmetic of rhythm.

This interference of intensity and duration in melodic phenomena offers
an illustration of a theory put forward by Jean
Nogué.^[12](#calibre_link-178){#calibre_link-193 .calibre10}^ His theory
is based on an ingenious and penetrating study of the energetics of
sensation. It amounts to making a distinction in the development of a
sensation between correct breath control and the voice's outpouring; it
thus allows us to analyse a sensation's both static and dynamic
conditions. Were we to compare this analysis with Maurice Emmanuel's
discoveries, we would become aware of the way in which the voice takes
flight from a starting point in the instant of correct breathing. For it
to have duration, the voice needs a reserve of energy. This reserve
exists statically before it is expended dynamically. It must be grasped
in its initial value for its intensity to be truly measured; the
duration resulting from this gives a less accurate measurement of it.
The existence of this combination of intensity and duration proves at
the very least that duration is not a truly primary quality of music's
constituent parts.

121

This complexity will be clearer still if we become aware that with the
dialectic of the long and the short there is intertwined not just the
dialectic of the loud and the soft but also that of the high and the
low. The atomisation of melody can then be really understood. Lionel
Dauriac has carefully marked out the stages in this atomisation. He
starts with the 'dyad of the high and the low'. He first of all accepts
there is a [continuous ]{.i1}variation from the low to the high. The two
pitches will then be connected by 'an inclined plane'. Very soon though,
a child's voice playing up and down this 'inclined plane' will turn it
into a ladder. Indeed, as he says:

the day a sound that is true is produced in a child's throat, it can be
said that the outcome of this random playing of the vocal organ has
turned out to be real voice-training. What constitutes this training? It
consists of the production of atoms of sound which the new born baby's
developing attention separates out in the indefinite field of the low
and high. My reason for using the term 'atoms' will soon be understood
if it is borne in mind that a sound that is true always remains on the
same rung of the musical ladder as long as it lasts, and if it is also
remembered that qualitatively, musical sounds are resistant to any
variation in degree: however loud or soft the intensity we think they
have, a D or a E will always remain a D or an E as long as they
reverberate.^[13](#calibre_link-179){#calibre_link-194 .calibre10}^

[]{#calibre_link-308 .calibre4}At first sight, Dauriac's argument seems
to support those who favour a pre-existing continuity, and it will be
objected that atomising pitches and timbres is secondary and artificial.
However, if we consider this argument carefully, we must note that the
'continuity' which is postulated as being immediate is so ephemeral that
it cannot be made a framework for the construction of musical concepts.
And vice versa, atomisation takes place so early, it is so spontaneous
and so unlearned that in many respects it can be regarded as natural. As
Lionel Dauriac himself says, continuity is little more than the 'the
seat of confused and incoherent sonorities'.

122

Thus, if we take a melodic line that is as simple and even as possible,
we see the accumulation of principles of atomisation. It would be futile
to resist these principles of the phenomenism of sound and to go on
seeing the substance of melody in duration. In fact, melody does not
provide good metaphors for the psychology of time any more than life
does. It would instead give us a wrong idea of time, lending as it does
too many intrusive colours to rhythms constructed on the dialectic of
sound and silence. It will be better understood once we have made some
observations about rhythmic superimpositions.

[III]{.b}

Before discussing the essential relativism of rhythmic superimpositions,
we must again banish all habits of reference to absolute time. Here once
again, we shall argue the essentially secondary and pragmatic character
of measurement. Synchronism is not achieved by an accurate measurement
of the different durations but simply by the instantaneous signal given
when someone [beats time]{.i1}. Beating time is, in Expert's view, 'a
practical means of carrying out the most arduous superimpositions of
disparate rhythms'.^[14](#calibre_link-180){#calibre_link-195
.calibre10}^ It is specious to object that this itself obeys a simple
rhythm and that it claims to be bringing in an objective rule, valid for
all voices, that is to say a mathematical time with regular durations.
Indeed, beating time does not work like duration but like a signal. It
brings coincidences close together; it brings together the different
rhythms in instants that are always notable ones. Moreover, conductors'
actions are far more effective than would be the action of a
well-regulated mechanism. They are truly masters of movement and pace
rather than dispensers of pure duration. They manage not just duration
[]{#calibre_link-236 .calibre4}but breathing, and it is here that the
values of intensity take precedence over those of duration. Conductors
must often let the sound die away of itself rather than stifle it. They
measure the outpouring of the sound in terms of the physical control
that first produces it. They also overlay one register on another and
control rhythmic correlation.

123

Here we have an illustration of the paradox mentioned in our foreword to
this book. From the moment we refuse to allow ourselves any reference to
an absolute duration, we have to accept fully that [rhythms are overlaid
and interdependent]{.i1}. It would not indeed work if we took there to
be one fundamental rhythm to which all the instruments refer. The
different instruments in fact support each other and carry each other
along. The conductor's role is to make the instrumentalists more
conscious of their endeavours to correlate with each other.

Our impression of continuity and fullness stems from this correlation.
We do not really know whether it is the quick or the slow rhythm that
imparts momentum, precisely because it is co-operation that determines
this momentum. We cannot therefore really separate melody from harmony,
as Georges Urbain has shown in an article of great density and richness:
'melodic sequence', he writes, 'is completely dependent on harmonic
sequence'.^[15](#calibre_link-181){#calibre_link-196 .calibre10}^ There
is always something that [accompanies]{.i1}, that [upholds]{.i1}. Yet
this accompanying and upholding is as insubstantial as that which is
accompanied and upheld, and it is for this reason that Urbain's paradox
can be accepted: 'even when melody is unadorned, that is to say when it
is monody', he says, there has to be something underlying it and
carrying it along; 'harmony is then held to be implied'. It can be said
that when we listen to a melody that is as linear as it is possible to
be, we give it density, we [accompany ]{.i1}it. We cannot listen to it
as a whole without giving it an accompaniment. We cannot hear its
connectedness, its continuous duration, without this heterogeneous
summation of sound and soul.

124

Thus, we have once again come to the same conclusion: a homogenous
process cannot ever change. Only plurality can have duration, can
change, and can become. The becoming of a plurality is as polymorphous
as, despite all simplifications, that of a melody is polyphonous. The
duration of sound is dialectical in every direction, on the axis of
melody as on that of harmony, in intensity as in timbre. Musical
metaphors would therefore be far more suited to teaching us the
different dialectics of time than to giving us images of the continuity
of substance. For this to happen, all we have to do is not rush on to
[]{#calibre_link-313 .calibre4}totalisations made by our over-all
impressions but choose instead to live, without emotional viscosity, the
musical life that really is both full of movement and variation and also
free.

[IV]{.b}

The same conclusions could be reached were we approach the study of
poetic rhythms in the same analytical spirit. We shall content ourselves
with just a few observations in order to show that the rhythmics of
poetry gradually breaks away from ideas of measurement and is
arithmetised by grouping together notable instants rather by measuring
uniform durations.

Ideas of measurement do not appear to have come on the scene at the very
beginning. Raoul de la Grasserie has shown that the rhythm of sound
alone has come late in poetry. He sees the starting point of prosody as
the line:

which was entirely psychic and formed by the divisions of time between
which words, that is to say ideas, were distributed. At this point in
development . . . we have the prose of the Bible . . . (Later on), we
pass imperceptibly from the same number of words in each phrase, where
words are of different lengths, to the same number of syllables, and so
the [early form of the line]{.i}, the line produced by [counting
syllables]{.i}, was born ([De l'Elément psychique dans le rythme]{.i},
p. 24).

125

The important point for our argument is the primary character of the
[psychic ]{.i1}line in poetry and its inherent supremacy over objective
temporal value. We shall rediscover this psychic poetry, this soundless
poetry, if we are prepared to [think ]{.i1}the lines instead of scanning
them, above even our inner language, in the time of thought, a time that
is full of lacunae. We shall then become aware that continuity is
essentially dialectical, that it is the result of reconciling opposites
and that temporally, it is made up of shifts, movements towards the
future or back to the past.

Surrealist poetry would give good examples of this temporal dialectic,
this purely psychic rhythm. If it meets with the objections or
incomprehension of psychologists given to logical reasoning and also of
literary critics, this is because they seek to evaluate this kind of
[]{#calibre_link-261 .calibre4}poetry by imposing schemas of continuity
on it and do not accept the dialectical freedom on which it is
constructed. Beyond sonority and at the level of the new-born psyche,
silences may be brief or long. It does not matter which of these they
are: we can rest or react, we can allow an impression to fade or else
suddenly interrupt it with a different or contrary impression. Then
[poetic causality ]{.i1}will appear, in all its disconnectedness; it
reverberates for a long while from one centre to another, despite all
intermediaries; the waves of syllables are simply eddies. Being a poet
means multiplying the temporal dialectic and refusing the easy
continuity of sensation and deduction; it means refusing catagenic
repose and welcoming a repose that vibrates, a psyche that vibrates.

126

This thought poetry doubtless needs poetry that is spoken, in which the
echo will reveal the voice that lies deep; however, the rhythm we think
is our starting-point for organising the rhythm we hear, and not the
reverse. As for counting syllables, which is a kind of imprinted rhythm,
well, this cannot really be defended. To support our argument here, we
need only refer to Pius Servien's very interesting work in recent years
on the phenomena of poetic rhythm, work which is in some respects
related to Maurice Emmanuel's discoveries. Pius Servien has in fact
shown that measurement of duration was very far from forming the basis
of poetic rhythm. This measurement of duration would do no more than
support an artificial rhythm. As he says in his book [Les Rythmes comme
introduction physique à l'esthétique]{.i1}:

People have endeavoured to determine long and short syllables very
accurately by carefully analysing words, but they did not realise that
everything collapses like a house of cards as soon as speech breathes on
these fragile edifices. A word's long and short syllables [immediately
change form, according to the position of the word in the sentence and
the stress on it ]{.i}(p. 64).

True poetic rhythm is made by grouping tonalities together. It is
strengthening; it is intensity; duration is but a more or less faithful
consequence. To quote Servien, 'there is only one truly independent
rhythmics which rules all the others . . . As secondary rhythmics, that
is to say those rhythmics which are totally under the sway of tonic
rhythmics, we have timbre first of all and then the different
durations'.

A discontinuous Bergsonism could readily accept this [realisation
]{.i1}of tonic groups; however, rhythmic values would of course have to
retain []{#calibre_link-315 .calibre4}the discontinuity of impulses with
different intensities, since these discontinuities come together at a
very homogeneous level, that at which the phenomenon is observed, all
ideas of a deep and hidden life that offers us its fundamental continuum
having been abandoned. 'What it is important to measure', according to
Servien, 'is the vibration we really hear, and above all the [vibration
that is observed]{.i1}' (p. 27). Now, this does mean eliminating
differences that are ineffective, and it also means that the formal
cause has supremacy over the material cause. The sound that is produced
is nothing in comparison with the sound that is observed. Rhythm will
thus be constituted at a level of abstraction at which the mind will
very soon play an active role. Servien then makes this very general
definition:

127

Something can be a rhythmic factor if we can see in it groups of
elements with the following properties. Firstly, the elements of all the
groups are perceived as being of the same nature; if one of them draws
our attention, then our attention is led to be interested in all of
them. Secondly, the elements of the same group appear as equal, and
those of two different groups as unequal (p. 29).

At this level of abstraction, the precise position of events in a
uniform time loses much of its importance, and we realise that the
principle of frequency takes precedence over that of measurement. In
other words, the question 'how often?' comes before the question 'how
long?'. Were people to accuse us here of going in a vicious circle, the
objection being raised that in order to compare frequency we have to
have equal intervals, our answer would be that tolerance with regard to
'the equality' of intervals is so great that it undermines the whole
idea of measurement. Lyric poetry is analysed by looking at the
proportion of stressed and un-stressed syllables. When we count up like
this we forget duration.

We can understand how Pius Servien came to propose that this kind of
generalised rhythmics should be made the basis of all aesthetics. We
propose to make it the basis of all temporal metaphysics.

Let us then decide on the fundamental temporal principle of generalised
rhythmics: it is the restoration of form. A characteristic is rhythmic
if it is restored. It then has duration through an essential dialectic.

128

If a rhythm clearly determines a characteristic, it will often affect
related ones. In restoring a form, a rhythm often restores matter and
energy. For example, to quote Servien, 'as it ends, music brings repose
[]{#calibre_link-270 .calibre4}to the energies it has created. Usually
too, it carries into this repose most of the energies originating
elsewhere that it has captured and brought with it' (p. 45). A
philosophy of repose can never spend too long reflecting on this both
formal and occasionalist causality which gives us a very accurate idea
of how insistently time presses us. Rhythm really is the only way of
disciplining and preserving the most diverse of energies. Rhythm is the
basis of the dynamics of both life and the psyche. It is rhythm, not
melody---for melody is too complex---that can provide the real metaphors
of a dialectical philosophy of duration.

[notes]{.b}

[1](#calibre_link-182){#calibre_link-167 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote (amended): H. Bergson, [Essai sur les données immédiates de la
conscience ]{.i1}(Paris, 1889), p. 75. For Bergson's use of music as a
metaphor of duration here, see his discussion of 'concrete duration' in
chapter 2.

[2](#calibre_link-183){#calibre_link-168 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote (amended): Otto has noted the syncretism of Bergson's method,
stating that 'Bergson's fluid ideas are in reality the ideograms of
feelings and of religious and aesthetic intuitions. In taking them to be
scientific ideas, he is confusing ideas with experience, a confusion for
which Schiller took Goethe to task' ([Le Sacré]{.i1}, p.153). Bachelard
in fact quotes from the French translation of Rudolf Otto's book, its
full title being [Le Sacré, l'élément non-rationnel dans l'idée du divin
et sa relation avec le rationnel]{.i1}; the original text was published
in Munich in 1932.

[3](#calibre_link-184){#calibre_link-169 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote (amended): L. Landry, [La Sensibilité musicale, ses éléments,
sa formation ]{.i1}(Paris, 1927), p. 29.

[4](#calibre_link-185){#calibre_link-170 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote: R. de la Grasserie, [De l'Elément psychique dans le rythme
]{.i1}(Paris, 1892). It should be remembered here that traditionally,
French versification requires syllables to be counted, the Alexandrine
for example---used in classical theatre and much subsequent
verse---being a line of twelve syllables.

[5](#calibre_link-186){#calibre_link-171 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote: cf. G. Urbain, 'La Mélodie', [Journal de psychologie
]{.i1}(1926), 201. Georges Urbain takes it to be a principle that 'a
melodic movement always returns to its origin'.

[6](#calibre_link-187){#calibre_link-172 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote (amended): M. Ravel, [Courrier musical ]{.i1}(1 January 1910);
Bachelard states that he has taken this reference from Landry, [La
Sensibilité musicale]{.i1}, p. 185.

[7](#calibre_link-188){#calibre_link-173 .calibre4}. Bachelard gives no
page reference here.

[8](#calibre_link-189){#calibre_link-174 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote: P. Servien, [Les Rythmes comme introduction physique à
l'esthétique ]{.i1}(Paris, 1930), p. 45.

[]{#calibre_link-325 .calibre4}[9](#calibre_link-190){#calibre_link-175
.calibre4}. Bachelard's footnote (amended): M. Emmanuel, [Histoire de la
langue musicale ]{.i1}(published in two volumes, Paris, 1911), 1, p.
253. Maurice Emmanuel (1862--1938) was, like Bachelard, a native of
Bar-sur-Aube; a distinguished musician---composer, performer, scholar,
and writer---he was appointed to a Chair in the history of music created
for him at the Collège de France in 1898 but which was soon suppressed
due to a faction opposed to this discipline, Emmanuel then being obliged
to earn his living teaching music in a girls' [lycée]{.i1}.

[10](#calibre_link-191){#calibre_link-176 .calibre4}. In prosody, an
anapaest is a foot consisting of two short syllables and one long one (»
» -).

[11](#calibre_link-192){#calibre_link-177 .calibre4}. In [canon
cancrizans]{.i1}, which is sometimes referred to as both retrograde
canon and 'crab canon', the melody is given out backwards; the etymology
here is rather misleading, [cancrizans ]{.i1}being derived from the
Latin [cancer]{.i1}, the crab with its sideways movement.

[12](#calibre_link-193){#calibre_link-178 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote: a very succinct account of Jean Nogué's theory is found in his
excellent article 'Ordre et durée'[, Revue philosophique ]{.i1}(July
1932).

[13](#calibre_link-194){#calibre_link-179 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote: L. Dauriac, 'Sur l'origine commune du langage verbal et du
langage musical', [Journal de psychologie ]{.i1}(1932), p. 834.

[14](#calibre_link-195){#calibre_link-180 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote (amended): this reference is taken from M. Emmanuel, [Histoire
de la langue musicale]{.i1}, 2, p. 378.

[15](#calibre_link-196){#calibre_link-181 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote: [Journal de psychologie ]{.i1}(1926), 206. He does not give
the article's title or page references for his other quotations from it.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-197 .calibre3}
[Chapter 8](#calibre_link-198){#calibre_link-13 .calibre4}

[[Rhythmanalysis](#calibre_link-198){.calibre4}]{.b}

129

[]{#calibre_link-314 .calibre4}The very complex and varied studies by
Lucio Alberto Pinheiro dos Santos that we have been able to see are in
the form of a sequence of essays described by the author himself as
provisional and open to
revision.^[1](#calibre_link-199){#calibre_link-207 .calibre10}^ Our
intention is neither to give an overall view of these nor to describe
all the many lines of development here. We simply wish to decide on some
of his general themes and to examine the resonance these themes may have
for our own argument concerning the essentially dialectical durations
that are constructed on waves and rhythms. Were it to be as fully
expounded as it deserves, Pinheiro dos Santos's work would require a
sizeable book on it. It suggests experiments in many fields which should
tempt those looking for new ideas for their work.

[I]{.b}

130

Pinheiro dos Santos studies the phenomenology of rhythm from three
points of view: material, biological, and psychological. We shall only
outline what concerns the first two of these since in this short book,
our main interest is the foundations for the psychology of duration.

131

It is now one of the most important principles of modern physics that
matter is transformed into wave radiation and that conversely, wave
radiation is transformed into matter. Such an easily reversible
transformation must very naturally lead us to think that, in some
respects, []{#calibre_link-316 .calibre4}matter and radiation are
similar. This amounts to saying that like radiation, matter must have
wave and rhythmic characteristics. Matter is not spread out in space and
indifferent to time; it does not remain totally constant and totally
inert in a uniform duration. Nor indeed does it live there like
something that wears away and is dispersed. It is not just sensitive to
rhythms but it exists, in the fullest sense of the term, on the level of
rhythm. The time in which matter develops some of its fragile
manifestations is a time that undulates like a wave that has but one
uniform way of being: the regularity of its frequency. As soon as the
different substantial powers of matter are studied in their detail,
these powers present themselves as frequencies. In particular, as soon
as we get down to the detail of exchanges of energy between different
kinds of chemical matter, these exchanges are seen to take place in a
rhythmic way, through the indispensable intermediary of radiations with
specific frequencies. Energy that is looked at very generally may no
doubt appear to lose its rhythms, letting go of what it has of
undulating, wave time; it is thus seen as an overall result, as an
overview in which time itself has lost its wave structure. We pay for
electricity by the kilowatt-hour and for coal by the hundred-weight, yet
we are nonetheless both lit and heated by vibrations. Forms of energy
which are still more constant must not delude us. The kinetic theory of
gases has taught us that a gas enclosed within a pump maintains the
piston at an invariable level through a large number of irregular
collisions. It would doubtless not be contradictory that a temporal
accord between these collisions might come about, with the piston
jumping simply as the effect of these synchronised collisions and
without there being any macroscopic reason for it. Physicists have
confidence though: the law of large numbers [preserves ]{.i1}its
phenomena; the chances of there being a temporal accord between
collisions have negligible probability. In a similar way, a kinetic
theory of solids would show us that the most stable patterns owe their
stability to rhythmic discord. They are the statistical patterns of a
temporal disorder, and nothing more than this. Our houses are built with
an anarchy of vibrations. We walk on an anarchy of vibrations. We sit
down on an anarchy of vibrations. The pyramids of Egypt, whose function
is to contemplate the unchanging centuries, are endless cacophonies. A
magician who as the conductor of the orchestra of matter could bring
material rhythms together, would make all these stones vanish into thin
air. The fundamental nature of rhythm for matter is clearly shown by
this possibility of there being a purely temporal []{#calibre_link-276
.calibre4}explosion, due solely to an action that synchronises the
superimposed times of the different elements.

132

Were we to tackle the problem with regard to a particular particle, our
conclusion would be the same. If a particle ceased to vibrate, it would
cease to be. It is now impossible to conceive the existence of an
element of matter without adding to that element a specific frequency.
We can therefore say that vibratory energy is the energy of existence.
Why then should we not have the right to place vibration at the heart of
time in its original form? We do so without any hesitation. For us, this
first form of time is time that vibrates. Matter exists in and only in a
time that vibrates, and it is because it rests on this time that it has
energy even in repose. We would therefore be forgetting a fundamental
characteristic if we were to take time to be a principle of
[uniformity]{.i1}. We must ascribe fundamental duality to time since the
duality inherent in vibration is its operative attribute. We now
understand why Pinheiro dos Santos has no hesitation in writing that
'matter and radiation exist only in and through rhythm' (volume 2,
section 1, p. 18). This is not, as is so often the case, a declaration
inspired by a mystique of rhythm; it really is a new intuition, firmly
based on the principles of modern wave physics.

This being so, the initial problem is not so much to ask how matter
vibrates as to ask how vibration can take on material aspects. The
theory of the relations between substance and time can therefore be seen
in a completely new metaphysical light: it should not be said that
substance develops and reveals itself in the form of rhythm, but rather
that it is [regular ]{.i1}rhythm which appears in the form of a
[specific ]{.i1}material attribute. The material aspect---with the
pseudo-riches of its irrationality---is but a confused aspect. Strictly
speaking, the material aspect is [realised confusion]{.i1}. Since
chemistry studies not [matter ]{.i1}but [pure substance]{.i1}, it will
sooner or later lead to the definition of the precise qualities of this
pure substance as temporal qualities, that is to say as qualities that
are wholly characterised by rhythms. In this connection, photochemistry
already suggests really new substances which bear the mark of vibrating
time. We can predict that chemists will soon produce substances with
space-time that has been made symmetrical and rhythmic. In other words,
the metaphysician wishing to establish intuitions that are in agreement
with current scientific needs must put symmetry-rhythmy in the place of
the doubly uniform space-time used in the era preceding de
Broglie.^[2](#calibre_link-200){#calibre_link-208 .calibre10}^

133

[]{#calibre_link-219 .calibre4}It is clear to us that realism does need
a metaphysical inversion for it to correspond to the principles of wave
materialism. This is a point to which we intend to return in another
book in which we shall be able to take all the scientific proof into
account. Nor shall we discuss here whether realism thus [inverted
]{.i1}is still strictly speaking realism. All we are doing for the
moment is outlining how rhythmanalysis has a basis in physics and
showing that this theory, which is really more biological and
psychological in fact, stems from a general metaphysical view.

[II]{.b}

We shall be equally brief with regard to Pinheiro dos Santos's proposal
of a wave biology. Referring to a large number of facts, drawn for the
most part from homeopathy, the author suggests a 'wave' interpretation,
that is to say the explanation of the action of substance by
substituting for substance a particular kind of radiation. Dilution,
which is always very great in homeopathy, in fact favours the vibrating
temporalisation of medical substances. This interpretation is plausible,
although it does not completely reject the traditional substantialist
interpretation. It would doubtless be necessary to set up experiments in
discrimination---for example, real medicinal interferences which are
conceived in a vibratory way---in order to legitimise fully the wave
form Pinheiro dos Santos suggests. Let us simply try to give a
metaphysical description of the two opposite and complementary points of
view of substance and rhythm.

134

The usual substantialist intuition is first of all contradicted in a way
by the existence of homeopathy. Indeed, for substantialist intuition in
its naive form, that is to say in its pure form, a substance acts in
proportion to its mass, up to a certain limit at least. It accepts that
there may be some very small doses, too much of which would produce
disturbances. It does not find it easy to accept the effectiveness of
the extreme dilutions used by homeopaths. As long as medical substances
are considered to be quantitative realities, it will not be easy to
understand the action of substance taking place in, so to speak,
[inverse ]{.i1}ratio to its quantity. In the same way, in a rational
approach to health-care, food substances are always held to be dependent
on an assessment of their weight. The human body is like a food store in
which no shelf must remain empty. We must take our daily dose of the
different food-stuffs that, matter for []{#calibre_link-220
.calibre4}matter, must come together again in the body's economy. Here
again, quantitative intuition is placed firmly in the foreground.

A psychoanalysis of the feeling of having could be undertaken at this
point. Jokes about homeopaths go down very well and this is doubtless
because of the predominant pleasure of possession, of possession that is
very clearly physical and material, that results from consciousness of
digesting and growing. It is against this major and immediate sense of
security given by the joy of swallowing that homeopathy and a wave
conception of healthcare must react. These theories concerning small
dosage do not just have the idea of substance against them but also the
obvious feeling of strength we get from possessing a substance, from
cherishing our reserves and our capital.

135

However, against this first reluctance to be convinced, let us accept
homeopathy and see how Pinheiro dos Santos interprets it
rhythmanalytically. He views assimilation as not so much an exchange of
substances but an exchange of energy; since energy in the detail of its
development cannot escape vibratory form, Pinheiro dos Santos proposes
the systematic introduction of radiation between the substance that is
swallowed and the substance that is assimilated. The phrase [assimilated
substance ]{.i1}has little meaning, in fact. If this is simply a matter
of storing something away, as in the case of adipose cells, then we are
not dealing with the anagenetic action of life. It is at the very moment
that substance is expended and destroyed that its action must be
understood. (We are not saying this should be at the moment that
substance is transformed, for wave materialism can postulate the
destruction of matter.) Now according to wave biology, it is not
possible for substance to act truly if it is not [temporalised ]{.i1}in
a vibratory form, following its destruction. When it is stored away, it
is shut into inert space. It only acts where it is, that is to say on
itself. In order to go beyond itself, it has to be propagated and it can
only be propagated in waves. External action is necessarily action that
vibrates. Moreover, the intervention of a wave will always be necessary
in order to awaken and activate a substance that has been stored away.
We must therefore always return to the period of activation in order to
understand the action of a food-stuff or a medicine.

Hence, therapeutic actions must be understood as going from rhythm to
rhythm rather than from thing to thing. Which vibrations do we normally
need? This question is vital, in the true sense of this word. Which
vibrations die away or are aroused? Which are those to be revived or
moderated? These are the therapeutic questions.

[]{#calibre_link-221 .calibre4}How though will this general view help to
explain homeopathy? It is because doses are ultra-diluted that medical
substances can propagate rhythms. In a massive form in fact, substance
would in a way absorb its own rhythms; it would start resonating with
itself, without fulfilling its role as a stimulus external to itself. It
would escape indispensable destruction and fail to play with
nothingness. It would reappropriate itself. Indeed, radiation physics
does show that substances act above all through what is on the surface
and that radiations from what lies deep are absorbed by radiant matter
itself. The dilution of homeopathic matter is thus a condition of its
vibratory action.

136

In a similar way, we can understand that the more delicate and rare are
the aromas and bouquets of food and wine, the more effectively they act
on our digestion. Indeed, these complex, fragile substances are easily
broken down or neutralised, and easily destroyed. Now, a substance that
goes back to nothingness causes radiation. 'The destructive wave' will
be especially penetrating and active here. The superficial epicureanism
for which smells and flavours do no more than whet the appetite must
therefore, in the light of the facts, be seen as very inadequate.
Pleasure has an effectiveness that goes far deeper. The question can be
raised as to whether an active rhythm-analytical theory of sensation
might not complete the traditional theory, wholly passive and receptive
as it is. Excitation would then be a resonance that would pair with
specific vibrations produced by the destruction of particular
substances. All digestive values would therefore have to be transmuted.
For a deep Epicureanism, ambrosia and heavenly distillations are primary
necessities. When they are carefully measured out, these marvellous
'tinctures' bring us the many rare and precious essences of the plant
world. They are the sources of an exhilarating kind of homeopathy and
they guide us towards a sense of enhanced life. This then is the
principle we should make fundamental to rhythmanalytical health: small
causes have great effects; small doses have great success. We might then
see the beginning of the art of micro-nutrition, if we may be allowed to
use such an ugly term which does however suggest a life so joyously
dematerialised! Before all else, the temporal characteristics of this
micro-nutrition must be revealed. With a micro-foodstuff, we take in
duration and rhythms rather than substance. Substance is but an
opportunity for becoming; pure essence is but time that truly vibrates.
We take it to be a fundamental principle that it is necessary to uphold
useful and normal rhythms, to help personal rhythms and those imposed by
nature to []{#calibre_link-222 .calibre4}harmonise, and to preserve the
symphony of hormones. We must never lose sight of the fact that all
exchanges take place through rhythms. Biological rhythmanalysis should
undertake the task of codifying all these rhythms and of giving
'symphonic' meaning to the organic and substantial totality.

137

If diluted substances have characteristic wave effects, then the direct
effect of certain waves can be very easily explained. These particular
radiations can be replacements for particular substances, and Pinheiro
dos Santos in fact suggests a theory of the reversibility of vibrations
and vitamins:

Some scientists, of whom Professor Centani is one . . . believe that
electric charges exist in vitamins; they thus consider these to be like
ions and explain their action by phenomena [which would be in biology
what radiations are in physics]{.i}. Rosenkeim and Webster have shown
that the action of ultraviolet radiation is similar to that of vitamin
D. Ultraviolet radiation produces photons with the same frequency as
those vitamin D can emit and which it has itself taken in from the sun
(1, section 1, p. 26).

We shall say in passing that there is consequently a rhythmanalytical
explanation for the medical action of certain insolated salts. Besides
this, the highly reversible character of radiation and substance can be
seen. It can therefore be maintained that certain chemical substances
bring the organism not a collection of specific qualities but a group of
rhythms or, as Pinheiro dos Santos has put it very well, a 'body of
photons'.

138

Moreover, there is nothing to prevent a homeopathic substance that has
taken the form of pure vibration from then being reconstituted in the
form of a substance. There is in fact complete reversibility from matter
to waves and from waves to matter. The role of micro-substance is
perhaps very simply to initiate natural biological vibrations. It can
also be explained that ultra-diluted doses are more completely preserved
than massive ones because they can be restored. We arrive at the paradox
that the infinitely small that is well structured and has clear rhythms
is less easily lost than crude, inert matter.

Indeed, Pinheiro dos Santos adds to this rhythmic theory of the
activities of substance an inverse hypothesis regarding the [concretion
]{.i1}of []{#calibre_link-331 .calibre4}certain rhythms. Such for
example is the curious hypothesis of the wave formation of toxins: do
some cells come to receive rhythms with dangerous frequencies? There is
then what he calls 'toxinic retention' (1, section 1, p. 1). Were toxins
not formed that concrefy^[3](#calibre_link-201){#calibre_link-209
.calibre10}^ and absorb harmful radiant energy, then a very minor
occurrence of illness would lead to death. There follows a whole
hypothesis regarding microbial relations which could form the basis of a
wave bacteriology and clarify many problems. However, although Pinheiro
dos Santos's explanation is coherent and rich, it cannot be seen to
suggest specific experiments which would allow us to decide between the
substantialist and the wave interpretation. Even so, it is in fact very
important that a wave translation of classical bacteriology is possible.

139

Moreover, whatever laboratories decide, it will still be to Pinheiro dos
Santos's credit that his thinking has shown the truly primordial
character of the vibration that is fundamental to life. If inert matter
has already come to terms with rhythms, then it is very certain that
through its material basis, life must have profoundly rhythmic
properties. It is however especially through emergence that the
rhythmanalytical needs of life's process are introduced. Life is
strictly contemporaneous with material transformations and impossible
without their unceasing help, without the interplay of assimilation and
disassimilation, and life must consequently pass through the medium of
wave energy. It is only when it is dealt with statistically and globally
that life seems to have temporal continuity and uniformity. From the
standpoint of the elementary transformations that give rise to it, life
is waves. In this respect, life is therefore directly dependent on
rhythmanalysis.

Besides this, if we remember that the different kinds of matter formed
by organic activity are especially complex and fragile, we shall come to
consider living matter as richer in timbres, more sensitive to echoes,
and more extravagant with resonance than inert matter is. Every threat
of destruction, every partial death that wrecks it, the whole area of
active nothingness tempting its being with a thousand intoxicating
prospects are all of them opportunities for oscillations. The same is
true where assimilation is concerned: every conquest of structure is
accompanied by the harmonisation of many rhythms. When life is
successful, it is made of well-ordered times; vertically, it is made of
superimposed and richly orchestrated instants; horizon tally, it is
linked to itself by the perfect cadence of successive instants that are
unified in their role. We shall moreover have a better sense of the
rhythmic movement of life if []{#calibre_link-302 .calibre4}we take it
at its summits and if we study, as we shall now do, the rhythm
analytical activity of the mind, that master of [arpeggio]{.i1}!

[III]{.b}

140

All we have said about the wave form that the emergence of life
necessarily takes could be repeated here, term for term. Indeed,
conscious life is a new emergence taking place in the conditions of
rarity, isolation, and unbinding that favour wave forms. In any process,
the less large the amount of energy involved, the clearer the wave form
of exchanges of energy. Of all the different energies of life, that of
the mind^[4](#calibre_link-202){#calibre_link-210 .calibre10}^ must
therefore be the closest to quantum and wave energy. It is a kind of
energy in which continuity and uniformity are highly exceptional and
artificial, the products of much work. The higher the psyche rises, the
greater its wave movement. When we pass from the material to the mental,
between matter and memory, it would be possible to set up a whole
research programme allowing us to take note of the importance of the
factor of repetition. Just as a heliotherapy that follows the principles
of rhythmanalysis will suggest alternating periods of pigmentation and
depigmentation, so a rhythmanalytical approach to teaching will
establish the systematic dialectic of remembering and forgetting. We
only know what we have forgotten and relearned seven times, according to
indulgent teachers, the good ones in fact. However, despite these
teachers' confidence in the natural reaction that prevents the mind from
becoming overloaded with knowledge it cannot assimilate, they have not
yet set about helping nature in this respect by contributing methods of
forgetting, of 'depigmentation'. Holidays are not enough. They are too
distant. They are not an integral part of the culture, of the school's
temporal texture. The rhythm of school life is thus completely
unbalanced; it runs counter to the elementary principles of a philosophy
of repose. We must introduce oscillation into the time of work itself.
Mathematics can be done to a metronome. This is a way of benefiting from
the oscillations of the mind's emergence.

141

We shall not however prolong this discussion of the increasingly obvious
wave character of the different kinds of emergence, but shall now pose a
particular problem that will show the full importance of rhythmanalysis.
This is the problem of the relations between psychoanalysis and
rhythmanalysis. More systematically than psychoanalysis
[]{#calibre_link-293 .calibre4}does, rhythmanalysis seeks motives of
duality for mental activity. It makes the same distinction between
unconscious tendencies and strivings for consciousness, but it achieves
a better balance than psycho analysis does between these tendencies
towards opposite poles, and of the psyche's two-directional movement.

Indeed, for Pinheiro dos Santos, people can suffer from being enslaved
to unconscious, confused rhythms which show a real lack of vibratory
structure. Above all though, they can suffer from consciousness of their
infidelity to the higher rhythms of the mind: as he says, 'human beings
know they can go beyond themselves' (2, section 1, p. 5), and they both
need to go beyond themselves and have a taste for doing so. Sublimation
is not some deep drive; it is a call. Art is not a poor substitute for
sexuality. On the contrary, sexuality is already an aesthetic tendency;
it is profoundly implicated in a set of aesthetic tendencies. Pinheiro
dos Santos bases his rhythmanalysis on creationist philosophy, on an
active sublimation of every tendency. It is the lack of active
sublimation, of sublimation with the power to draw us on, emergent and
positively creationist, that unbalances psychoanalytical ambivalence and
disturbs the interplay of psychic values. Not being able to [realise
]{.i1}an ideal love is certainly a cause of pain. Not being able to
[idealise ]{.i1}a love we have realised is another.

142

Here we reach the most difficult part of Pinheiro dos Santos's theory.
Let us therefore try to see how exactly creationism imposes waves of
affectivity on the psyche. Should living beings seek to leave their
present state and follow their own impetus, placing part of their power
and energy at risk, they will at once feel the need to turn back to
their acquired knowledge, back to a [support ]{.i1}that will ensure
their impetus, as has been well shown by Jean Nogué. If on the contrary
they remain at the level of what they have already acquired, then
straightaway the monotonous rhythms characteristic of this state, which
is closer to matter, tend increasingly to die away and the creationist
reaction appears as more necessary and at the same time easier. Without
this reaction, the becoming of living beings would decline into torpor.
All creative evolution which is understood not in the statistical
summary that is the evolution of species but in individuals, in young
individuals especially, must necessarily be in wave form. Evolution in
individuals is a tissue of successes and errors. The evolution of the
species gives us only the sum of successes which are more or less great,
more or less special, in which error is recorded in only its
teratological aspects. The function of []{#calibre_link-237
.calibre4}the individual is on the contrary to make mistakes. If we all
try out on ourselves the psychology of an attempt to create, an attempt
to innovate, then however modest this attempt, or especially in fact if
this attempt to create is modest, the accuracy of creationist wave
psychology will be apparent. Error cannot be continued without causing
harm. Success cannot be continued without risk and fragility. In its
detail, the evolution of individuals takes a wave form.

143

From a more specifically moral standpoint, Pinheiro dos Santos is aware
that repression is either liberated or corrected by cathartic method, as
Freud has shown. Freud's method, though, does not go far enough: it
forgets characteristics that rhythmanalysis will take great care to
introduce into cathartic method. Indeed, once the repressed event has
been brought to clear consciousness, it seems that for psychoanalytical
theory the patient will automatically get better, that this enlightened
consciousness will forgive the fault that long lay hidden, and that
unconscious 'remorse' will be stilled by conscious avowal. Yet is it not
to be feared that the painful process might start up again in the
unconscious? Is not this painful process, as Freud himself admits, a
dynamic disturbance, a disturbance of becoming rather than of a state?
In order to be safe from a repetition of neurosis, for which
interpretations are never in short supply, a clear system of inner
forgiveness must be prepared in consciousness. We can then hope that the
'scruple' will no longer be renewed. This systematic, conscious
forgiveness, set up in face of the automatic reflexes of a guilty
conscience and in opposition to the dangerous slope of harmful becoming,
must form the clear pole of the moral dialectic. As has often been said,
psychoanalysis has underestimated the conscious, rational life of the
mind. It has not seen the constant action of the mind that somehow or
other always gives form to the formless and can always interpret obscure
desires and instincts. Cathartic method will remain then a medical act,
carried out by a skilful and knowledgeable practitioner. It is an
'operation' that may be necessary in the case of neuroses and also in
the great misfortunes of criminal life. The morality that deals with
detail needs a more frequent and more flexible cathartic method. It is
dependent on a rhythmanalysis better suited than is psychoanalysis to
following the temptations that come like waves. Moreover, when we have
to attain a positive life, [inventing ]{.i1}good and not just doing it,
only rhythmanalysis can guide us. Rhythmanalysis alone takes account of
moral dualism, and Pinheiro dos Santos writes that 'the rhythmic balance
of moral inflexibility and []{#calibre_link-252
.calibre4}kind-heartedness is the law of love and its very expression'
(2, section 2, p. 12). More precisely, rhythmanalysis under the name of
the solidarity of couples has brought to light the fundamental motive of
moral duality. Since human egoism always comes back in the end to the
desire to appropriate [social ]{.i1}values, the seduction and conquest
of others remains the egoist's aim. The personality thus lives according
to the rhythm of conciliation and aggression 'that goes from one pole to
the other in the two contrary attitudes of the rhythm
[self-love---]{.i1}love of others' (2, section 2, p. 6). The ambiguity
of interpretations is perhaps nowhere more visible in the closeness of
its terms than in morality: all our moral acts have a dual aim. Morality
reacts on being. I respect in order to be respected. I love in order to
be loved. I do good in order to be happy. Comparison of the self and
others is the fundamental principle of all moral proof. Of all the
emotions, the moral emotion is most wave-like. Rhythmanalytical morality
sets out to regulate this wave-motion.

144

[IV]{.b}

Pinheiro dos Santos's lengthy discussions in his work have thus
furnished us with a number of examples of the essential polarity of
mental life that is fundamental to rhythmanalysis. In limiting ourselves
in this way, it is not possible to convey all the richness of his work.
The important point though is that we should give readers the feeling
that all life's endeavours are dialectised, that all mental activity is
a passage from one level to a higher one, and that every emergence has
to have something supporting it. Readers may find it quite easy to
accept all these polarities which are not new in philosophy, but they
will no doubt raise the following objection: how can a philosophy of
time result from these psychological and moral oppositions? Does it not
appear that duration has nothing at all to do with these problems and
that all these oppositions can be summed up by the old saying that
opposites attract?

145

We can answer these objections by referring to two kinds of cases in
which either the opposites confront one another in incontrovertible
hostility or else there is minimal disagreement between them. In the
first case, the duration of a state will in fact determine the intensity
of the opposite reaction. Politicians and teachers have often made this
observation, but it would benefit from being extended to all aspects of
life. It would then be recognised that any severe inhibition determines
[]{#calibre_link-297 .calibre4}accumulations of energy which must sooner
or later react. The duration of a reaction that follows a long-lasting
coercion is itself lengthened, hence the setting up of a rhythm that is
at one and the same time both powerful and slow.

Although it would be easy to develop this point, we shall not dwell on
it but shall simply ask those who criticise us to consider examples in
which the opposites are less distant from each other and less hostile
than those Pinheiro dos Santos examines. It will then appear that
between these two fairly close poles, hesitation---that indispensable
form of progress---behaves like an increasingly regular oscillation,
which synchronises more and more with precise temporal rhythms. Thus, is
it a matter of emotional ambivalence? Let us no longer look at
irrefutably passionate and dramatic emotions. Let us consider moods that
are just a little melancholy and full of fickle desires; let us
consider, so to speak, temptations that do not tempt, scorn that is
indulgent, kind refusal, verbal joy . . . and we shall see time begin to
oscillate, all its seconds slightly contradicting and colouring each
other, either dull or brilliant. Opposites unite together and then part,
only to unite again, as we see in Verlaine's famous line: 'Melancholy
waltz and languorous vertigo'.

Such is the minor ambivalence in which we shall see rhythmanalysis come
into being. In these superficially unstable states, it is really time
that offers the appropriate analytical schema; when the dialectic of
consciousness and will is completely separated from interests and
usefulness, it tends to become temporal. There is so little reason for
[continuing ]{.i1}a state that the taste for breaking things off makes
itself clear. Time alone is in command in this sweet, free life:
everything twinkles and sparks.

146

If physical pain is sufficiently slight, it too comes within the
competence of rhythmanalysis. With a little practice, we can for example
make toothache vibrate. All we need do is calmly and attentively put it
into its proper perspective and avoid the general annoyance and
agitation that would [fill up ]{.i1}the intervals of the particular
pain. The throbbing of this local pain then acquires its regular rhythm.
Once this regularity has been accepted, it comes as a relief. Pain is
truly restored to its local aspect because its correct temporal aspect
has been fully determined.

Although we ourselves have found these detailed applications to be
effective, they do require quite considerable practice. They are really
only possible if the great natural rhythms upholding life have been
previously restored to their importance and regularised. Here,
respiration []{#calibre_link-334 .calibre4}takes precedence with its
slow, regular cadence which, once completely freed of all organic
worries, deeply marks our temporal confidence, the confidence we have in
the near future, our harmony with rhythmical
time.^[5](#calibre_link-203){#calibre_link-211 .calibre10}^

It is regularity of breathing that a philosophy of repose must endeavour
to achieve before all else. Indeed, rhythmanalysis concurs with the
teachings of Indian philosophy. Romain Rolland describes to us
Vivekananda's first lesson as follows:

147

Learn to breathe rhythmically, in a regular way, through each nostril
alternately, concentrating the mind on the nerve flow, on the centre.
Add a few words to respiratory rhythm in order that it be more clearly
emphasised, marked out, and directed. Let the whole body become
rhythmic! Thus are learned true mastery and true repose, and calmness of
both face and voice. Through rhythmic respiration everything in the
organism is gradually coordinated. All the body's molecules take the
same direction.^[6](#calibre_link-204){#calibre_link-212 .calibre10}^

In other words, because of their resonance regular rhythms reinforce
structural symmetries. We must also stress the advice that respiratory
rhythm be preserved by linking it to a slower vocal cadence. The very
great effectiveness of less frequent rhythms of this kind is from our
point of view essential. It shows that a low-pitched rhythm, with slow
beats, can uphold and determine one that is high-pitched and with much
greater frequency. Should one of life's quick rhythms be disturbed, it
can be set to rights by being placed within the framework of a slower
rhythm that is easier both to monitor and impose. This explains why
marching along to a very discontinuous tune, with a rallying beat every
two or three steps, is so beneficial for restoring calm and regularity
to respiration. Too rapidly realist a conclusion would instead see the
very opposite as effective, imagining that it is a rhythm with many
frequencies that carries the events of a slow rhythm, as though these
were additional incidents. But experience is conclusive: the mind
imposes its rule on life through very few but well-chosen actions, and
this is why an art of repose can be established when there is certainty
of well-distributed reference points.

We shall moreover find very many confirmations of this when we study,
from the standpoint of rhythmanalysis, the great sweeping rhythms that
mark human life. We scarcely need to remind readers of the importance
for a good and thoughtful life of living in accordance
[]{#calibre_link-344 .calibre4}with the day's pattern, with the regular
passing of the hours. Nor do we need to describe the very rhythmic
duration of those who work in the fields, living in harmony with the
seasons and shaping their land according to the rhythms of their
labours. The importance for us, from a physical point of view, of
adapting very strictly to plant rhythms has become increasingly evident
since the specificity of vitamins was discovered: strawberries, peaches,
and grapes have all of them their hour and are the occasion of physical
renewal, in harmony with spring or autumn. The calendar of fruit follows
the calendar of rhythmanalysis.

148

Rhythmanalysis will look anywhere and everywhere in order to discover
new opportunities for creating rhythms. It firmly believes that there is
a definite correspondence between natural rhythms, or alternatively that
they can easily be superimposed, one rhythm imparting momentum to
another. Rhythmanalysis forewarns us then of the dangers of living at
odds with such rhythms, and of failing to understand our fundamental
need for temporal dialectics.

[V]{.b}

We believe however that if human life is indeed placed in the framework
of these natural rhythms, what we are determining is happiness, not
thought. The mind needs a much closer pattern of reference points. If,
as we would argue, intellectual life is to become the dominant form of
life, physically speaking, with thought time prevailing over lived time,
then we must devote all our efforts to the quest for an active repose
that finds no satisfaction in what is freely bestowed by the hour and
the season. It would seem that for Pinheiro dos Santos this active,
vibrating repose corresponds to the lyric state. The Brazilian
philosopher has close knowledge of modern French literature, in
particular of Valéry and Claudel, whom he greatly admires. He submits to
each in turn, to the power and the rhetoric of Claudel's writing, and
then to the subtle ambiguities of Paul Valéry's thought. In Valéry, he
appreciates most of all the supreme art of the poet as, skilfully, he
disturbs our calm and calms our disturbance and moves from our heart to
our mind, only to return at once from mind to heart.

149

Yet Pinheiro dos Santos does not rest content with this rather coldly
intellectual interpretation of the lyric life. He prefers that lyricism
should continue to be regarded as a purely physical charm, a myth that
[]{#calibre_link-275 .calibre4}lulls us to sleep, a complex binding us
to our past, to our youth and its impetuosity. Indeed, he suggests a
lyric myth for rhythmanalysis which could well be called the Orpheus
complex. This complex would correspond to our first and fundamental need
to give pleasure and to offer solace; it would be revealed in the
caresses of tender sympathy, and characterised by the attitude in which
our being gains pleasure through the giving of pleasure, by the attitude
of making some kind of offering. The Orpheus complex would thus be the
antithesis of the Oedipus complex. Poetic interpretations of this
Orpheus complex may be seen in Rilke's orphic lyricism, as Félix Bertaux
has called it,^[7](#calibre_link-205){#calibre_link-213 .calibre10}^ a
lyricism which egotistically lives out an indeterminate love of others.
How very sweet it is to love anyone or anything, indiscriminately! How
delightful ever to live at the moment of falling in love, ever amidst
love's first rapturous declarations! This then is the basis of a theory
of formal pleasure which is the very opposite of the theory of that
immediately objective material pleasure, which in the Oedipus complex
binds the unfortunate child to the face that is first seen above the
cradle. Rhythmanalysis is the complete antithesis of psychoanalysis in
that it is a theory of childhood rediscovered, of childhood which
remains a possibility for us always, always opening a limitless future
to our dreams. It is interesting to note here that Pinheiro dos Santos
has, in an essay in which he takes issue with Freud's work on Leonardo
da Vinci, set out to explain this artist's creative genius in terms of
an eternal childhood. Creationism is in fact nothing other than the
process of growing perpetually younger, a method of systematic
wonderment that rediscovers a pair of wondering eyes with which to look
upon familiar sights. Every lyric state must originate in this truly
enthusiastic knowledge. The child is our master, as Pope once
said.^[8](#calibre_link-206){#calibre_link-214 .calibre10}^ Childhood is
the source of all our rhythms and it is in childhood that these rhythms
are creative and formative. Adults must be rhythmanalysed in order that
they may be restored to the discipline of that rhythmic activity to
which they owe their own youth and its development.

[VI]{.b}

150

We ourselves would prefer that the lyric state be subjected to some kind
of mental elaboration, thus setting ourselves at some distance from the
unconscious powers that imprison us in the Orpheus complex. We have,
[]{#calibre_link-332 .calibre4}for this reason, turned our attention to
the uppermost regions of superimposed time, to thought time, in our
search for the most clear-cut and therefore most invigorating of
dialectics. We have, for example, sought to experience all Valéry's
poetry in our own way by applying to these poems the structures implicit
in the dialectic of time. This may well be too abstract and too personal
an approach, suggested all too readily by habits bred of dry and dusty
philosophy. Yet we have discovered that as a result of using this
method, which in effect impoverishes, we can hear rare and precious
echoes; we have experienced in particular how the temporal structure
found in ambiguity can help us to intellectualise rhythms produced by
sound, and so enable us to [think ]{.i1}that poetry which will not
reveal all its charms when we confine ourselves to speaking or feeling
it. We have come to realise that it is the idea that sings its song,
that the complex interplay of ideas has its own tonality, a tonality
that can call forth deep within us all a faint, soft murmuring. If we
speak soundlessly and allow image to follow image in quick succession,
so that we are living at the meeting point, the point of
superimposition, of all the different interpretations, we understand the
nature of a truly mental, truly intellectual, lyric state. Reality is
enfolded and adorned by the rich garment of conditionals. In place of
the association of ideas there comes the ever possible dissociation of
interpretations. The mind takes pleasure in its refusal of all that it
once found unfailingly attractive: it discovers all the delights of
poetry in its destruction of poetry, as it contradicts the sweet spring
and resists all charming things. This, it must be said, is a highly
epicurean asceticism, since in this conditional form pleasure seems more
vibrant. Poetry is thus freed from the rules of habit, to become once
again the model of rhythmic life and thought that it used to be, and so
it offers us the best possible way of rhythmanalysing our mental life,
in order that the mind may regain its mastery of all the dialectics of
duration.

[notes]{.b}

[1](#calibre_link-207){#calibre_link-199 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote: L. Pinheiro dos Santos teaches philosophy at the University of
Porto in Brazil; the work referred to is [La Rythmanalyse]{.i1}, Société
de psychologie et de philosophie, Rio de Janeiro (1931). This work was
not published commercially and has not been traceable, despite the
efforts of many Bachelardian scholars over the years: it appears to have
been sent privately to []{#calibre_link-272 .calibre4}Bachelard. All his
quotations from Pinheiro dos Santos in this chapter are from this work.

[2](#calibre_link-208){#calibre_link-200 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
reference is to Prince Louis de Broglie, the founder of wave mechanics.

[3](#calibre_link-209){#calibre_link-201 .calibre4}. The word
'[concréfier]{.i1}' used here appears to be one of Bachelard's
neologisms, the sense of which should nevertheless be clear to the
reader.

[4](#calibre_link-210){#calibre_link-202 .calibre4}. Bachelard's phrase
'l'énergie spirituelle' implicitly refers to Bergson's collection of
studies entitled [L'Energie spirituelle ]{.i1}(Paris, 1919).

[5](#calibre_link-211){#calibre_link-203 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote: cf. Masson-Oursel, 'Les Doctrines indiennes de physiologie
mystique', [Journal de Psychologie ]{.i1}(1922), 322.

[6](#calibre_link-212){#calibre_link-204 .calibre4}. Bachelard's
footnote: R. Rolland, [La Vie de Ramakrishna]{.i1}, p. 295.

[7](#calibre_link-213){#calibre_link-205 .calibre4}. Félix Bertaux was a
Germanist and a contemporary of Bachelard's, who translated a number of
German writers and produced French-German dictionaries. Bachelard
probably refers here to Bertaux's book [Panorama de la littérature
allemande contemporaine ]{.i1}(Paris: KRA, 1928).

[8](#calibre_link-214){#calibre_link-206 .calibre4}. This appears to be
an imperfect recollection on Bachelard's part, this phrase being in fact
reminiscent of Wordsworth's 'The Child is Father of the Man' in his poem
'My heart leaps up when I behold'.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-215 .calibre3}
[[]{#calibre_link-380
.calibre4}[Index](#calibre_link-216){#calibre_link-14 .calibre4}]{.b}

action,
[61](#calibre_link-217){.calibre10}--[63](#calibre_link-218){.calibre10},
[126](#calibre_link-219){.calibre10}--[27](#calibre_link-220){.calibre10},
[128](#calibre_link-221){.calibre10},
[129](#calibre_link-222){.calibre10};

human, [39](#calibre_link-223){.calibre10},
[41](#calibre_link-224){.calibre10}--[42](#calibre_link-225){.calibre10},
[45](#calibre_link-226){.calibre10}--[54](#calibre_link-227){.calibre10},
[73](#calibre_link-228){.calibre10}--[74](#calibre_link-229){.calibre10},
[94](#calibre_link-230){.calibre10},
[108](#calibre_link-231){.calibre10},
[109](#calibre_link-232){.calibre10}.

[See also]{.i} skill

becoming,
[63](#calibre_link-218){.calibre10}--[65](#calibre_link-233){.calibre10},
[68](#calibre_link-234){.calibre10},
[92](#calibre_link-235){.calibre10},
[117](#calibre_link-236){.calibre10},
[133](#calibre_link-237){.calibre10}

behaviour, temporal, [42](#calibre_link-225){.calibre10},
[43](#calibre_link-238){.calibre10},
[44](#calibre_link-239){.calibre10}--[45](#calibre_link-226){.calibre10},
[46](#calibre_link-240){.calibre10},
[47](#calibre_link-241){.calibre10}--[51](#calibre_link-242){.calibre10},
[89](#calibre_link-243){.calibre10}

being, [19](#calibre_link-244){.calibre10},
[20](#calibre_link-245){.calibre10},
[21](#calibre_link-246){.calibre10},
[22](#calibre_link-247){.calibre10}--[23](#calibre_link-248){.calibre10},
[27](#calibre_link-249){.calibre10},
[31](#calibre_link-250){.calibre10},
[51](#calibre_link-242){.calibre10},
[99](#calibre_link-251){.calibre10},
[134](#calibre_link-252){.calibre10};

and becoming, [18](#calibre_link-253){.calibre10},
[27](#calibre_link-249){.calibre10},
[63](#calibre_link-218){.calibre10},
[99](#calibre_link-251){.calibre10},
[128](#calibre_link-221){.calibre10};

and time, [24](#calibre_link-254){.calibre10},
[27](#calibre_link-249){.calibre10},
[40](#calibre_link-255){.calibre10}.

[See also]{.i} nothingness

Bergson, Henri,
[15](#calibre_link-256){.calibre10}--[27](#calibre_link-249){.calibre10},
[29](#calibre_link-257){.calibre10},
[30](#calibre_link-258){.calibre10},
[46](#calibre_link-240){.calibre10},
[49](#calibre_link-259){.calibre10},
[58](#calibre_link-260){.calibre10},
[109](#calibre_link-232){.calibre10},
[119](#calibre_link-261){.calibre10};

being for,
[16](#calibre_link-262){.calibre10}--[20](#calibre_link-245){.calibre10};

continuity for,
[17](#calibre_link-263){.calibre10}--[20](#calibre_link-245){.calibre10},
[32](#calibre_link-264){.calibre10};

creative evolution for, [19](#calibre_link-244){.calibre10},
[82](#calibre_link-265){.calibre10};

dialectic for, [20](#calibre_link-245){.calibre10},
[34](#calibre_link-266){.calibre10},
[37n1](#calibre_link-267){.calibre10};

[Essai sur les données immédiates de la conscience,]{.i}
[55n6](#calibre_link-268){.calibre10},
[79n1](#calibre_link-269){.calibre10},
[121n1](#calibre_link-270){.calibre10};

free act for,
[19](#calibre_link-244){.calibre10}--[20](#calibre_link-245){.calibre10};

grace for, [79n1](#calibre_link-269){.calibre10};

intellect and instinct for, [15](#calibre_link-256){.calibre10},
[18](#calibre_link-253){.calibre10};

intuition for, [17](#calibre_link-263){.calibre10},
[32](#calibre_link-264){.calibre10},
[33](#calibre_link-271){.calibre10},
[34](#calibre_link-266){.calibre10};

[L'Energie spirituelle]{.i}, [140n4](#calibre_link-272){.calibre10};

[L'Evolution créatrice]{.i}, [21](#calibre_link-246){.calibre10},
[37n1](#calibre_link-267){.calibre10},
[68n1](#calibre_link-234){.calibre10};

[La Pensée et la mouvant]{.i}, [37n2](#calibre_link-267){.calibre10};

life for,
[15](#calibre_link-256){.calibre10}--[16](#calibre_link-262){.calibre10},
[18](#calibre_link-253){.calibre10}--[19](#calibre_link-244){.calibre10},
[30](#calibre_link-258){.calibre10};

life force for, [16](#calibre_link-262){.calibre10},
[18](#calibre_link-253){.calibre10},
[19](#calibre_link-244){.calibre10};

matter for, [30](#calibre_link-258){.calibre10};

nothingness for, [xii](#calibre_link-273){.calibre10},
[16](#calibre_link-262){.calibre10}--[20](#calibre_link-245){.calibre10},
[26](#calibre_link-274){.calibre10},
[37n1](#calibre_link-267){.calibre10};

possible and probable for, [17](#calibre_link-263){.calibre10};

succession for, [32](#calibre_link-264){.calibre10};

time for, [16](#calibre_link-262){.calibre10},
[33](#calibre_link-271){.calibre10}

Bertaux, Félix, [138](#calibre_link-275){.calibre10},
[140n7](#calibre_link-272){.calibre10}

biology, [92](#calibre_link-235){.calibre10}

Broglie, Louis de, [125](#calibre_link-276){.calibre10},
[140n2](#calibre_link-272){.calibre10}

causality, [47](#calibre_link-241){.calibre10},
[49](#calibre_link-259){.calibre10},
[57](#calibre_link-277){.calibre10}--[68](#calibre_link-234){.calibre10},
[111](#calibre_link-278){.calibre10},
[112](#calibre_link-279){.calibre10},
[119](#calibre_link-261){.calibre10},
[121](#calibre_link-270){.calibre10};

intellectual,
[71](#calibre_link-280){.calibre10}--[79](#calibre_link-269){.calibre10},
[92](#calibre_link-235){.calibre10};

mental, [100](#calibre_link-281){.calibre10};

physical,
[57](#calibre_link-277){.calibre10}--[68](#calibre_link-234){.calibre10};

psychological, [28](#calibre_link-282){.calibre10},
[42](#calibre_link-225){.calibre10},
[107](#calibre_link-283){.calibre10}

change, [48](#calibre_link-284){.calibre10},
[49](#calibre_link-259){.calibre10},
[64](#calibre_link-285){.calibre10},
[67](#calibre_link-286){.calibre10},
[91](#calibre_link-287){.calibre10},
[117](#calibre_link-236){.calibre10}

chemistry, [125](#calibre_link-276){.calibre10}

child, [84](#calibre_link-288){.calibre10},
[115](#calibre_link-289){.calibre10},
[138](#calibre_link-275){.calibre10}

[]{#calibre_link-381 .calibre10}cogito, Cartesian,
[98](#calibre_link-290){.calibre10}

cogito, compound,
[99](#calibre_link-251){.calibre10}--[101](#calibre_link-291){.calibre10}

consciousness, [78](#calibre_link-292){.calibre10},
[100](#calibre_link-281){.calibre10},
[132](#calibre_link-293){.calibre10};

of skill, [73](#calibre_link-228){.calibre10};

and time, [40](#calibre_link-255){.calibre10},
[44](#calibre_link-239){.calibre10},
[93](#calibre_link-294){.calibre10}, [95](#calibre_link-295){.calibre10}

consolidation, temporal,
[78](#calibre_link-292){.calibre10}--[79](#calibre_link-269){.calibre10},
[81](#calibre_link-296){.calibre10}--[89](#calibre_link-243){.calibre10},
[135](#calibre_link-297){.calibre10}

continuity, [29](#calibre_link-257){.calibre10},
[34](#calibre_link-266){.calibre10},
[36](#calibre_link-298){.calibre10},
[62](#calibre_link-299){.calibre10},
[68](#calibre_link-234){.calibre10},
[86](#calibre_link-300){.calibre10},
[91](#calibre_link-287){.calibre10},
[101](#calibre_link-291){.calibre10},
[110](#calibre_link-301){.calibre10}--[12](#calibre_link-279){.calibre10},
[117](#calibre_link-236){.calibre10}--[19](#calibre_link-261){.calibre10},
[131](#calibre_link-302){.calibre10};

as constructed, [xiii](#calibre_link-303){.calibre10},
[20](#calibre_link-245){.calibre10},
[47](#calibre_link-241){.calibre10};

as metaphor, [108](#calibre_link-231){.calibre10};

psychic, [xiii](#calibre_link-303){.calibre10};

temporal, [xiv](#calibre_link-304){.calibre10},
[16](#calibre_link-262){.calibre10},
[33](#calibre_link-271){.calibre10},
[64](#calibre_link-285){.calibre10},
[67](#calibre_link-286){.calibre10}, [92](#calibre_link-235){.calibre10}

Cournot, Antoine-Augustin,
[87](#calibre_link-305){.calibre10}--[88](#calibre_link-306){.calibre10},
[90n4](#calibre_link-307){.calibre10}

creationism,
[132](#calibre_link-293){.calibre10}--[33](#calibre_link-237){.calibre10},
[138](#calibre_link-275){.calibre10}

Dauriac, Lionel,
[115](#calibre_link-289){.calibre10}--[16](#calibre_link-308){.calibre10}

Descartes, René, [108n6](#calibre_link-231){.calibre10}

dialectic, [xiv](#calibre_link-304){.calibre10},
[25](#calibre_link-309){.calibre10},
[29](#calibre_link-257){.calibre10}--[30](#calibre_link-258){.calibre10},
[31](#calibre_link-250){.calibre10}--[32](#calibre_link-264){.calibre10},
[36](#calibre_link-298){.calibre10},
[40](#calibre_link-255){.calibre10},
[92](#calibre_link-235){.calibre10},
[93](#calibre_link-294){.calibre10},
[115](#calibre_link-289){.calibre10},
[131](#calibre_link-302){.calibre10},
[133](#calibre_link-237){.calibre10};

of being and nothingness, [17](#calibre_link-263){.calibre10},
[21](#calibre_link-246){.calibre10},
[22](#calibre_link-247){.calibre10},
[33](#calibre_link-271){.calibre10};

of being in duration, [xii](#calibre_link-273){.calibre10};

discontinuity of, [35](#calibre_link-310){.calibre10},
[66](#calibre_link-311){.calibre10},
[114](#calibre_link-312){.calibre10};

temporal, [117](#calibre_link-236){.calibre10},
[118](#calibre_link-313){.calibre10},
[123](#calibre_link-314){.calibre10}.

[See also]{.i} Bergson

discontinuity, [xii](#calibre_link-273){.calibre10},
[20](#calibre_link-245){.calibre10},
[25](#calibre_link-309){.calibre10},
[35](#calibre_link-310){.calibre10},
[36](#calibre_link-298){.calibre10},
[48](#calibre_link-284){.calibre10},
[57](#calibre_link-277){.calibre10},
[120](#calibre_link-315){.calibre10};

succession as, [32](#calibre_link-264){.calibre10};

of time, [34](#calibre_link-266){.calibre10},
[63](#calibre_link-218){.calibre10},
[110](#calibre_link-301){.calibre10}

disorder, [29](#calibre_link-257){.calibre10},
[35](#calibre_link-310){.calibre10},
[124](#calibre_link-316){.calibre10}.

[See also]{.i} order

Dostoyevsky, Fyodor, [104](#calibre_link-317){.calibre10}

dreams, superimposed time in,
[96](#calibre_link-318){.calibre10}--[97](#calibre_link-319){.calibre10},
[106](#calibre_link-320){.calibre10}

Dupréel, M., [79](#calibre_link-269){.calibre10},
[81](#calibre_link-296){.calibre10}--[89](#calibre_link-243){.calibre10},
[102](#calibre_link-321){.calibre10}

duration,
[xii](#calibre_link-273){.calibre10}--[iv](#calibre_link-304){.calibre10},
[28](#calibre_link-282){.calibre10}--[29](#calibre_link-257){.calibre10},
[34](#calibre_link-266){.calibre10}--[35](#calibre_link-310){.calibre10},
[40](#calibre_link-255){.calibre10}--[43](#calibre_link-238){.calibre10},
[47](#calibre_link-241){.calibre10},
[49](#calibre_link-259){.calibre10},
[53](#calibre_link-322){.calibre10},
[54](#calibre_link-227){.calibre10},
[58](#calibre_link-260){.calibre10},
[65](#calibre_link-233){.calibre10},
[86](#calibre_link-300){.calibre10},
[109](#calibre_link-232){.calibre10},
[134](#calibre_link-252){.calibre10}--[35](#calibre_link-297){.calibre10};

anagenic and catagenic, [45](#calibre_link-226){.calibre10},
[54n5](#calibre_link-227){.calibre10};

as constructed, made, [47](#calibre_link-241){.calibre10};

dialectical conception of, [40](#calibre_link-255){.calibre10},
[92](#calibre_link-235){.calibre10};

intellectual,
[71](#calibre_link-280){.calibre10}--[79](#calibre_link-269){.calibre10},
[82](#calibre_link-265){.calibre10};

knowledge of, [67](#calibre_link-286){.calibre10};

as metaphor, [108](#calibre_link-231){.calibre10},
[109](#calibre_link-232){.calibre10}--[21](#calibre_link-270){.calibre10};

physical,
[57](#calibre_link-277){.calibre10}--[68](#calibre_link-234){.calibre10},
[83](#calibre_link-323){.calibre10};

plurality of,
[36](#calibre_link-298){.calibre10}--[37](#calibre_link-267){.calibre10},
[64](#calibre_link-285){.calibre10};

and the will,
[45](#calibre_link-226){.calibre10}--[46](#calibre_link-240){.calibre10}.

[See also]{.i} Bergson; causality; memory; psychology

Emmanuel, Maurice, [xiv](#calibre_link-304){.calibre10},
[113](#calibre_link-324){.calibre10},
[115](#calibre_link-289){.calibre10},
[119](#calibre_link-261){.calibre10},
[122n9](#calibre_link-325){.calibre10},
[122n14](#calibre_link-325){.calibre10}

emotion, [46](#calibre_link-240){.calibre10},
[49](#calibre_link-259){.calibre10},
[102](#calibre_link-321){.calibre10},
[106](#calibre_link-320){.calibre10},
[110](#calibre_link-301){.calibre10},
[112](#calibre_link-279){.calibre10},
[118](#calibre_link-313){.calibre10},
[134](#calibre_link-252){.calibre10},
[135](#calibre_link-297){.calibre10}

error,
[65](#calibre_link-233){.calibre10}--[66](#calibre_link-311){.calibre10},
[73](#calibre_link-228){.calibre10},
[132](#calibre_link-293){.calibre10}--[33](#calibre_link-237){.calibre10}

evolution, [82](#calibre_link-265){.calibre10},
[85](#calibre_link-326){.calibre10},
[89](#calibre_link-243){.calibre10},
[132](#calibre_link-293){.calibre10}

existence, [98](#calibre_link-290){.calibre10},
[125](#calibre_link-276){.calibre10}

form, [61](#calibre_link-217){.calibre10},
[63](#calibre_link-218){.calibre10},
[85](#calibre_link-326){.calibre10}--[86](#calibre_link-300){.calibre10},
[98](#calibre_link-290){.calibre10}--[101](#calibre_link-291){.calibre10},
[120](#calibre_link-315){.calibre10},
[132](#calibre_link-293){.calibre10}

Freud, Sigmund, [107](#calibre_link-283){.calibre10},
[133](#calibre_link-237){.calibre10},
[138](#calibre_link-275){.calibre10}

Galileo, [24](#calibre_link-254){.calibre10}

grace, [73](#calibre_link-228){.calibre10},
[79n1](#calibre_link-269){.calibre10}

Grasserie, Raoul de la,
[111](#calibre_link-278){.calibre10}--[12](#calibre_link-279){.calibre10},
[118](#calibre_link-313){.calibre10},
[121n4](#calibre_link-270){.calibre10}

gravity, [61](#calibre_link-217){.calibre10}

Halbwachs, Maurice, [50](#calibre_link-327){.calibre10},
[55n7](#calibre_link-268){.calibre10}

Hegel, Georg Willhelm Friedrich, [37n5](#calibre_link-267){.calibre10},
[93](#calibre_link-294){.calibre10}--[94](#calibre_link-230){.calibre10},
[108n2](#calibre_link-231){.calibre10}

homeopathy,
[127](#calibre_link-220){.calibre10}--[29](#calibre_link-222){.calibre10}

Husserl, [90n3](#calibre_link-307){.calibre10}

'Idéalisme discursif', [90n3](#calibre_link-307){.calibre10},
[108n8](#calibre_link-231){.calibre10}

indeterminacy, [35](#calibre_link-310){.calibre10},
[66](#calibre_link-311){.calibre10}

instant, [27](#calibre_link-249){.calibre10},
[29](#calibre_link-257){.calibre10},
[33](#calibre_link-271){.calibre10},
[40](#calibre_link-255){.calibre10},
[43](#calibre_link-238){.calibre10},
[44](#calibre_link-239){.calibre10}--[45](#calibre_link-226){.calibre10},
[48](#calibre_link-284){.calibre10},
[50](#calibre_link-327){.calibre10},
[51](#calibre_link-242){.calibre10},
[99](#calibre_link-251){.calibre10},
[109](#calibre_link-232){.calibre10}

intellect, [45](#calibre_link-226){.calibre10},
[57](#calibre_link-277){.calibre10},
[85](#calibre_link-326){.calibre10}, [94](#calibre_link-230){.calibre10}

intensity, [46](#calibre_link-240){.calibre10},
[85](#calibre_link-326){.calibre10},
[114](#calibre_link-312){.calibre10}--[15](#calibre_link-289){.calibre10},
[120](#calibre_link-315){.calibre10},
[134](#calibre_link-252){.calibre10}

intuition, and intellect,
[21](#calibre_link-246){.calibre10}--[22](#calibre_link-247){.calibre10},
[40](#calibre_link-255){.calibre10},
[42](#calibre_link-225){.calibre10},
[57](#calibre_link-277){.calibre10},
[60](#calibre_link-328){.calibre10}, [91](#calibre_link-287){.calibre10}

[]{#calibre_link-382 .calibre10}Janet, Marie-Pierre-Félix,
[40](#calibre_link-255){.calibre10},
[42](#calibre_link-225){.calibre10},
[44](#calibre_link-239){.calibre10},
[45](#calibre_link-226){.calibre10},
[46](#calibre_link-240){.calibre10}--[47](#calibre_link-241){.calibre10},
[52](#calibre_link-329){.calibre10}--[53](#calibre_link-322){.calibre10}

Jankélévitch, Vladimir, [17](#calibre_link-263){.calibre10}

judgment, [24](#calibre_link-254){.calibre10},
[25](#calibre_link-309){.calibre10},
[26](#calibre_link-274){.calibre10}--[8](#calibre_link-282){.calibre10},
[43](#calibre_link-238){.calibre10},
[59](#calibre_link-330){.calibre10}, [98](#calibre_link-290){.calibre10}

Kant, Immanuel, [33](#calibre_link-271){.calibre10},
[59](#calibre_link-330){.calibre10}, [93](#calibre_link-294){.calibre10}

knowledge, [39](#calibre_link-223){.calibre10},
[50](#calibre_link-327){.calibre10},
[67](#calibre_link-286){.calibre10},
[82](#calibre_link-265){.calibre10},
[84](#calibre_link-288){.calibre10}--[85](#calibre_link-326){.calibre10},
[99](#calibre_link-251){.calibre10},
[131](#calibre_link-302){.calibre10},
[138](#calibre_link-275){.calibre10};

as polemic, [23](#calibre_link-248){.calibre10},
[24](#calibre_link-254){.calibre10}.

[See also]{.i} duration, knowledge of; time, knowledge of

Koyré, Alexandre, [37n5](#calibre_link-267){.calibre10},
[93](#calibre_link-294){.calibre10}--[94](#calibre_link-230){.calibre10},
[108n2](#calibre_link-231){.calibre10},

Landry, Lionel, [xiv](#calibre_link-304){.calibre10},
[110](#calibre_link-301){.calibre10}--[11](#calibre_link-278){.calibre10},
[113](#calibre_link-324){.calibre10}--[14](#calibre_link-312){.calibre10},
[121n3](#calibre_link-270){.calibre10}

life,
[30](#calibre_link-258){.calibre10}--[33](#calibre_link-271){.calibre10},
[82](#calibre_link-265){.calibre10},
[85](#calibre_link-326){.calibre10},
[88](#calibre_link-306){.calibre10}--[89](#calibre_link-243){.calibre10},
[120](#calibre_link-315){.calibre10},
[127](#calibre_link-220){.calibre10},
[130](#calibre_link-331){.calibre10}

and thought, [21](#calibre_link-246){.calibre10},
[28](#calibre_link-282){.calibre10},
[82](#calibre_link-265){.calibre10},
[83](#calibre_link-323){.calibre10},
[92](#calibre_link-235){.calibre10},
[94](#calibre_link-230){.calibre10}--[95](#calibre_link-295){.calibre10},
[101](#calibre_link-291){.calibre10},
[107](#calibre_link-283){.calibre10},
[131](#calibre_link-302){.calibre10},
[139](#calibre_link-332){.calibre10}

[L'Intuition de l'instant]{.i}, [xvin1](#calibre_link-333){.calibre10},
[xvin3](#calibre_link-333){.calibre10},
[68n1](#calibre_link-234){.calibre10}

Marc, Alexandre,
[94](#calibre_link-230){.calibre10}--[95](#calibre_link-295){.calibre10},
[108n3](#calibre_link-231){.calibre10}

matter,
[123](#calibre_link-314){.calibre10}--[25](#calibre_link-276){.calibre10},
[136](#calibre_link-334){.calibre10};

scientific knowledge of, [35](#calibre_link-310){.calibre10}

melody, [109](#calibre_link-232){.calibre10},
[110](#calibre_link-301){.calibre10}--[15](#calibre_link-289){.calibre10},
[116](#calibre_link-308){.calibre10},
[117](#calibre_link-236){.calibre10},
[121](#calibre_link-270){.calibre10}

memory, [16](#calibre_link-262){.calibre10},
[17](#calibre_link-263){.calibre10},
[33](#calibre_link-271){.calibre10},
[40](#calibre_link-255){.calibre10},
[41](#calibre_link-224){.calibre10}--[42](#calibre_link-225){.calibre10},
[49](#calibre_link-259){.calibre10}--[53](#calibre_link-322){.calibre10},
[76](#calibre_link-335){.calibre10},
[111](#calibre_link-278){.calibre10},
[131](#calibre_link-302){.calibre10}

metaphysics, [xi](#calibre_link-336){.calibre10},
[32](#calibre_link-264){.calibre10},
[35](#calibre_link-310){.calibre10},
[62](#calibre_link-299){.calibre10},
[76](#calibre_link-335){.calibre10},
[78](#calibre_link-292){.calibre10},
[81](#calibre_link-296){.calibre10},
[86](#calibre_link-300){.calibre10},
[93](#calibre_link-294){.calibre10},
[98](#calibre_link-290){.calibre10},
[120](#calibre_link-315){.calibre10}

microphysics, [65](#calibre_link-233){.calibre10}

Minkowski, Eugène, [95](#calibre_link-295){.calibre10},
[108n5](#calibre_link-231){.calibre10}

morality,
[133](#calibre_link-237){.calibre10}--[34](#calibre_link-252){.calibre10}

music, [91](#calibre_link-287){.calibre10},
[109](#calibre_link-232){.calibre10}--[16](#calibre_link-308){.calibre10},
[117](#calibre_link-236){.calibre10},
[120](#calibre_link-315){.calibre10};

as a metaphor, [112](#calibre_link-279){.calibre10},
[117](#calibre_link-236){.calibre10},
[121n1](#calibre_link-270){.calibre10}.

[See also]{.i} melody

negation,
[19](#calibre_link-244){.calibre10}--[20](#calibre_link-245){.calibre10},
[21](#calibre_link-246){.calibre10},
[24](#calibre_link-254){.calibre10}--[26](#calibre_link-274){.calibre10},
[28](#calibre_link-282){.calibre10},
[50](#calibre_link-327){.calibre10},
[58](#calibre_link-260){.calibre10}--[59](#calibre_link-330){.calibre10},
[105](#calibre_link-337){.calibre10}

Nogué, Jean, [115](#calibre_link-289){.calibre10},
[122n12](#calibre_link-325){.calibre10},
[132](#calibre_link-293){.calibre10}

nothingness, [15](#calibre_link-256){.calibre10},
[21](#calibre_link-246){.calibre10},
[26](#calibre_link-274){.calibre10},
[29](#calibre_link-257){.calibre10},
[30](#calibre_link-258){.calibre10},
[33](#calibre_link-271){.calibre10},
[34](#calibre_link-266){.calibre10},
[35](#calibre_link-310){.calibre10},
[36](#calibre_link-298){.calibre10},
[37n1](#calibre_link-267){.calibre10},
[41](#calibre_link-224){.calibre10},
[49](#calibre_link-259){.calibre10};

being and, [xiii](#calibre_link-303){.calibre10},
[16](#calibre_link-262){.calibre10}--[17](#calibre_link-263){.calibre10},
[19](#calibre_link-244){.calibre10},
[21](#calibre_link-246){.calibre10},
[22](#calibre_link-247){.calibre10},
[36](#calibre_link-298){.calibre10},
[93](#calibre_link-294){.calibre10}.

[See also]{.i} Bergson

Oedipus complex, [138](#calibre_link-275){.calibre10}

order, [27](#calibre_link-249){.calibre10},
[29](#calibre_link-257){.calibre10},
[61](#calibre_link-217){.calibre10},
[67](#calibre_link-286){.calibre10},
[83](#calibre_link-323){.calibre10}--[84](#calibre_link-288){.calibre10},
[99](#calibre_link-251){.calibre10}.

[See also]{.i} disorder

Orpheus complex, [138](#calibre_link-275){.calibre10}

physics, [35](#calibre_link-310){.calibre10},
[61](#calibre_link-217){.calibre10},
[63](#calibre_link-218){.calibre10}--[64](#calibre_link-285){.calibre10},
[65](#calibre_link-233){.calibre10},
[71](#calibre_link-280){.calibre10},
[91](#calibre_link-287){.calibre10}--[92](#calibre_link-235){.calibre10},
[93](#calibre_link-294){.calibre10},
[123](#calibre_link-314){.calibre10}--[25](#calibre_link-276){.calibre10},
[128](#calibre_link-221){.calibre10},
[129](#calibre_link-222){.calibre10}.

[See also]{.i} gravity; indeterminacy; microphysics; quantum; radiation;
relativity; stroboscopy; vibration; wave

Pinheiro dos Santos, Lucio Alberto, [xv](#calibre_link-338){.calibre10},
[xvin5](#calibre_link-333){.calibre10},
[123](#calibre_link-314){.calibre10}--[39](#calibre_link-332){.calibre10},
[139n1](#calibre_link-332){.calibre10}

Poe, Edgar Allan, [43](#calibre_link-238){.calibre10},
[54n4](#calibre_link-227){.calibre10}

poetry, [xv](#calibre_link-338){.calibre10},
[91](#calibre_link-287){.calibre10},
[110](#calibre_link-301){.calibre10},
[111](#calibre_link-278){.calibre10},
[118](#calibre_link-313){.calibre10}--[20](#calibre_link-315){.calibre10},
[139](#calibre_link-332){.calibre10}

Poirier, René, [41](#calibre_link-224){.calibre10},
[54n3](#calibre_link-227){.calibre10},
[63](#calibre_link-218){.calibre10}

Pope, Alexander, [138](#calibre_link-275){.calibre10}

possibility, [61](#calibre_link-217){.calibre10},
[65](#calibre_link-233){.calibre10},
[66](#calibre_link-311){.calibre10},
[87](#calibre_link-305){.calibre10}, [88](#calibre_link-306){.calibre10}

pretence, temporal texture of,
[101](#calibre_link-291){.calibre10}--[6](#calibre_link-320){.calibre10}

probability,
[86](#calibre_link-300){.calibre10}--[89](#calibre_link-243){.calibre10}

psyche, [81](#calibre_link-296){.calibre10},
[89](#calibre_link-243){.calibre10},
[103](#calibre_link-339){.calibre10},
[107](#calibre_link-283){.calibre10},
[119](#calibre_link-261){.calibre10},
[121](#calibre_link-270){.calibre10},
[131](#calibre_link-302){.calibre10}

psychoanalysis, [xiv](#calibre_link-304){.calibre10},
[53](#calibre_link-322){.calibre10},
[131](#calibre_link-302){.calibre10}--[33](#calibre_link-237){.calibre10},
[138](#calibre_link-275){.calibre10}

psychology, [75](#calibre_link-340){.calibre10},
[77](#calibre_link-341){.calibre10},
[83](#calibre_link-323){.calibre10},
[100](#calibre_link-281){.calibre10}--[101](#calibre_link-291){.calibre10},
[102](#calibre_link-321){.calibre10},
[107](#calibre_link-283){.calibre10}--[8](#calibre_link-231){.calibre10},
[133](#calibre_link-237){.calibre10};

of beginning,
[46](#calibre_link-240){.calibre10}--[48](#calibre_link-284){.calibre10};

of change,
[48](#calibre_link-284){.calibre10}--[49](#calibre_link-259){.calibre10};

compound, [100](#calibre_link-281){.calibre10},
[101](#calibre_link-291){.calibre10},
[104](#calibre_link-317){.calibre10};

of duration, [83](#calibre_link-323){.calibre10},
[123](#calibre_link-314){.calibre10};

exponential,
[107](#calibre_link-283){.calibre10}--[8](#calibre_link-231){.calibre10};

of the scientific mind, [9](#calibre_link-342){.calibre10};

temporal,
[39](#calibre_link-223){.calibre10}--[54](#calibre_link-227){.calibre10},
[78](#calibre_link-292){.calibre10},
[86](#calibre_link-300){.calibre10},
[92](#calibre_link-235){.calibre10},
[116](#calibre_link-308){.calibre10}

quantum, [66](#calibre_link-311){.calibre10},
[68](#calibre_link-234){.calibre10},
[71](#calibre_link-280){.calibre10},
[91](#calibre_link-287){.calibre10},
[92](#calibre_link-235){.calibre10},
[131](#calibre_link-302){.calibre10}

radiation,
[123](#calibre_link-314){.calibre10}--[25](#calibre_link-276){.calibre10},
[126](#calibre_link-219){.calibre10},
[128](#calibre_link-221){.calibre10},
[129](#calibre_link-222){.calibre10}

Ravel, Maurice,
[111](#calibre_link-278){.calibre10}--[12](#calibre_link-279){.calibre10}

realism:

naïve, [63](#calibre_link-218){.calibre10};

[]{#calibre_link-383 .calibre10}of rhythm,
[68](#calibre_link-234){.calibre10}

reality, [17](#calibre_link-263){.calibre10},
[20](#calibre_link-245){.calibre10},
[23](#calibre_link-248){.calibre10},
[26](#calibre_link-274){.calibre10},
[29](#calibre_link-257){.calibre10},
[82](#calibre_link-265){.calibre10},
[87](#calibre_link-305){.calibre10}--[88](#calibre_link-306){.calibre10},
[97](#calibre_link-319){.calibre10},
[139](#calibre_link-332){.calibre10};

and possibility, [61](#calibre_link-217){.calibre10},
[75](#calibre_link-340){.calibre10};

and realisation, [27](#calibre_link-249){.calibre10};

temporal, [21](#calibre_link-246){.calibre10},
[36](#calibre_link-298){.calibre10},
[78](#calibre_link-292){.calibre10},
[82](#calibre_link-265){.calibre10}, [86](#calibre_link-300){.calibre10}

reason, [43](#calibre_link-238){.calibre10},
[49](#calibre_link-259){.calibre10},
[62](#calibre_link-299){.calibre10}, [85](#calibre_link-326){.calibre10}

relativity and time, [91](#calibre_link-287){.calibre10}

relaxation,
[20](#calibre_link-245){.calibre10}--[21](#calibre_link-246){.calibre10},
[34](#calibre_link-266){.calibre10},
[37n1](#calibre_link-267){.calibre10},
[114](#calibre_link-312){.calibre10}

repose, [xi](#calibre_link-336){.calibre10},
[xii](#calibre_link-273){.calibre10},
[xiv](#calibre_link-304){.calibre10},
[19](#calibre_link-244){.calibre10},
[21](#calibre_link-246){.calibre10},
[23](#calibre_link-248){.calibre10},
[36](#calibre_link-298){.calibre10},
[93](#calibre_link-294){.calibre10},
[99](#calibre_link-251){.calibre10},
[101](#calibre_link-291){.calibre10}.

[See also]{.i} vibration, repose as

reverie, [50](#calibre_link-327){.calibre10},
[53](#calibre_link-322){.calibre10},
[110](#calibre_link-301){.calibre10}

rhythm,
[xii](#calibre_link-273){.calibre10}--[xv](#calibre_link-338){.calibre10},
[21](#calibre_link-246){.calibre10},
[29](#calibre_link-257){.calibre10},
[33](#calibre_link-271){.calibre10},
[36](#calibre_link-298){.calibre10},
[44](#calibre_link-239){.calibre10},
[67](#calibre_link-286){.calibre10},
[68](#calibre_link-234){.calibre10},
[95](#calibre_link-295){.calibre10},
[97](#calibre_link-319){.calibre10},
[110](#calibre_link-301){.calibre10},
[113](#calibre_link-324){.calibre10}--[14](#calibre_link-312){.calibre10}

rhythmanalysis,
[xiv](#calibre_link-304){.calibre10}--[xv](#calibre_link-338){.calibre10},
[123](#calibre_link-314){.calibre10}--[39](#calibre_link-332){.calibre10}

Rilke, Rainer Maria, [138](#calibre_link-275){.calibre10}

Rivers, W. H. R., [31](#calibre_link-250){.calibre10},
[36](#calibre_link-298){.calibre10},
[37n7](#calibre_link-267){.calibre10}

Rolland, Romain, [136](#calibre_link-334){.calibre10},
[140n6](#calibre_link-272){.calibre10}

Roupnel, Gaston,
[xiii](#calibre_link-303){.calibre10}--[xiv](#calibre_link-304){.calibre10},
[xvn1](#calibre_link-338){.calibre10},
[xvin2](#calibre_link-333){.calibre10}

Sand, George, [104](#calibre_link-317){.calibre10}

Schopenhauer, Arthur, [25](#calibre_link-309){.calibre10},
[30](#calibre_link-258){.calibre10},
[31](#calibre_link-250){.calibre10},
[37n3](#calibre_link-267){.calibre10},
[59](#calibre_link-330){.calibre10},
[100](#calibre_link-281){.calibre10}

science, [68](#calibre_link-234){.calibre10},
[72](#calibre_link-343){.calibre10},
[87](#calibre_link-305){.calibre10}.

[See also]{.i} biology; chemistry; microphysics; physics; time, in
science

self, [52](#calibre_link-329){.calibre10},
[95](#calibre_link-295){.calibre10},
[96](#calibre_link-318){.calibre10},
[98](#calibre_link-290){.calibre10},
[134](#calibre_link-252){.calibre10}

[See also]{.i} cogito, compound; pretence, temporal texture of

sensation, [48](#calibre_link-284){.calibre10},
[110](#calibre_link-301){.calibre10},
[112](#calibre_link-279){.calibre10},
[115](#calibre_link-289){.calibre10},
[128](#calibre_link-221){.calibre10}

Servien, Pius, [xiv](#calibre_link-304){.calibre10},
[119](#calibre_link-261){.calibre10}--[20](#calibre_link-315){.calibre10},
[121n8](#calibre_link-270){.calibre10}

Siloam, pool of, [xii](#calibre_link-273){.calibre10},
[xiv](#calibre_link-304){.calibre10},
[xvn1](#calibre_link-338){.calibre10}

skill, as a dialectic,
[73](#calibre_link-228){.calibre10}--[74](#calibre_link-229){.calibre10}

space, [45](#calibre_link-226){.calibre10},
[88](#calibre_link-306){.calibre10},
[124](#calibre_link-316){.calibre10},
[125](#calibre_link-276){.calibre10}.

[See also]{.i} time, and space

stroboscopy, [67](#calibre_link-286){.calibre10}

substance, [59](#calibre_link-330){.calibre10},
[63](#calibre_link-218){.calibre10},
[103](#calibre_link-339){.calibre10},
[117](#calibre_link-236){.calibre10},
[125](#calibre_link-276){.calibre10}--[29](#calibre_link-222){.calibre10}

succession, [42](#calibre_link-225){.calibre10},
[47](#calibre_link-241){.calibre10},
[58](#calibre_link-260){.calibre10},
[61](#calibre_link-217){.calibre10},
[67](#calibre_link-286){.calibre10},
[83](#calibre_link-323){.calibre10},
[109](#calibre_link-232){.calibre10}

superimpositions, temporal, [89](#calibre_link-243){.calibre10},
[91](#calibre_link-287){.calibre10}--[108](#calibre_link-231){.calibre10}

teaching, [39](#calibre_link-223){.calibre10},
[48](#calibre_link-284){.calibre10},
[50](#calibre_link-327){.calibre10},
[62](#calibre_link-299){.calibre10},
[93](#calibre_link-294){.calibre10},
[117](#calibre_link-236){.calibre10},
[131](#calibre_link-302){.calibre10}.

[See also]{.i} duration, knowledge of; time, knowledge of

time,
[xii](#calibre_link-273){.calibre10}--[xv](#calibre_link-338){.calibre10},
[33](#calibre_link-271){.calibre10}--[34](#calibre_link-266){.calibre10},
[36](#calibre_link-298){.calibre10},
[37](#calibre_link-267){.calibre10},
[41](#calibre_link-224){.calibre10}--[51](#calibre_link-242){.calibre10},
[58](#calibre_link-260){.calibre10},
[62](#calibre_link-299){.calibre10}--[4](#calibre_link-285){.calibre10},
[68](#calibre_link-234){.calibre10},
[81](#calibre_link-296){.calibre10},
[87](#calibre_link-305){.calibre10},
[93](#calibre_link-294){.calibre10},
[95](#calibre_link-295){.calibre10},
[96](#calibre_link-318){.calibre10},
[103](#calibre_link-339){.calibre10},
[107](#calibre_link-283){.calibre10}--[8](#calibre_link-231){.calibre10},
[124](#calibre_link-316){.calibre10}--[25](#calibre_link-276){.calibre10},
[135](#calibre_link-297){.calibre10};

in science,
[63](#calibre_link-218){.calibre10}--[68](#calibre_link-234){.calibre10},
[91](#calibre_link-287){.calibre10}--[92](#calibre_link-235){.calibre10},
[93](#calibre_link-294){.calibre10} ([see also]{.i} relativity);

knowledge of,
[39](#calibre_link-223){.calibre10}--[40](#calibre_link-255){.calibre10},
[42](#calibre_link-225){.calibre10}--[43](#calibre_link-238){.calibre10},
[44](#calibre_link-239){.calibre10},
[48](#calibre_link-284){.calibre10},
[78](#calibre_link-292){.calibre10};

lived, [27](#calibre_link-249){.calibre10},
[68n1](#calibre_link-234){.calibre10},
[82](#calibre_link-265){.calibre10},
[92](#calibre_link-235){.calibre10},
[94](#calibre_link-230){.calibre10},
[101](#calibre_link-291){.calibre10},
[103](#calibre_link-339){.calibre10},
[139](#calibre_link-332){.calibre10};

and space, [63](#calibre_link-218){.calibre10},
[68](#calibre_link-234){.calibre10},
[85](#calibre_link-326){.calibre10};

vertical,
[97](#calibre_link-319){.calibre10}--[98](#calibre_link-290){.calibre10},
[100](#calibre_link-281){.calibre10}.

[See also]{.i} consolidation, temporal; dialectic, temporal; instant;
interval; memory; psychology, temporal; superimpositions, temporal

truth and error, [25](#calibre_link-309){.calibre10},
[132](#calibre_link-293){.calibre10}--[33](#calibre_link-237){.calibre10}.

[See also]{.i} error, pretence; temporal texture of

unconscious, [76](#calibre_link-335){.calibre10},
[132](#calibre_link-293){.calibre10},
[133](#calibre_link-237){.calibre10},
[138](#calibre_link-275){.calibre10}

Urbain, Georges, [117](#calibre_link-236){.calibre10},
[121n5](#calibre_link-270){.calibre10}

Valéry, Paul, [15](#calibre_link-256){.calibre10},
[28](#calibre_link-282){.calibre10},
[72](#calibre_link-343){.calibre10},
[106](#calibre_link-320){.calibre10},
[108n9](#calibre_link-231){.calibre10},
[139](#calibre_link-332){.calibre10}

vibration, [60](#calibre_link-328){.calibre10},
[67](#calibre_link-286){.calibre10}--[68](#calibre_link-234){.calibre10},
[119](#calibre_link-261){.calibre10}--[20](#calibre_link-315){.calibre10},
[124](#calibre_link-316){.calibre10}--[26](#calibre_link-219){.calibre10},
[127](#calibre_link-220){.calibre10}--[30](#calibre_link-331){.calibre10}

importance for Bachelard, [xvin4](#calibre_link-333){.calibre10}

repose as, [xiv](#calibre_link-304){.calibre10},
[119](#calibre_link-261){.calibre10},
[137](#calibre_link-344){.calibre10}

Wahl, Jean, [26](#calibre_link-274){.calibre10}

wave, [40](#calibre_link-255){.calibre10},
[60](#calibre_link-328){.calibre10},
[64](#calibre_link-285){.calibre10},
[67](#calibre_link-286){.calibre10},
[92](#calibre_link-235){.calibre10},
[93](#calibre_link-294){.calibre10},
[114](#calibre_link-312){.calibre10},
[123](#calibre_link-314){.calibre10},
[134](#calibre_link-252){.calibre10},
[140n2](#calibre_link-272){.calibre10}

will, [45](#calibre_link-226){.calibre10},
[47](#calibre_link-241){.calibre10},
[73](#calibre_link-228){.calibre10},
[74](#calibre_link-229){.calibre10},
[76](#calibre_link-335){.calibre10},
[82](#calibre_link-265){.calibre10},
[84](#calibre_link-288){.calibre10},
[135](#calibre_link-297){.calibre10}

Wordsworth, William, [140n8](#calibre_link-272){.calibre10}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-345 .calibre3}
[[]{#calibre_link-384 .calibre4}[About the
Author](#calibre_link-346){#calibre_link-15 .calibre4}]{.b}

[Gaston Bachelard]{.b} (1884--1962) was Professor of Philosophy at the
University of Dijon, and later held the Chair of History of Philosophy
of Science at La Sorbonne. His influence is attested by thinkers as
diverse as Derrida, Foucault and Barthes.[]{#calibre_link-385 .calibre4}
:::
