---
title: "The Poetics of Space"
author: "Gaston Bachelard"
voice: "Gaston Bachelard"
voice_role: "Foundation Stone - Material Imagination"
tradition: "French Philosophy"
period: "20th Century"
region: "France"
genre: "Phenomenology"
form: "Philosophical Treatise"
mode: "Spatial Analysis"
work_type: "Primary Source"
source_type: "Complete Work"
source_quality: "English Translation"
language: "English"
bilingual_capacity: "French original also in library"
chamber_integration: "June 2025"
significance: "Bachelard's masterwork on space, dwelling, and material imagination - bilingual capacity"
tags:
  - space
  - dwelling
  - house
  - phenomenology
  - material-imagination
  - intimate-space
  - poetic-image
related_voices:
  - Christopher Alexander
  - John Berger
  - Richard Sennett
  - Maurice Merleau-Ponty
chamber_position: "Second Ring - Foundation Stones - The Core Four"
status: "source-aware"
---

# The Poetics of Space

*Gaston Bachelard*

*English Translation*

---

*Chamber Note: This English translation complements the French original already in the library, providing bilingual capacity for Bachelard's foundational work on spatial phenomenology and material imagination. Essential for architectural and spatial thinking in Chamber protocols.*
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-1 .calibre}
::: h
![](images/000009.jpg){.h1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-2 .calibre}
::: basic-text-frame
PENGUIN BOOKS

Published by the Penguin Group

Penguin Group (USA) LLC

[375]{.scap1} Hudson Street

New York, New York [10014]{.scap1}

![](images/000001.jpg){.h2em}

USA \| Canada \| UK \| Ireland \| Australia \| New Zealand \| India \|
South Africa \| China

[penguin.com](http://penguin.com)

A Penguin Random House Company

First published in the United States of America by The Orion Press, Inc.
[1964]{.scap1}

This edition with a foreword by Mark Z. Danielewski and an introduction
by Richard Kearney published in Penguin Books [2014]{.scap1}

Copyright © [1958]{.scap1} by Presses Universitaires de France

Translation copyright © [1964]{.scap1} by Penguin Group (USA) LLC

Foreword copyright © [2014]{.scap1} by Mark Z. Danielewski

Introduction copyright © [2014]{.scap1} by Richard Kearney

Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages
diverse voices, promotes free speech, and creates a vibrant culture.
Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for
complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or
distributing any part of it in any form without permission. You are
supporting writers and allowing Penguin to continue to publish books for
every reader.

Originally published in French under the title *La poetique de l'espace*
by Presses Universitaires de France, Paris.

ISBN [978]{.scap1}-[0]{.scap1}-[698]{.scap1}-[17043]{.scap1}-[8]{.scap1}
:::

Version_1
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-3 .calibre}
::: basic-text-frame
# [Contents]{.pt} {#calibre_link-510 .fmhead}

[About the Authors](#calibre_link-0)

[Title Page](#calibre_link-1)

[Copyright](#calibre_link-2)

[*Foreword by* M[ARK]{.scap1} Z. D[ANIELEWSKI]{.scap1}](#calibre_link-4)

[*Introduction by* R[ICHARD ]{.scap1}K[EARNEY]{.scap1}](#calibre_link-5)

[Notes](#calibre_link-6)

[*Suggestions for Further Reading*](#calibre_link-7)

THE POETICS OF SPACE

[*Introduction by* GASTON BACHELARD](#calibre_link-8)

[1. The House. From Cellar to Garret. The Significance of the
Hut](#calibre_link-9)

[2. House and Universe](#calibre_link-10)

[3. Drawers, Chests and Wardrobes](#calibre_link-11)

[4. Nests](#calibre_link-12)

[5. Shells](#calibre_link-13)

[6. Corners](#calibre_link-14)

[7. Miniature](#calibre_link-15)

[8. Intimate Immensity](#calibre_link-16)

[9. The Dialectics of Outside and Inside](#calibre_link-17)

[10. The Phenomenology of Roundness](#calibre_link-18)

[Notes](#calibre_link-19)
:::
::::

:::::::::: {#calibre_link-4 .calibre}
::::::::: basic-text-frame
# [Foreword]{.pt} {#calibre_link-511 .fmhead1}

M[ARK ]{.scap}Z[. ]{.scap}D[ANIELEWSKI]{.scap}

For you without imagination, who can matter-of-factly claim that you're
not the creative type---mind you, not proudly claim; for an imagination
of ruin must burn beneath defiances against personal invention---then
best put this book down and seek out instead some almanac of
entertainment free from all such catalytic risks to a mind just mad
enough to make out of one world another world.

Gaston Bachelard's book---published originally in [1957]{.scap1} by
Presses Universitaires de France as *La poétique de l'espace*---has as
little to do with the House, Cellar and Garret, the Hut, Drawers, Chests
and Wardrobes, not to mention Nests, Shells and even Roundness (these
from chapter titles), as it has everything to do with how our
comprehension of space, however confined or expansive, still affords an
opportunity to encounter the boundaries of the self just as they are
about to give way.

"The lock doesn't exist that could resist absolute violence, and all
locks are an invitation to thieves. A lock is a psychological
threshold." Yet despite saying so, Bachelard does not turn to violence
nor does he keep the company of thieves. There aren't even many locks.
In fact it's hard, over the course of even one reading, not to detect
the warmth of that rare personality who unmakes a thief simply by making
every article of interest available. Sit down. Stay awhile. Something to
nibble on? Generosity of spirit abounds. Doors swing open. Thresholds
offer little impediment. All are welcome. And in return, Bachelard asks
of us only to dream. Or rather he gives us the chance to dream. For a
chamber is no more a cage than reverie is an escape. Improbable
discoveries wait at every border. As when Bachelard extends René Char's
invitation regarding

::: w
![](images/000003.jpg){.w1}
:::

Discovery---not "hostile space"---concerns Bachelard. In the same way
that Steve Erickson's *Days Between Stations* and Thomas Pynchon's
*Against the Day* revive the sands of time as a medium intent on voyage,
Bachelard gently addresses those settings we live in, and finally die
in, with the lightness of why we live in the first place. Suddenly a
chapter on miniatures offers a reflection on a hermit who while
"watching his hour-glass without praying . . . heard the catastrophe of
time." The matter of prayer seems incidental to the anecdote, and yet
throughout these pages there arises something meditative. Call it a
calculus of emotional continuity or a music that only the grieving can
know because they chose to carry on: what warms the hearth long after
catastrophe has razed both hearth and home.

*The Poetics of Space* is one of those books in the tradition of Edmond
Jabès's *The Book of Questions*, Harold Bloom's *The Anxiety of
Influence*, Anne Carson's *Eros the Bittersweet*, and Lewis Hyde's *The
Gift*. Whether portraiture of Sarah and Yukel; the designs poets
inscribe upon each other; Sappho; the Kula exchange of necklaces and
armshells, each of these aforementioned books becomes so much more: an
indispensable guide for anyone set on becoming an artist.

Over the years I have discovered that it is not uncommon to mention
Bachelard and hear in return a sigh of happy recognition. I have sat at
tables crowded with journalists, graphic artists, urban planners,
therapists, sculptors, and architects, all of whom carry some fond
memory of their first encounter with *The Poetics of Space*.

The approval of architects seems the most obvious and at the same time
the most odd. Despite the mention here of everything from floorboards to
molding, names such as Isidore & Anthemius, Ictinus & Callicrates, da
Vinci, Mansart, Gabriel, Soufflot, Garnier, Bartholdi, let alone Eiffel,
Van Alen, Wright, Gaudí, Le Corbusier, or Pei, never appear. Instead the
authorities vitalizing this work are Desbordes-Valmore, Caubère, Wahl,
Caroutch, Poe, Barucoa, Morange, Clancier, Éluard, Milosz, Sand, Lafon,
Duthil, Bosco, Monteiro, Proust, Spyridaki, Cazelles, Hartmann, Thoreau,
Laroche, Guillaume, Bourdeillette, Richaud, Seghers, Supervielle, Wartz,
Péguy, Rouffange, Vigée, Mallarmé, Bousquet, Goll, Ganzo, Shedrow,
Valéry, Alexandre, Puel, Rouquier, Blanchard, Albert-Birot, de Boissy,
Breton, Hugo, Bureau, Cadou, Patocchi, Rimbaud, Masson, Daumal, Vallès,
Jouve, Guéguen, Baudelaire, Tardieu, Michaux, Pellerin, Barrault, Tzara,
Rilke. Poets one and all. And why not? Just as stanza means "verse," it
also means "room."

Though architecture prompted the recommendation, my own introduction to
Bachelard came by way of poetry. A young woman I'd met one night in a
roomy loft on Varick Street responded to my sonnets with news that in
Italian her name meant "death"---A Non-Name Admittedly. Not that my
interest was put off by this a.m. warning. Eventually I came to give her
more than poems, including an early draft of my first novel. The
seduction still failed and her stern advice to read Bachelard hardly
seemed to make up for bruised desire. But what did I know? Thanks to
love's failure---and here, really, is a belated thanks to her decades
due---a necessary revision was set in motion thanks to a young woman
whose name meant nothing more.

Of course, sometimes nothing more can mean so much more. And these pages
offer just that. After all, here is a thinker who urges the reader to
discover an excess of association: "And how should one receive an
exaggerated image, if not by exaggerating it a little more, by
personalizing the exaggeration? . . . in prolonging *exaggeration*, we
may have the good fortune to avoid the habits of *reduction*." At every
turn Bachelard encourages personal engagement: "A [house]{.house} that
has been experienced is not an inert box. Inhabited space transcends
geometrical space." Or here: "Sometimes the [house]{.house} grows and
spreads so that, in order to live in it, greater elasticity of
daydreaming, a daydream that is less clearly outlined, are needed." What
would that have been like? To have had such a teacher who applauded you
for letting your thoughts run wild? Encouraged you to live beyond
gutters and margins, frames and apps, the limits of map and page? Well,
this is that education.

::: w2
![](images/000004.jpg){.w1}
:::

::: h
![](images/000005.jpg){.h1}
:::

::: h
![](images/000006.jpg){.h1}
:::

Note how Bachelard's Buddhistlike invocation creates out of the
trap-of-the-corner a place to escape into the open of all that is not.
Whether being there (*être-là*) or not there---or quoting Michaux, "*en
dedans-en dehors"* (inside-outside)---by way of the [house]{.house}
Bachelard grants access to the vastness of place while at the same time
admitting within a vast inverse. Doors---ajar, in-between, mostly
open---wait for us. Windows, however, seem less important, likely
because of the way walls thin and nearly vanish. And I say "nearly" only
because one senses that Bachelard believes that the invention of
structure results in the transparency through which we need to view the
world.

Above and beyond dwellings or even the inspirations of water and fire
(see his *Water and Dreams*; *The Psychoanalysis* *of Fire*), image and
language are central to Bachelard. He reveres image for its impact and
the ecstasy it provokes just as he believes it is "the property of a
naïve consciousness; in its expression, it is youthful language." (We
can only imagine with what reservation he would observe our present-day
addictions to jpegs and gifs.) Language, on the other hand, recalls time
just as it suspends the ordination of time:

We find ourselves experiencing in words, on the inside of words, secret
movements of our own. Like friendship, words sometimes swell, at the
dreamer's will, in the loop of a syllable. While in other words,
everything is calm, tight . . . Words---I often imagine this---are
little [house]{.house}s, each with its cellar and garret . . . To go
upstairs in the word [house]{.house} is to withdraw, step by step; while
to go down to the cellar is to dream, it is losing oneself in the
distant corridors of an obscure etymology, looking for treasures that
cannot be found in words.

For language is both image and text. The one tool we have capable of
transcending both. Or as Bachelard so succinctly puts it, evoking
childish delight over a discovery at the beach set against the immensity
of ocean:

::: h
![](images/000007.jpg){.h1}
:::

Perhaps the more clamor the better. That which we don't know provokes
what we just might conjure. Or as Bachelard writes it: "A lost symbolism
begins to collect dreams again."

What an inspiring pleasure then---with all this attention to paths and
interiors leading to greater intimacies---to at the same time be
reintroduced again and again to the outside. To suddenly discover
D'Annunzio's hares awake at dawn, running across "silvery frost" only to
pause, ears alert, and by gaze alone "confer peace upon the entire
universe." And along with our own dreams of peace, ever beside such
"animal peace," to discover soon enough trees, many trees, beautiful
trees.

Make no mistake: for all this dreaminess and natural calm, Bachelard is
not without bite. From the outset he shows little patience for
psychologists or psychiatrists. Though a philosopher himself, he calls
the philosophy of his day a "cancerization of the linguistic tissue."
And yet in the final chapters he lets slip (a confession really) how if
he "were a psychiatrist," he would recommend a poem by Baudelaire to
treat "anguish." His squabble then is not with the purpose but rather
the approach of a still-young profession. And of course, why not treat
the power of great poems as something akin to "virtual 'drugs'"? Many
today would not disagree.

Regardless though of correct protocols, it is this enduring desire to
heal that is the heart of *The Poetics of Space* and it makes of these
pages something far beyond pages. As comfortable as Bachelard might be
at a table of chemists and physicists, he could just as easily join a
conversation between the ghosts of Carl Jung and James Hillman. His
distaste is for what impedes in the name of dogma. He values the
imagination because he recognizes that understanding without imagination
is doctrine without growth. And without growth, what chance is there to
engage the complexity that bounds us?

Culture gives us our collective dreams---on stage, on screen,
online---but daydreams grant us each the collective possibility of
oneself. Bachelard wants his readers to find the courage to pursue that
private and very personal becoming no matter how strange and unfamiliar
the outcome may prove---if only because he recognizes that what must
allways deny us in the end must forever remain strange and unfamiliar,
too. And so, as I see it, Bachelard extends to anyone with even a
flicker of desire to fashion something beyond the pettiness of
themselves this wish:

::: w2
![](images/000008.jpg){.w1}
:::
:::::::::
::::::::::

:::: {#calibre_link-5 .calibre}
::: basic-text-frame
# [Introduction]{.pt} {#calibre_link-512 .fmhead}

Bachelard often praised imagination for its power of metamorphosis. One
could hardly think of someone more open to constant transformation than
the author of *The Poetics of Space*. Born into a family of shoemakers,
Bachelard began his career as a postman in the Champagne-Ardennes region
of France before working his way to a professorship at the Sorbonne. Far
from remaining satisfied as a philosopher of science, when he got there
he went on to embrace the life of the imaginary in all its forms:
poetic, visual, psychological and elemental. There were many mansions in
Bachelard's mind and he occupied them all magnificently.

The house in which he took up ultimate residency was *The Poetics of
Space*. This is a book that talks at length about homes. Or more
precisely, their imaginary dimensions as underground cellars and dusty
garrets, unlocked drawers and secret wardrobes, winding stairways and
shadowy thresholds. For many years now, readers of all stripes have been
attracted to Bachelard's poetic haunts: artists and architects,
philosophers and analysts, writers and scholars, each finding what
resonates with his or her own professional and personal interests. For
some it is the phenomenology of roundness, for others the experience of
insideness and outsideness, for others again the dream power of
childhood or the collective unconscious: the way, for example, his
favorite image---the tree---amplifies from root and bole to leaf and
branch, offering nests to all sorts of imaginary dwellers. Bachelard
paints a vast canvas, his sense of perspective ranging from the most
intimate interior to the most vital expanse, moving easily---as only
poetic imagination can---between the micro- and macro-cosmos. Nothing is
alien to the Bachelardian home, be it elemental, human or sacred. His
imagination is endlessly hospitable. In reverie the "not" no longer
functions. All are welcome.

 • • • 

This Penguin edition of *The Poetics of Space* is timely and
commendable. Its republication fifty years after the first English
edition in [1964]{.scap1} comes at a moment when contemporary society
needs imagination more than ever. So much of our experience today is
processed by digital communication networks and social media, leaving
little room for inner spaces of reverie and meditation---the sorts of
places that Bachelard cherishes and celebrates in his poetic revisiting
of basements and attics, nests and shelters, closets and stairwells,
cupboards and chests. *The Poetics of Space* is about hide-and-seek
places where the mind can go on holiday for a while and think about
nothing---which means everything. Havens where the soul can pause, in
silence, and free itself to dream. And let things be. Now more than ever
we have need for intimacy, secrets, sites of interiority and
contemplation where we can practice what Baudelaire---one of Bachelard's
favorite poets---called the art of "fertile laziness" (*la paresse
féconde).* Without such nooks and crannies to muse and mope, to linger
and loiter, there is nowhere to begin anew. No place for rapt attention.

Amidst our culture of broadcast and bigness, Bachelard recommends that
we rediscover the immense in the most intimate of things. In a world
where Facebook and Twitter expose our most private thoughts to public
view, and where so many places of work and habitation are featureless,
climate-controlled and quarantined against surprise, Bachelard shows us
ways of dwelling again in the flesh of space, of dreaming our homes as
nests and shells, of reimaging hidden gardens and caverns where we can
delve back into a world of natality, newness, beginning.

This book invites us to become readers and writers of our lives. And
Bachelard is both. He is an author who *loves* reading, and no reader
can enter the imaginary realms he opens up without falling in love with
the world again. To follow Bachelard on his poetic meanderings is to be
led through homescapes and landscapes of reverie and repose. It is to
wander meditatively through new fields and forests of imagination where
we revisit our experience as if it were the first day of creation.
Rilke, another Bachelard favorite, has the artwork summon the reader
with the words "Change your
life."[]{#calibre_link-38}[[1]{.osf}](#calibre_link-20) Such change
occurs, for Bachelard, when we re-enter the dwelling of the soul and
intensify the transformation of being: "Our soul is an abode. And by
remembering 'houses' and 'rooms,' we learn to 'abide' within
ourselves."[]{#calibre_link-39}[[2]{.osf}](#calibre_link-21)[]{.osf}

 • • • 

*The Poetics of Space* is the most concise and consummate expression of
Bachelard's philosophy of imagination. His famous turn toward poetics
began in the late thirties when Bachelard decided to supplement his work
on scientific epistemology (almost thirteen volumes) with an exploration
of the life of art and creation. He had become increasingly dissatisfied
by what he called the "growing rationalism of contemporary science" and
was eager to investigate the "ecstasy of the newness of the
image."[]{#calibre_link-40}[[3]{.osf}](#calibre_link-22) This meant
breaking with the strict habits of scientific research---which placed
new discoveries always in the context of acquired bodies of
evidence---so as to expose oneself to the novelty of the poetic instant.
Because "the poetic act has no
past,"[]{#calibre_link-41}[[4]{.osf}](#calibre_link-23) we must be fully
attentive to the image at the very moment it appears, both as itself and
as a vibration of the psyche. A new methodology was called for.

The notion of attention was key. Bachelard was concerned as much with
the "material" image that stirs us in our depths as with the "formal"
image that we produce in response. Bachelard offers a poetics of both
matter and form, whereas Aristotle had originally defined poetics in
terms of formal properties of plot (*muthos)* and imitation (*mimesis).*
Poetics comes from *poiesis*, meaning "to make," and for Bachelard this
is a two-way process: we are made by material images that we remake in
our turn. We are inhabited by deep imaginings---visual and verbal,
auditory and tactile---that we reinhabit in our own unique way. Poetics
is about hearing and feeling as well as crafting and shaping. It is the
double play of re-creation. And this oscillating tension flies in the
face of traditional dichotomies between subject and object, mind and
matter, active and passive, which inform the history of Western thought.
Or to put it another way: Bachelard's sense of poetic creation
transcends the traditionally opposed roles of the image as either
"imitation" or "invention." For Plato and many medieval philosophers,
imagination was construed primarily as a mimetic act of mirroring,
representing, copying. This approach was often associated with deceit
and illusion, with confounding original realities with secondary
substitutes. By contrast, for Kant and the romantics---including German
idealists and existentialists like Sartre---imagination was hailed as a
productive force in its own right, the source of all true meaning and
value. Bachelard resisted both extremes. For him imagination was at once
receptive and creative---an acoustic of listening *and* an art of
participation. The two functions, passive and active, were inseparable.
The world itself dreams, he said, and we help give it
voice.[[]{#calibre_link-42 .pt}]{.osf}[[5]{.osf}](#calibre_link-24) "The
image \[is\] the specific phenomena of the speaking
creature."[]{#calibre_link-43}[[6]{.osf}](#calibre_link-25) The highest
act of imagination is the will to attune oneself to the saying of being
itself.

Hence Bachelard's refusal of Jean-Paul Sartre's argument in *The
Imaginary* ([1940]{.scap1}) that perception and imagination are two
radically opposed modes of intentionality. Where Sartre spoke of
imagination "unrealizing" the world and replacing it with a solipsistic
consciousness, Bachelard celebrated imagination's power to realize the
unrealized potential of the world. Where the Sartrean imagination
involved a radical negation of things---issuing in an essential "poverty
of being"---Bachelard saw imagination as the coming into being of
language. Not non-being but surplus-being: being as incessant birthing
of newness through images.

For Bachelard the cosmos, no less than the human psyche, is brimming
with the force of the imaginary. And to return to his favorite example
of the house, he maintains that the poetic reimagining of stairs,
passageways, porches or dressers brings together powers of memory,
perception and fantasy that criss-cross in all kinds of surprising ways,
sounding previously untapped "reverberations" (*retentissements*).
Imagination is a laboratory of the possible inviting us---through
reverie and poetry---to give a future to the past. And it is not just a
matter of a private past (though Bachelard's memories of his hometown of
Bar-sur-Aube ghost his work) but of a shared reservoir of resonances
bequeathed to us by the great poets from Homer and Ovid to Rilke and
Valéry.

Bachelard is in his element in poetics, and his poetics is of the
elements: water, fire, air and earth. The list of his works on the
"elemental imaginary" is hugely telling in this regard, ranging from
*Water and Dreams, Air and Dreams, Earth and the Reveries of the Will,
Earth and the Reveries of Repose* right up to his final works, *The
Flame of a Candle* and *Fragments of a Poetics of Fire*. The term
"element" does double duty for Bachelard as both a material and
metaphysical substance. Elemental space is something we dwell in with
body and soul. It is to be found---shaped and formed---in the "material
paradise" of the protective dwelling as well as in the abyssal immensity
that seems to breathe and blow through the house, at times dissolving
its doors and enclosures. *The Poetics of Space* is no less than the
fruition of a chapter entitled "The House of Our Birth and the Oneiric
House" that Bachelard had written in his last book on the elements,
*Earth* *and the Reveries of Repose* ([1948]{.scap1}). Both elemental
notions haunt *The Poetics of Space*---the homey existential one, and
the more expansive cosmological one. Bachelard writes about the house
blown by the winds, or the airy house of words, as well the house rooted
in soil and rock.

 • • • 

Bachelard's philosophy was eclectic. Though primarily inspired by
phenomenology, he was discreetly drawn toward Eastern philosophies and
even mysticism, evident in his continuous pursuit of a "philosophy of
repose" over against the *Angst* that ghosted much European culture
during his lifetime. He stated this preference as early as his
*Dialectic of Duration* in [1936]{.scap1} and as late as *The Flame of a
Candle* in [1962]{.scap1}. Yet, as a modest phenomenologist---with the
ingrained discipline of a laboratory scientist---Bachelard steered away
from explicitly spiritualist or religious language as much as he did
from political discourse (or any language that risked becoming
tendentious). Instead, he made a sustained effort *to think always from
the beginning*---focusing on the micro-phenomenon of the poetic image
"at the moment of its emergence" in the reader's waking consciousness.
In this sense his writing and thinking are deeply democratic, available
to everyone regardless of ideology or creed. It requires no academic
degree to appreciate the genesis of the image in the individual
consciousness. His imagination is capacious, nothing deemed ineligible
if it stirs being into language and language into being. No reader is
excluded: professional or amateur, expert or lay. Anyone who can read
poetry can read Bachelard---a philosopher of the infinite in the
infinitesimal, of the mystical in matter. Daydreams and fantasies are
grist for poetic reverie as much as masterpieces by Dante or Baudelaire.
"When we dream, we are phenomenologists without realizing it," Bachelard
tells us.[[]{#calibre_link-44 .pt}]{.osf}[[7]{.osf}](#calibre_link-26)
We are born poets whether we like it or not, though what we do with it
is our singular responsibility.

*The Poetics of Space* not only summarizes the author's previous
approaches to literary language---serving as canopy for its intertwining
branches---it also signals his clearest philosophical insights. It is
here that Bachelard inaugurates the distinctions between a
"phenomenology of soul" (intuition) as opposed to a "phenomenology of
mind" (analysis) and between "superlative" imagination and "comparative"
reason (poetic words, he notes, are not comparisons but
transformations). And it is also in this work that he sharpens the
crucial difference between harmonic values (indeterminate reverberation)
and empirical facts (determinate observation). Its sequel, *The Poetics
of Reverie*, will elaborate on these key phenomenological insights while
incorporating themes from Jungian depth-psychology, including those of
*animus* and *anima* and the importance of imaginary idealization in
their reconciliation.

Bachelard's poetics of space equally entails a poetics of time. The
temporality of the image is, he insists, that of the instant. Here we
are concerned with epiphanies that riddle the continuity of time.
Bachelard claims that every true poetic image breaks with linear clock
time, introducing a dimension of verticality in depth and
height.[[]{#calibre_link-45 .pt}]{.osf}[[8]{.osf}](#calibre_link-27)
Where prosaic time is evolving and continuous (like Bergson's), poetic
time is disruptive and surprising. Echoing Coleridge's definition of
poetry as the "balance or reconciliation of opposite or discordant
qualities," Bachelard maintains that the poetic instant is a "harmonic
relation between
opposites."[]{#calibre_link-46}[[9]{.osf}](#calibre_link-28) Confronted
by the successive antitheses of ordinary time, the poet refuses to
comply, resisting the habit of chronological sequencing by transmuting
opposition into instantaneous "ambivalence" (where contraries coexist).
The poetic imagination thus substitutes simultaneity for succession. It
calls for a radical transmutation of values in a gesture Bachelard calls
"rapture" or "ecstasy." A genuine poetics of space explodes the
continuum of the world's time, as happens in the reading or dreaming of
a great fantasy. Just think, for example, of how the creative revisiting
of a childhood room can provoke a sense of "involuntary memory" that
renders the recalled image timeless and essential---the past suddenly
transformed into a miraculous present, as in the Proustian remembrance
of the mother's bedtime kiss. But for Bachelard the imagination even
surpasses the limits of the personal past, embracing what he calls the
"antecedence of being." His ruminations on the epiphanic power of
dwellings---from nests and shells to cellars and attics---epitomize this
ontological embrace.

But perhaps the most original contribution that *The Poetics of Space*
makes to contemporary poetics is its exploration of the rapport between
imagination and *language*. It is here that Bachelard clarifies his bold
claim that images "speak" the emergence of being, setting verbs in
motion and turning sensations into metaphors by inviting us to live
figuratively. For this reason, he insists, images are more demanding and
rewarding than ideas. They give logos to perception. So that, as he
says, we can devote our reading being to an image that confers being on
us. In fact, the image that is the pure product of "absolute
imagination" is a specific phenomenon of the *speaking
creature.*[[]{#calibre_link-47 .pt}]{.osf}[[10]{.osf}](#calibre_link-29)
Here, under the ancient Greek term *Logos*---with its metaphysical and
biblical resonances---Bachelard brings together the fundamental notions
of Being, Word and Creation. But the Logos that commands our attention
speaks in the lower case of cadences and rhymes. Bachelard always sounds
the extraordinary in the ordinary.

So where does this Logos speak from? Bracketing standard causal and
metaphysical accounts, Bachelard adopts what he calls a phenomenological
attitude of "daily crisis" that allows consciousness to be exposed to
the moment's gift.[[]{#calibre_link-48
.pt}]{.osf}[[11]{.osf}](#calibre_link-30) Resolved to let images speak
for themselves, he resists all determinist models of explaining
consciousness in terms of prior infantile, historical or behavioral
events. One cannot, he says, explain "the flower by the
fertilizer."[[]{#calibre_link-49
.pt}]{.osf}[[12]{.osf}](#calibre_link-31) Or again:

Poetry extends well beyond psychoanalysis on every side. From a dream it
always makes a daydream \[*rêverie*\]. And the poetic daydream cannot
content itself with the rudiments of a story; it cannot be tied to a
knotty complex. The poet lives a daydream that is awake, but above all,
his daydream remains in the world, facing worldly things. It gathers the
universe together around and in an object.[[]{#calibre_link-50
.pt}]{.osf}[[13]{.osf}](#calibre_link-32)[]{.osf}

Thus a poet can, for example, condense cosmic wealth into the image of a
slender casket, the universe into a miniature purse. Images captured
from the past act as triggers into a timeless elemental unconscious,
extending across individuals and generations, and opening up a limitless
future. He writes: "The casket contains the things that are
*unforgettable,* unforgettable for us, but also unforgettable for those
to whom we are going to give our treasures. Here the past, the present
and a future are condensed. Thus the casket is memory of what is
immemorial."[]{#calibre_link-51}[[14]{.osf}](#calibre_link-33)[]{.osf}

 • • • 

Bachelard's work had a considerable impact on his intellectual
contemporaries. He influenced structuralists like Foucault and Althusser
with his revolutionary notion of the "epistemological break" (the idea
of radical rupture between different paradigms of knowledge),
existentialists like Merleau-Ponty with his discovery of the imaginary
as a cosmic-psychic "element," and hermeneutic thinkers like Ricoeur
with the claim that the image is a four-way relationship between author,
reader, text and world. Contrary to the formalist ideology of the
absolute text (closed in on itself), Bachelard celebrated the
interactive function of imagination as a symbolizing process involving
someone saying something to someone about something. Poetics, for
Bachelard, is not a matter of anonymous floating signifiers; it signals
a relational dynamics between beings, involving vital dimensions of
intimacy, secrecy, desire and repose. Imagination is at its best when it
is incarnate, elemental, opening out into time and space, even when the
space is elsewhere---before being, beneath being, beyond being, more
than being. For Bachelard, images are not merely seen but lived. They
are not just vision, but the cosmos itself as it expands and amplifies
from the minute to the magnified, creating a "concordance of world
immensity with intimate depth of
being."[]{#calibre_link-52}[[15]{.osf}](#calibre_link-34)[ ]{.osf}Images
touch us at the deepest place of existence and remake the world again
and again. Baudelaire---oft cited by Bachelard---expresses this with his
notion of "correspondences" that transform vast expanses into the
intensity of our inmost being. Correspondences institute "transactions
between two kinds of grandeur"---inner and outer.[[]{#calibre_link-53
.pt}]{.osf}[[16]{.osf}](#calibre_link-35) They draft peace treaties
between self and world. "In the realm of images, there can be no
contradiction."[]{#calibre_link-54}[[17]{.osf}](#calibre_link-36)[]{.osf}

The ultimate task of a phenomenology of imagination is, Bachelard
concludes, to capture images at their *inception,* as they begin anew.
In this the phenomenologist and the poet are one, for they both know
that imaginative contact with the outer world renews our inner being. To
imagine going down into the water or wandering in the desert is to
change space; and to change space is to change
being.[[]{#calibre_link-55 .pt}]{.osf}[[18]{.osf}](#calibre_link-37) To
dream otherwise---even if it is for the moment of a reverie or poem---is
to *exist* otherwise. And Bachelard invites each reader to join company
with his walking companions---Rilke, Lautréamont, Mallarmé, Poe---on
such grand imaginary journeys. Once you have entered the poetics of
space there is no going back. The home you revisit is never the same
again.

[RICHAR]{.scap1}[D KEARNEY]{.scap1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-6 .calibre}
::: basic-text-frame
# [NOTES]{.pt} {#calibre_link-513 .bmhead}

[
[]{#calibre_link-20}]{.note-number}[[1]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-38)[.
]{.note-number}Rilke, "Archaic Torso of Apollo."

[
[]{#calibre_link-21}]{.note-number}[[2]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-39)[.
]{.note-number}Gaston Bachelard, *The Poetics of Space* *(*henceforth
*PS),* trans. Maria Jolas (New York: Penguin, [2014]{.scap1}), p.
[21]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-22}]{.note-number}[[3]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-40)[.
]{.note-number}*PS*, p. [1]{.scap1}. It is important nonetheless to note
that Bachelard's turn toward poetics did not mean turning his back on
science. His main career remained that of a philosopher of science and,
while he saw poetic imagination and scientific reason as traveling on
apparently separate tracks, he also saw interesting links between them,
especially in their prioritizing of the possible over the real and in
their transformation of ordinary language (see Roch Smith, "Gaston
Bachelard and the Power of Poetic Being," in *French Literature Series,*
vol. IV, \[[1977]{.scap1}\], pp. [235]{.scap1}--[37]{.scap1}). It was
Bachelard's hope to return to more writing on science after *The Poetics
of Reverie* (henceforth *PR*). Also alluding to the subtle relationship
between science and poetics in Bachelard, Etienne Gilson notes in his
foreword to the [1963]{.scap1} edition of *The Poetics of Space*
(Boston: Beacon, [1994]{.scap1}): "\[Bachelard's\] whole career was
founded upon his philosophical critique of scientific knowledge and his
conception of a free type of rationalism, quite different from the
abstract mode of thinking which the word usually designates, and wholly
bent upon the art of using reason as an instrument to achieve an always
closer approach to concrete reality" (p. viii).

[
[]{#calibre_link-23}]{.note-number}[[4]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-41)[.
]{.note-number}*PS*, pp. [1]{.scap1}--[2]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-24}]{.note-number}[[5]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-42)[.
]{.note-number}As he later put it in *The Poetics of Reverie*: "The more
subtle duality of the Voice and the Sound rises to the cosmic level of a
duality of the breath and the wind. Where is the dominant being of the
spoken reverie? When a dreamer speaks, who is speaking, he or the
world? . . . 'All the being of the world, if it dreams, dreams that it
is speaking' \[Henri Bosco\]. But does the being of the world dream? Ah!
long ago, before 'culture,' who would have doubted it? Everyone knew
that metal ripened slowly in the mine. And how can anything ripen
without dreaming?" *PR*, trans. Daniel Russell (Boston: Beacon,
[1971]{.scap1}), p. [187]{.scap1}. See also Richard Kearney, *Poetics of
Imagining* (New York: Fordham University Press, [1998]{.scap1}), pp.
[109]{.scap1}--[10]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-25}]{.note-number}[[6]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-43)[.
]{.note-number}*PS,* p. [96]{.scap1}. On sounding the vibrant Logos of
being, see also *Poetics of Imagining,* *p.* [107]{.scap1} et seq., and
Eileen Rizo-Patron's excellent study "Awakening the Inner Ear: Gadamer
and Bachelard in Search of a Living Logos," *Translation and Literary
Studies*, ed. Marella Feltrin-Morris *et al.* (New York: St. Jerome
Publishing, [2012]{.scap1}), pp. [52]{.scap1}--[68]{.scap1}, esp. pp.
[57]{.scap1}--[61]{.scap1}. See also Miles Kennedy, *A Concrete
Bachelardian Metaphysics* (Oxford: Peter Lang, [2012]{.scap1}).

[
[]{#calibre_link-26}]{.note-number}[[7]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-44)[.
]{.note-number}*PS,* p. [122]{.scap1}. See also *Poetics of Imagining:*
in Bachelard "the authentic image . . . does not represent something, it
addresses someone" (p. [109]{.scap1}).

[
[]{#calibre_link-27}]{.note-number}[[8]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-45)[.
]{.note-number}Bachelard, "Poetic Instant and Metaphysical Instant," in
*Intuition of the Instant,* trans. Eileen Rizo-Patron (Evanston, IL:
Northwestern University Press, [2013]{.scap1}), pp.
[58]{.scap1}--[63]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-28}]{.note-number}[[9]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-46)[.
]{.note-number}Bachelard, *Intuition of the Instant*, p. [59]{.scap1}.
On Bachelard's critique of Bergson's notion of time, see Jean-François
Perraudin, "A Non-Bergsonian Bachelard," in *Continental Philosophy
Review* [41]{.scap1} ([2008]{.scap1}): [463]{.scap1}--[79]{.scap1}. See
also Richard Kearney, "Bachelard and the Epiphanic Instant," in
*Philosophy Today (SPEP Supplement),* vol. [33]{.scap1}
([2008]{.scap1}): [38]{.scap1}--[44]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-29}]{.note-number}[[10]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-47)[.
]{.note-number}*PS*, p. [96]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-30}]{.note-number}[[11]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-48)[.
]{.note-number}*PS*, p. [3]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-31}]{.note-number}[[12]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-49)[.
]{.note-number}PS, p. [14]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-32}]{.note-number}[[13]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-50)[.
]{.note-number}*PS*, p. [105]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-33}]{.note-number}[[14]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-51)[.
]{.note-number}*PS,* *p.* [105]{.scap1}. On Bachelard's own past see the
very poignant piece "Bachelard et sa fille," by Alain Garric, in
Libellules, *Le Monde,* January [4]{.scap1}, [2004]{.scap1}. Here it is
worth recalling Bachelard's comment on poetic time in *The Poetics of
Reverie:* "In reverie we re-enter into contact with possibilities which
destiny has not been able to make use of. A great paradox is connected
with the reveries toward childhood: in us this dead past has a
future . . . which opens before any rediscovered image" (*PR,* *p.*
[112]{.scap1}). Poetic reverie performs a double action of retrieving
unactivated seeds of the past while simultaneously provoking crises and
ruptures that break the conjunctive tissue of time and carve open new
spaces of becoming (*PS,* p. [31]{.scap1}).

[
[]{#calibre_link-34}]{.note-number}[[15]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-52)[.
]{.note-number}*PS,* p. [207]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-35}]{.note-number}[[16]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-53)[.
]{.note-number}*PS,* p. [210]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-36}]{.note-number}[[17]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-54)[.
]{.note-number}*PS,* p. [219]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-37}]{.note-number}[[18]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-55)[.
]{.note-number}*PS,* pp. [221]{.scap1}--[23]{.scap1}.[]{.scap1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-7 .calibre}
::: basic-text-frame
# [Suggestions for Further Reading]{.pt} {#calibre_link-514 .fmhead}

WORKS BY GASTON BACHELARD

Bachelard, Gaston. *Intuition of the Instant*. Trans. Eileen
Rizo-Patron. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press,
[2013]{.scap1}.

---------. *Dialectics of Duration*. Trans. Mary McAllester Jones.
Manchester, UK: Clinamen Press, [2000]{.scap1}.

---------. *Lautréamont*. Trans. Robert S. Dupree. Dallas: Dallas
Institute Publications, [1986]{.scap1}.

---------. *Air and Dreams: An Essay on the Imagination of Movement*.
Trans. Edith Farrell and Frederick Farrell. Dallas: Dallas Institute
Publications, [1988]{.scap1}.

---------. *Earth and Reveries of Repose: An Essay on Images of
Interiority*. Trans. Mary McAllester. Dallas: Dallas Institute
Publications, [2011]{.scap1}.

---------. *The Right to Dream*. Trans. J. A. Underwood. Dallas: Dallas
Institute Publications, [1988]{.scap1}.

CRITICAL SOURCES

Gilson, Etienne. "Foreword" to *The Poetics of Space*. Trans. Maria
Jolas. Boston: Beacon Press, [1994]{.scap1}, pp. xi--xiv.

Kaplan, Edward. "Gaston Bachelard's Philosophy of Imagination,"
*Philosophy and Phenomenological Research,* [1972]{.scap1}, pp.
[1]{.scap1}--[24]{.scap1}.

Kearney, Richard. "Bachelard and the Epiphanic Instant." *Philosophy
Today* [52]{.scap1} ([2008]{.scap1}): [38]{.scap1}--[45]{.scap1}.

---------. "The Poetical Imagination" (Gaston Bachelard). In *Poetics of
Imagining*. New York: Fordham University Press, [1998]{.scap1}, pp.
[96]{.scap1}--[119]{.scap1}.

Kennedy, Miles. *Home: A Concrete Bachelardian Metaphysics*. Oxford:
Peter Lang, [2011]{.scap1}.

McAllester Jones, Mary. *Gaston Bachelard: Subversive Humanist*. Madison
and London: University of Wisconsin Press, [1991]{.scap1}.

Rizo-Patron, Eileen. "Awakening the Inner Ear: Gadamer and Bachelard in
Search of a Living Logos." *Translation and Literary Studies*. Ed.
Marella Feltrin-Morris et al. Manchester, UK: [2012]{.scap1}, pp.
[54]{.scap1}--[68]{.scap1}.

---------. "*Regressus ad Uterum*: Bachelard's Elemental Hermeneutics."
*Philosophy Today* [52]{.scap1} ([2008]{.scap1}):
[21]{.scap1}--[30]{.scap1}.

Smith, Roch C. *Gaston Bachelard*. Boston: Twayne Publishers,
[1982]{.scap1}. See especially the chapter "A Phenomenology of the
Creative Imagination," pp. [116]{.scap1}--[34]{.scap1}.

---------. "Gaston Bachelard and the Poetic Power of Being." *French
Literary Criticism* IV ([1977]{.scap1}): [235]{.scap1}--[38]{.scap1}.

RELATED READINGS

Casey, Edward S. *Getting Back into Place: Toward a Renewed
Understanding of Place-World*. Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
[1993]{.scap1}.

Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. "Space." *The Phenomenology of Perception*.
Trans. Colin Smith. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, [1962]{.scap1}, pp.
[243]{.scap1}--[98]{.scap1}.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-8 .calibre}
::: basic-text-frame
# [INTRODUCTION]{.pt} {#calibre_link-515 .fmhead}

I

A philosopher who has evolved his entire thinking from the fundamental
themes of the philosophy of science, and followed the main line of the
active, growing rationalism of contemporary science as closely as he
could, must forget his learning and break with all his habits of
philosophical research, if he wants to study the problems posed by the
poetic imagination. For here the cultural past doesn't count. The long
day-in, day-out effort of putting together and constructing his thoughts
is ineffectual. One must be receptive, receptive to the image at the
moment it appears: if there be a philosophy of poetry, it must appear
and re-appear through a significant verse, in total adherence to an
isolated image; to be exact, in the very ecstasy of the newness of the
image. The poetic image is a sudden salience on the surface of the
psyche, the lesser psychological causes of which have not been
sufficiently investigated. Nor can anything general and co-ordinated
serve as a basis for a philosophy of poetry. The idea of principle or
"basis" in this case would be disastrous, for it would interfere with
the essential psychic actuality, the essential novelty of the poem. And
whereas philosophical reflection applied to scientific thinking
elaborated over a long period of time requires any new idea to become
integrated in a body of tested ideas, even though this body of ideas be
subjected to profound change by the new idea (as is the case in all the
revolutions of contemporary science), the philosophy of poetry must
acknowledge that the poetic act has no past, at least no recent past, in
which its preparation and appearance could be followed.

Later, when I shall have occasion to mention the relation of a new
poetic image to an archetype lying dormant in the depths of the
unconscious, I shall have to make it understood that this relation is
not, properly speaking, a *causal* one. The poetic image is not subject
to an inner thrust. It is not an echo of the past. On the contrary:
through the brilliance of an image, the distant past resounds with
echoes, and it is hard to know at what depth these echoes will
reverberate and die away. Because of its novelty and its action, the
poetic image has an entity and a dynamism of its own; it is referable to
a direct *ontology.* This ontology is what I plan to study.

Very often, then, it is in the opposite of causality, that is, in
*reverberation,* which has been so subtly analyzed by
Minkowski,[]{#calibre_link-281}[[1]{.osf}](#calibre_link-56) that I
think we find the real measure of the being of a poetic image. In this
reverberation, the poetic image will have a sonority of being. The poet
speaks on the threshold of being. Therefore, in order to determine the
being of an image, we shall have to experience its reverberation in the
manner of Minkowski's phenomenology.

To say that the poetic image is independent of causality is to make a
rather serious statement. But the causes cited by psychologists and
psychoanalysts can never really explain the wholly unexpected nature of
the new image, any more than they can explain the attraction it holds
for a mind that is foreign to the process of its creation. The poet does
not confer the past of his image upon me, and yet his image immediately
takes root in me. The communicability of an unusual image is a fact of
great ontological significance. We shall return to this question of
communion through brief, isolated, rapid actions. Images excite
us---afterwards---but they are not the phenomena of an excitement. In
all psychological research, we can, of course, bear in mind
psychoanalytical methods for determining the personality of a poet, and
thus find a measure of the pressures---but above all of the
oppressions---that a poet has been subjected to in the course of his
life. But the poetic act itself, the sudden image, the flare-up of being
in the imagination, are inaccessible to such investigations. In order to
clarify the problem of the poetic image philosophically, we shall have
to have recourse to a phenomenology of the imagination. By this should
be understood a study of the phenomenon of the poetic image when it
emerges into the consciousness as a direct product of the heart, soul
and being of man, apprehended in his actuality.

II

I shall perhaps be asked why, departing from my former point of view, I
now seek a phenomenological determination of images. In my earlier works
on the subject of the imagination, I did, in fact, consider it
preferable to maintain as objective a position as possible with regard
to the images of the four material elements, the four principles of the
intuitive cosmogonies, and, faithful to my habits as a philosopher of
science, I tried to consider images without attempting personal
interpretation. Little by little, this method, which has in its favor
scientific prudence, seemed to me to be an insufficient basis on which
to found a metaphysics of the imagination. The "prudent" attitude itself
is a refusal to obey the immediate dynamics of the image. I have come to
realize how difficult it is to break away from this "prudence." To say
that one has left certain intellectual habits behind is easy enough, but
how is it to be achieved? For a rationalist, this constitutes a minor
daily crisis, a sort of split in one's thinking which, even though its
object be partial---a mere image---has nonetheless great psychic
repercussions. However, this minor cultural crisis, this crisis on the
simple level of a new image, contains the entire paradox of a
phenomenology of the imagination, which is: how can an image, at times
very unusual, appear to be a concentration of the entire psyche?
How---with no preparation---can this singular, short-lived event
constituted by the appearance of an unusual poetic image, react on other
minds and in other hearts, despite all the barriers of common sense, all
the disciplined schools of thought, content in their immobility?

It seemed to me, then, that this transsubjectivity of the image could
not be understood, in its essence, through the habits of subjective
reference alone. Only phenomenology---that is to say, consideration of
the *onset of the image* in an individual consciousness---can help us to
restore the subjectivity of images and to measure their fullness, their
strength and their transsubjectivity. These subjectivities and
transsubjectivities cannot be determined once and for all, for the
poetic image is essentially *variational,* and not, as in the case of
the concept, *constitutive.* No doubt, it is an arduous task---as well
as a monotonous one---to isolate the transforming action of the poetic
imagination in the detail of the variations of the images. For a reader
of poems, therefore, an appeal to a doctrine that bears the frequently
misunderstood name of phenomenology risks falling on deaf ears. And yet,
independent of all doctrine, this appeal is clear: the reader of poems
is asked to consider an image not as an object and even less as the
substitute for an object, but to seize its specific reality. For this,
the act of the creative consciousness must be systematically associated
with the most fleeting product of that consciousness, the poetic image.
At the level of the poetic image, the duality of subject and object is
iridescent, shimmering, unceasingly active in its inversions. In this
domain of the creation of the poetic image by the poet, phenomenology,
if one dare to say so, is a microscopic phenomenology. As a result, this
phenomenology will probably be strictly elementary. In this union,
through the image, of a pure but short-lived subjectivity and a reality
which will not necessarily reach its final constitution, the
phenomenologist finds a field for countless experiments; he profits by
observations that can be exact because they are simple, because they
"have no consequences," as is the case with scientific thought, which is
always related thought. The image, in its simplicity, has no need of
scholarship. It is the property of a naïve consciousness; in its
expression, it is youthful language. The poet, in the novelty of his
images, is always the origin of language. To specify exactly what a
phenomenology of the image can be, to specify that the image comes
*before* thought, we should have to say that poetry, rather than being a
phenomenology of the mind, is a phenomenology of the soul. We should
then have to collect documentation on the subject of the *dreaming
consciousness.*

The language of contemporary French philosophy---and even more so,
psychology---hardly uses the dual meaning of the words "soul" and
"mind." As a result, they are both somewhat deaf to certain themes that
are very numerous in German philosophy, in which the distinction between
mind and soul (*der Geist und die Seele*) is so clear. But since a
philosophy of poetry must be given the entire force of the vocabulary,
it should not simplify, not harden anything. For such a philosophy, mind
and soul are not synonymous, and by taking them as such, we bar
translation of certain invaluable texts, we distort documents brought to
light thanks to the archeologists of the image. The word "soul" is an
immortal word. In certain poems it cannot be effaced, for it is a word
born of our breath.[[]{#calibre_link-282
.pt}]{.osf}[[2]{.osf}](#calibre_link-57) The vocal importance alone of a
word should arrest the attention of a phenomenologist of poetry. The
word "soul" can, in fact, be poetically spoken with such conviction that
it constitutes a commitment for the entire poem. The poetic register
that corresponds to the soul must therefore remain open to our
phenomenological investigations.

In the domain of painting, in which realization seems to imply decisions
that derive from the mind, and rejoin obligations of the world of
perception, the phenomenology of the soul can reveal the first
commitment of an oeuvre. René Huyghe, in his very fine preface for the
exhibition of Georges Rouault's works in Albi, wrote: "If we wanted to
find out wherein Rouault explodes definitions . . . we should perhaps
have to call upon a word that has become rather outmoded, which is the
word, soul." He goes on to show that in order to understand, to sense
and to love Rouault's work, we must "start from the center, at the very
heart of the circle from where the whole thing derives its source and
meaning: and here we come back again to that forgotten, outcast word,
the soul." Indeed, the soul---as Rouault's painting proves---possesses
an inner light, the light that an inner vision knows and expresses in
the world of brilliant colors, in the world of sunlight, so that a
veritable reversal of psychological perspectives is demanded of those
who seek to understand, at the same time that they love Rouault's
painting. They must participate in an inner light which is not a
reflection of a light from the outside world. No doubt there are many
facile claims to the expressions "inner vision" and "inner light." But
here it is a painter speaking, a producer of lights. He knows from what
heat source the light comes. He experiences the intimate meaning of the
passion for red. At the core of such painting, there is a soul in
combat---the fauvism, the wildness, is interior. Painting like this is
therefore a phenomenon of the soul. The oeuvre must redeem an
impassioned soul.

These pages by René Huyghe corroborate my idea that it is reasonable to
speak of a phenomenology of the soul. In many circumstances we are
obliged to acknowledge that poetry is a commitment of the soul. A
consciousness associated with the soul is more relaxed, less
intentionalized than a consciousness associated with the phenomena of
the mind. Forces are manifested in poems that do not pass through the
circuits of knowledge. The dialectics of inspiration and talent become
clear if we consider their two poles: the soul and the mind. In my
opinion, soul and mind are indispensable for studying the phenomena of
the poetic image in their various nuances, above all, for following the
evolution of poetic images from the original state of revery to that of
execution. In fact, in a future work, I plan to concentrate particularly
on poetic revery as a phenomenology of the soul. In itself, revery
constitutes a psychic condition that is too frequently confused with
dream. But when it is a question of poetic revery, of revery that
derives pleasure not only from itself, but also prepares poetic pleasure
for other souls, one realizes that one is no longer drifting into
somnolence. The mind is able to relax, but in poetic revery the soul
keeps watch, with no tension, calmed and active. To compose a finished,
well-constructed poem, the mind is obliged to make projects that
prefigure it. But for a simple poetic image, there is no project; a
flicker of the soul is all that is needed.

And this is how a poet poses the phenomenological problem of the soul in
all clarity. Pierre-Jean Jouve
writes:[]{#calibre_link-283}[[3]{.osf}](#calibre_link-58) "Poetry is a
soul inaugurating a form." The soul inaugurates. Here it is the supreme
power. It is human dignity. Even if the "form" was already well-known,
previously discovered, carved from "commonplaces," before the interior
poetic light was turned upon it, it was a mere object for the mind. But
the soul comes and inaugurates the form, dwells in it, takes pleasure in
it. Pierre-Jean Jouve's statement can therefore be taken as a clear
maxim of a phenomenology of the soul.

III

Since a phenomenological inquiry on poetry aspires to go so far and so
deep, because of methodological obligations, it must go beyond the
sentimental resonances with which we receive (more or less
richly---whether this richness be within ourselves or within the poem) a
work of art. This is where the phenomenological doublet of resonances
and repercussions must be sensitized. The resonances are dispersed on
the different planes of our life in the world, while the repercussions
invite us to give greater depth to our own existence. In the resonance
we hear the poem, in the reverberations we speak it, it is our own. The
reverberations bring about a change of being. It is as though the poet's
being were our being. The multiplicity of resonances then issues from
the reverberations' unity of being. Or, to put it more simply, this is
an impression that all impassioned poetry-lovers know well: the poem
possesses us entirely. This grip that poetry acquires on our very being
bears a phenomenological mark that is unmistakable. The exuberance and
depth of a poem are always phenomena of the resonance-reverberation
doublet. It is as though the poem, through its exuberance, awakened new
depths in us. In order to ascertain the psychological action of a poem,
we should therefore have to follow the two perspectives of
phenomenological analysis, toward the outpourings of the mind and toward
the profundities of the soul.

Needless to say, the reverberation, in spite of its derivative name, has
a simple phenomenological nature in the domain of poetic imagination.
For it involves bringing about a veritable awakening of poetic creation,
even in the soul of the reader, through the reverberations of a single
poetic image. By its novelty, a poetic image sets in motion the entire
linguistic mechanism. The poetic image places us at the origin of the
speaking being.

Through this reverberation, by going *immediately* beyond all psychology
or psychoanalysis, we feel a poetic power rising naïvely within us.
After the original reverberation, we are able to experience resonances,
sentimental repercussions, reminders of our past. But the image has
touched the depths before it stirs the surface. And this is also true of
a simple experience of reading. The image offered us by reading the poem
now becomes really our own. It takes root in us. It has been given us by
another, but we begin to have the impression that we could have created
it, that we should have created it. It becomes a new being in our
language, expressing us by making us what it expresses; in other words,
it is at once a becoming of expression, and a becoming of our being.
Here expression creates being.

This last remark defines the level of the ontology toward which I am
working. As a general thesis I believe that everything specifically
human in man is *logos.* One would not be able to meditate in a zone
that preceded language. But even if this thesis appears to reject an
ontological depth, it should be granted, at least as a working
hypothesis appropriate to the subject of the poetic imagination.

Thus the poetic image, which stems from the logos, is personally
innovating. We cease to consider it as an "object" but feel that the
"objective" critical attitude stifles the "reverberation" and rejects on
principle the depth at which the original poetic phenomenon starts. As
for the psychologist, being deafened by the resonances, he keeps trying
to *describe* his feelings. And the psychoanalyst, victim of his method,
inevitably intellectualizes the image, losing the reverberations in his
effort to untangle the skein of his interpretations. He understands the
image more deeply than the psychologist. But that's just the point, he
"understands" it. For the psychoanalyst, the poetic image always has a
context. When he interprets it, however, he translates it into a
language that is different from the poetic logos. Never, in fact, was
*"traduttore, traditore"* more justifiably applicable.

When I receive a new poetic image, I experience its quality of
inter-subjectivity. I know that I am going to repeat it in order to
communicate my enthusiasm. When considered in transmission from one soul
to another, it becomes evident that a poetic image eludes causality.
Doctrines that are timidly causal, such as psychology, or strongly
causal, such as psychoanalysis, can hardly determine the ontology of
what is poetic. For nothing prepares a poetic image, especially not
culture, in the literary sense, and especially not perception, in the
psychological sense.

I always come then to the same conclusion: the essential newness of the
poetic image poses the problem of the speaking being's creativeness.
Through this creativeness the imagining consciousness proves to be, very
simply but very purely, an origin. In a study of the imagination, a
phenomenology of the poetic imagination must concentrate on bringing out
this quality of origin in various poetic images.

IV

By thus limiting my inquiry to the poetic image at its origin,
proceeding from pure imagination, I leave aside the problem of the
*composition* of the poem as a grouping together of numerous images.
Into this composition enter certain psychologically complex elements
that associate earlier cultures with actual literary ideals---components
which a complete phenomenology would no doubt be obliged to consider.
But so extensive a project might be prejudicial to the purity of the
phenomenological observations, however elementary, that I should like to
present. The real phenomenologist must make it a point to be
systematically modest. This being the case, it seems to me that merely
to refer to phenomenological reading powers, which make of the reader a
poet on a level with the image he has read, shows already a taint of
pride. Indeed, it would be a lack of modesty on my part to assume
personally a reading power that could match and re-live the power of
organized, complete creation implied by a poem in its entirety. But
there is even less hope of attaining to a synthetic phenomenology which
would dominate an entire oeuvre, as certain psychoanalysts believe they
can do. It is therefore on the level of detached images that I shall
succeed in "reverberating" phenomenologically.

Precisely this touch of pride, this lesser pride, this mere reader's
pride that thrives in the solitude of reading, bears the unmistakable
mark of phenomenology, if its simplicity is maintained. Here the
phenomenologist has nothing in common with the literary critic who, as
has frequently been noted, judges a work that he could not create and,
if we are to believe certain facile condemnations, would not want to
create. A literary critic is a reader who is necessarily severe. By
turning inside out like a glove an overworked complex that has become
debased to the point of being part of the vocabulary of statesmen, we
might say that the literary critic and the professor of rhetoric, who
know-all and judge-all, readily go in for a simplex of superiority. As
for me, being an addict of felicitous reading, I only read and re-read
what I like, with a bit of reader's pride mixed in with much enthusiasm.
But whereas pride usually develops into a massive sentiment that weighs
upon the entire psyche, the touch of pride that is born of adherence to
the felicity of an image remains secret and unobtrusive. It is within
us, mere readers that we are, it is for us, and for us alone. It is a
homely sort of pride. Nobody knows that in reading we are re-living our
temptations to be a poet. All readers who have a certain passion for
reading nurture and repress, through reading, the desire to become a
writer. When the page we have just read is too near perfection, our
modesty suppresses this desire. But it reappears, nevertheless. In any
case, every reader who re-reads a work that he likes knows that its
pages *concern* him. In Jean-Pierre Richard's excellent collection of
essays entitled *Poésie et profondeur* (Poetry and Depth), there is one
devoted to Baudelaire and one to Verlaine. Emphasis is laid on
Baudelaire, however, since, as the author says, his work "concerns us."
There is great difference of tone between the two essays. Unlike
Baudelaire, Verlaine does not attract complete phenomenological
attention. And this is always the case. In certain types of reading with
which we are in deep sympathy, in the very expression itself, we are the
"beneficiaries." Jean-Paul Richter, in *Le* *Titan,* gives the following
description of his hero: "He read eulogies of great men with as much
pleasure as though he himself had been the object of these
panegyrics."[]{#calibre_link-284}[[4]{.osf}](#calibre_link-59) In any
case, harmony in reading is inseparable from admiration. We can admire
more or less, but a sincere impulse, a little impulse toward admiration,
is always necessary if we are to receive the phenomenological benefit of
a poetic image. The slightest critical consideration arrests this
impulse by putting the mind in second position, destroying the
primitivity of the imagination. In this admiration, which goes beyond
the passivity of contemplative attitudes, the joy of reading appears to
be the reflection of the joy of writing, as though the reader were the
writer's ghost. At least the reader participates in the joy of creation
that, for Bergson, is the sign of
creation.[]{#calibre_link-285}[[5]{.osf}](#calibre_link-60) Here,
creation takes place on the tenuous thread of the sentence, in the
fleeting life of an expression. But this poetic expression, although it
has no vital necessity, has a bracing effect on our lives, for all that.
To speak well is part of living well. The poetic image is an emergence
from language, it is always a little above the language of
signification. By living the poems we read, we have then the salutary
experience of emerging. This, no doubt, is emerging at short range. But
these acts of emergence are repeated; poetry puts language in a state of
emergence, in which life becomes manifest through its vivacity. These
linguistic impulses, which stand out from the ordinary rank of pragmatic
language, are miniatures of the vital impulse. A micro-Bergsonism that
abandoned the thesis of language-as-instrument in favor of the thesis of
language-as-reality would find in poetry numerous documents on the
intense life of language.

Thus, along with considerations on the life of words, as it appears in
the evolution of language across the centuries, the poetic image, as a
mathematician would say, presents us with a sort of differential of this
evolution. A great verse can have a great influence on the soul of a
language. It awakens images that had been effaced, at the same time that
it confirms the unforeseeable nature of speech. And if we render speech
unforeseeable, is this not an apprenticeship to freedom? What delight
the poetic imagination takes in making game of censors! Time was when
the poetic arts codified the licenses to be permitted. Contemporary
poetry, however, has introduced freedom in the very body of the
language. As a result, poetry appears as a phenomenon of freedom.

V

Even at the level of an isolated poetic image, if only in the
progression of expression constituted by the verse, the phenomenological
reverberation can appear; and in its extreme simplicity, it gives us
mastery of our tongue. Here we are in the presence of a minuscule
phenomenon of the shimmering consciousness. The poetic image is
certainly the psychic event that has the least importance. To seek
justification of it in terms of perceptible reality, to determine its
place and rôle in the poem's composition, are two tasks that do not need
to be undertaken until later. In the first phenomenological inquiry of
the poetic imagination, the isolated image, the phrase that carries it
forward, the verse, or occasionally the stanza in which the poetic image
radiates, form *language areas* that should be studied by means of
topoanalysis. J. B. Pontalis, for instance, presents Michel Leiris as a
"lonely prospector in the galleries of
words,"[]{#calibre_link-286}[[6]{.osf}](#calibre_link-61) which
describes extremely well this fibered space traversed by the simple
impetus of words that have been experienced. The atomism of conceptual
language demands reasons for fixation, forces of centralization. But the
verse always has a movement, the image flows into the line of the verse,
carrying the imagination along with it, as though the imagination
created a nerve fiber. Pontalis adds the following (p. [932]{.scap1}),
which deserves to be remembered as a sure index for a phenomenology of
expression: "The speaking subject is the entire subject." And it no
longer seems paradoxical to say that the speaking subject exists in his
entirety in a poetic image, because unless he abandons himself to it
without reservations, he does not enter into the poetic space of the
image. Very clearly, the poetic image furnishes one of the simplest
experiences of language that has been lived. And if, as I propose to do,
it is considered as an origin of consciousness, it points to a
phenomenology.

Also, if we had to name a "school" of phenomenology, it would no doubt
be in connection with the poetic phenomenon that we should find the
clearest, the really elementary, lessons. In a recent book, J. H. Van
den Berg[]{#calibre_link-287}[[7]{.osf}](#calibre_link-62) writes:
"Poets and painters are born phenomenonologists." And noting that things
"speak" to us and that, as a result of this fact, if we give this
language its full value, we have a contact with things, Van den Berg
adds: "We are continually living a solution of problems that reflection
can not hope to solve." The philosopher whose investigations are
centered on the speaking being will find encouragement in these lines by
this learned Dutch phenomenologist.

VI

The phenomenological situation with regard to psychoanalytical
investigation will perhaps be more precisely stated if, in connection
with poetic images, we are able to isolate a sphere of *pure
sublimation;* of a sublimation which sublimates nothing, which is
relieved of the burden of passion, and freed from the pressure of
desire. By thus giving to the poetic image at its peak an absolute of
sublimation, I place heavy stakes on a simple nuance. It seems to me,
however, that poetry gives abundant proof of this absolute sublimation,
as will be seen frequently in the course of this work. When
psychologists and psychoanalysts are furnished this proof, they cease to
see anything in the poetic image but a simple game, a short-lived,
totally vain game. Images, in particular, have no significance for
them---neither from the standpoint of the passions, nor from that of
psychology or psychoanalysis. It does not occur to them that the
significance of such images is precisely a poetic significance. But
poetry is there with its countless surging images, images through which
the creative imagination comes to live in its own domain.

For a phenomenologist, the attempt to attribute antecedents to an image,
when we are in the very existence of the image, is a sign of inveterate
psychologism. On the contrary, let us take the poetic image in its
being. For the poetic consciousness is so wholly absorbed by the image
that appears on the language, above customary language; the language it
speaks with the poetic image is so new that correlations between past
and present can no longer be usefully considered.

The examples I shall give of breaks in significance, sensation and
sentiment will oblige the reader to grant me that the poetic image is
under the sign of a new being.

This new being is happy man.

Happy in speech, therefore unhappy in reality, will be the
psychoanalyst's immediate objection. Sublimation, for him, is nothing
but a vertical compensation, a flight upwards, exactly in the same way
that compensation is a lateral flight. And right away, the psychoanalyst
will abandon ontological investigation of the image, to dig into the
past of man. He sees and points out the poet's secret sufferings. He
explains the flower by the fertilizer.

The phenomenologist does not go that far. For him, the image is there,
the word speaks, the word of the poet speaks to him. There is no need to
have lived through the poet's sufferings in order to seize the felicity
of speech offered by the poet---a felicity that dominates tragedy
itself. Sublimation in poetry towers above the psychology of the
mundanely unhappy soul. For it is a fact that poetry possesses a
felicity of its own, however great the tragedy it may be called upon to
illustrate.

Pure sublimation, as I see it, poses a serious problem of method, for,
needless to say, the phenomenologist cannot disregard the deep
psychological reality of the processes of sublimation that have been so
lengthily examined by psychoanalysis. His task is that of proceeding
phenomenologically to images which have not been experienced, and which
life does not prepare, but which the poet creates; of living what has
not been lived, and being receptive to an overture of language. There
exist a few poems, such as certain poems by Pierre-Jean Jouve, in which
experiences of this kind may be found. Indeed, I know of no oeuvre that
has been nourished on psychoanalytical meditation more than Jouve's.
However, here and there, his poetry passes through flames of such
intensity that we no longer need live at its original source. He himself
has said:[]{#calibre_link-288}[[8]{.osf}](#calibre_link-63) "Poetry
constantly surpasses its origins, and because it suffers more deeply in
ecstasy or in sorrow, it retains greater freedom." Again, on page
[112]{.scap1}: "The further I advanced in time, the more the plunge was
controlled, removed from the contributory cause, directed toward the
pure form of language." I cannot say whether or not Pierre-Jean Jouve
would agree to consider the causes divulged by psychoanalysis as
"contributory." But in the region of "the pure form of language" the
psychoanalyst's causes do not allow us to predict the poetic image in
its newness. They are, at the very most, opportunities for liberation.
And in the poetic age in which we live, it is in this that poetry is
specifically "surprising." Its images are therefore unpredictable. Most
literary critics are insufficiently aware of this unpredictability,
which is precisely what upsets the plans of the usual psychological
explanations. But the poet states clearly: "Poetry, especially in its
present endeavors, (can) only correspond to attentive thought that is
enamored of something unknown, and essentially receptive to becoming."
Later, on page [170]{.scap1}: "Consequently, a new definition of a poet
is in view, which is: he who knows, that is to say, who transcends, and
names what he knows." Lastly (p.[10]{.scap1}): "There is no poetry
without absolute creation."

Such poetry is rare.[]{#calibre_link-289}[[9]{.osf}](#calibre_link-64)
The great mass of poetry is more mixed with passion, more psychologized.
Here, however, rarity and exception do not confirm the rule, but
contradict it and set up a new regime. Without the region of absolute
sublimation---however restrained and elevated it may be, and even though
it may seem to lie beyond the reach of psychologists or psychoanalysts,
who, after all, have no reason to examine pure poetry---poetry's exact
polarity cannot be revealed.

We may hesitate in determining the exact level of disruption, we may
also remain for a long time in the domain of the confusing passions that
*perturb* poetry. Moreover, the height at which we encounter pure
sublimation is doubtless not the same for all souls. But at least the
necessity of separating a sublimation examined by a psychoanalyst from
one examined by a phenomenologist of poetry is a necessity of method. A
psychoanalyst can of course study the human character of poets but, as a
result of his own sojourn in the region of the passions, he is not
prepared to study poetic images in their exalting reality. C. J. Jung
said this, in fact, very clearly: by persisting in the habits of
judgment inherent in psychoanalysis, "interest is diverted from the work
of art and loses itself in the inextricable chaos of psychological
antecedents; the poet becomes a 'clinical case,' an example, to which is
given a certain number in the *psychopathia sexualis.* Thus the
psychoanalysis of a work of art moves away from its object and carries
the discussion into a domain of general human interest, which is not in
the least peculiar to the artist and, particularly, has no importance
for his art."[]{#calibre_link-290}[[10]{.osf}](#calibre_link-65)[
]{.osf}Merely with a view to summarizing this discussion, I should like
to make a polemical remark, although indulging in polemics is not one of
my habits.

A Roman said to a shoemaker who had directed his gaze too high:

*Ne sutor ultra crepidam.*

Every time there is a question of pure sublimation, when the very being
of poetry must be determined, shouldn't the phenomenologist say to the
psychoanalyst:

*Ne psuchor ultra uterum.*

VII

In other words, as soon as an art has become autonomous, it makes a
fresh start. It is therefore salient to consider this start as a sort of
phenomenology. On principle, phenomenology liquidates the past and
confronts what is new. Even in an art like painting, which bears witness
to a skill, the important successes take place independently of skill.
In a study of the painting of Charles Lapicque, by Jean Lescure, we
read: "Although his work gives evidence of wide culture and knowledge of
all the dynamic expressions of space, they are not applied, they are not
made into recipes . . . Knowing must therefore be accompanied by an
equal capacity to forget knowing. Non-knowing is not a form of ignorance
but a difficult transcendence of knowledge. This is the price that must
be paid for an oeuvre to be, at all times, a sort of pure beginning,
which makes its creation an exercise in
freedom."[]{#calibre_link-291}[[11]{.osf}](#calibre_link-66) These lines
are of essential importance for us, in that they may be transposed
immediately into a phenomenology of the poetic. In poetry, non-knowing
is a primal condition; if there exists a skill in the writing of poetry,
it is in the minor task of associating images. But the entire life of
the image is in its dazzling splendor, in the fact that an image is a
transcending of all the premises of sensibility.

It becomes evident, then, that a man's work stands out from life to such
an extent that life cannot explain it. Jean Lescure says of the painter
(loc. cit., p. [132]{.scap1}): "Lapicque demands of the creative act
that it should offer him as much surprise as life itself." Art, then, is
an increase of life, a sort of competition of surprises that stimulates
our consciousness and keeps it from becoming somnolent. In a quotation
of Lapicque himself (given by Lescure, p. [132]{.scap1}) we read: "If,
for instance, I want to paint horses taking the water hurdle at the
Auteuil race-course, I expect my painting to give me as much that is
unexpected, although of another kind, as the actual race I witnessed
gave me. Not for a second can there be any question of reproducing
exactly a spectacle that is already in the past. But I have to re-live
it entirely, in a manner that is new and, this time, from the standpoint
of painting. By doing this, I create for myself the possibility of a
fresh impact." And Lescure concludes: "An artist does not create the way
he lives, he lives the way he creates."

Thus, contemporary painters no longer consider the image as a simple
substitute for a perceptible reality. Proust said already of roses
painted by Elstir that they were "a new variety with which this painter,
like some clever horticulturist, had enriched the Rose
family."[]{#calibre_link-292}[[12]{.osf}](#calibre_link-67)[ ]{.osf}

VIII

Academic psychology hardly deals with the subject of the poetic image,
which is often mistaken for simple metaphor. Generally, in fact, the
word *image,* in the works of psychologists, is surrounded with
confusion: we see images, we reproduce images, we retain images in our
memory. The image is everything except a direct product of the
imagination. In Bergson's *Matière et mémoire* (Matter and Memory), in
which the image concept is very widely treated, there is only one
reference (on p. [198]{.scap1}) to the *productive* imagination. This
production remains, therefore, an act of lesser freedom, that has no
relation to the great free acts stressed by Bergsonian philosophy. In
this short passage, the philosopher refers to the "play of fantasy" and
the various images that derive from it as "so many liberties that the
mind takes with nature." But these liberties, in the plural, do not
commit our being; they do not add to the language nor do they take it
out of its utilitarian rôle. They really are so much "play." Indeed, the
imagination hardly lends iridescence to our recollections. In this
domain of poeticized memory, Bergson is well this side of Proust. The
liberties that the mind takes with nature do not really designate the
nature of the mind.

I propose, on the contrary, to consider the imagination as a major power
of human nature. To be sure, there is nothing to be gained by saying
that the imagination is the faculty of producing images. But this
tautology has at least the virtue of putting an end to comparisons of
images with memories.

By the swiftness of its actions, the imagination separates us from the
past as well as from reality; it faces the future. To the *function of
reality,* wise in experience of the past, as it is defined by
traditional psychology, should be added a *function of unreality,* which
is equally positive, as I tried to show in certain of my earlier works.
Any weakness in the function of unreality will hamper the productive
psyche. If we cannot imagine, we cannot foresee.

But to touch more simply upon the problems of the poetic imagination, it
is impossible to receive the psychic benefit of poetry unless these two
functions of the human psyche---the function of the real and the
function of the unreal---are made to co-operate. We are offered a
veritable cure of rhythmo-analysis through the poem, which interweaves
real and unreal, and gives dynamism to language by means of the dual
activity of signification and poetry. And in poetry, the commitment of
the imagining being is such that it is no longer merely the subject of
the verb "to adapt oneself." Actual conditions are no longer
determinant. With poetry, the imagination takes its place on the margin,
exactly where the function of unreality comes to charm or to
disturb---always to awaken---the sleeping being lost in its automatisms.
The most insidious of these automatisms, the automatism of language,
ceases to function when we enter into the domain of pure sublimation.
Seen from this height of pure sublimation, reproductive imagination
ceases to be of much importance. To quote Jean-Paul
Richter:[]{#calibre_link-293}[[13]{.osf}](#calibre_link-68)
"Reproductive imagination is the prose of productive imagination."

IX

In this philosophical introduction---doubtless too long---I have
summarized certain general themes that I should like to put to the test
in the work that follows, as also in a few others which I hope to write.
In the present volume, my field of examination has the advantage of
being well circumscribed. Indeed, the images I want to examine are the
quite simple images of *felicitous space.* In this orientation, these
investigations would deserve to be called topophilia. They seek to
determine the human value of the sorts of space that may be grasped,
that may be defended against adverse forces, the space we love. For
diverse reasons, and with the differences entailed by poetic shadings,
this is eulogized space. Attached to its protective value, which can be
a positive one, are also imagined values, which soon become dominant.
Space that has been seized upon by the imagination cannot remain
indifferent space subject to the measures and estimates of the surveyor.
It has been lived in, not in its positivity, but with all the partiality
of the imagination. Particularly, it nearly always exercises an
attraction. For it concentrates being within limits that protect. In the
realm of images, the play between the exterior and intimacy is not a
balanced one. On the other hand, hostile space is hardly mentioned in
these pages. The space of hatred and combat can only be studied in the
context of impassioned subject matter and apocalyptic images. For the
present, we shall consider the images that *attract.* And with regard to
images, it soon becomes clear that to attract and to repulse do not give
contrary experiences. The terms are contrary. When we study electricity
or magnetism, we can speak symmetrically of repulsion and attraction.
All that is needed is a change of algebraic signs. But images do not
adapt themselves very well to quiet ideas, or above all, to definitive
ideas. The imagination is ceaselessly imagining and enriching itself
with new images. It is this wealth of imagined being that I should like
to explore.

Here, then, is a rapid account of the chapters that compose this book.

First of all, as is proper in a study of images of intimacy, we shall
pose the problem of the poetics of the house. The questions abound: how
can secret rooms, rooms that have disappeared, become abodes for an
unforgettable past? Where and how does repose find especially conducive
situations? How is it that, at times, a provisional refuge or an
occasional shelter is endowed in our intimate daydreaming with virtues
that have no objective foundation? With the house image we are in
possession of a veritable principle of psychological integration.
Descriptive psychology, depth psychology, psychoanalysis and
phenomenology could constitute, with the house, the corpus of doctrines
that I have designated by the name of topoanalysis. On whatever
theoretical horizon we examine it, the house image would appear to have
become the topography of our intimate being. In order to give an idea of
how complex is the task of the psychologist who studies the depths of
the human soul, C. G. Jung asks his readers to consider the following
comparison: "We have to describe and to explain a building the upper
story of which was erected in the nineteenth century; the ground floor
dates from the sixteenth century, and a careful examination of the
masonry discloses the fact that it was reconstructed from a
dwelling-tower of the eleventh century. In the cellar we discover Roman
foundation walls, and under the cellar a filled-in cave, in the floor of
which stone tools are found and remnants of glacial fauna in the layers
below. That would be a sort of picture of our mental
structure."[]{#calibre_link-294}[[14]{.osf}](#calibre_link-69)
Naturally, Jung was well aware of the limitations of this comparison
(cf. p. [120]{.scap1}). But from the very fact that it may be so easily
developed, there is ground for taking the house as a *tool for analysis*
of the human soul. With the help of this tool, can we not find within
ourselves, while dreaming in our own modest homes, the consolations of
the cave? Are the towers of our souls razed for all time? Are we to
remain, to quote Gérard de Nerval's famous line, beings whose "towers
have been destroyed"? Not only our memories, but the things we have
forgotten are "housed." Our soul is an abode. And by remembering
"houses" and "rooms," we learn to "abide" within ourselves. Now
everything becomes clear, the house images move in both directions: they
are in us as much as we are in them, and the play is so varied that two
long chapters are needed to outline the implications of house images.

After these two chapters on the houses of man, I studied a series of
images which may be considered the houses of things: drawers, chests and
wardrobes. What psychology lies behind their locks and keys! They bear
within themselves a kind of esthetics of hidden things. To pave the way
now for a phenomenology of what is hidden, one preliminary remark will
suffice: an empty drawer is *unimaginable.* It can only be *thought of.*
And for us, who must describe what we imagine before what we know, what
we dream before what we verify, all wardrobes are full.

At times when we believe we are studying something, we are only being
receptive to a kind of daydreaming. The two chapters that I devoted to
nests and shells---the two refuges of vertebrates and
invertebrates---bear witness to an activity of the imagination which is
hardly curbed by the reality of objects. During my lengthy meditation
upon the imagination of the four elements, I re-lived countless aerial
or aquatic day-dreams, according to whether I followed the poets into
the nest in the tree, or into the sort of animal cave that is
constituted by a shell. Sometimes, even when I touch things, I still
dream of an *element.*

After having followed the daydreams of inhabiting these uninhabitable
places, I returned to images that, in order for us to live them, require
us to become very small, as in nests and shells. Indeed, in our houses
we have nooks and corners in which we like to curl up comfortably. To
curl up belongs to the phenomenology of the verb "to inhabit," and only
those who have learned to do so can inhabit with intensity. In this
respect, we have within ourselves an entire assortment of images and
recollections that we would not readily disclose. No doubt, a
psychoanalyst, who desired to systematize these images of comforting
retreat, could furnish numerous documents. All I had at my disposal were
literary ones. I thus wrote a short chapter on "nooks and corners," and
was surprised myself to see that important writers gave literary dignity
to these psychological documents.

After all these chapters devoted to intimate space, I wanted to see what
the dialectics of large and small offered for a poetics of space, how,
in exterior space, the imagination benefited from the relativity of
size, without the help of ideas and, as it were, quite naturally. I have
put the dialectics of small and large under the signs of miniature and
immensity, but these two chapters are not as antithetical as might be
supposed. In both cases, small and large are not to be seized in their
objectivity, since, in this present work, I only deal with them as the
two poles of a projection of images. In other of my books, particularly
with regard to immensity, I have tried to delineate the poet's
meditations before the more imposing spectacles of
nature.[]{#calibre_link-295}[[15]{.osf}](#calibre_link-70) Here, it is a
matter of participating more intimately in the movement of the image.
For instance, I shall have to prove in following certain poems that the
impression of immensity is in us, and not necessarily related to an
object.

At this point in my book, I had already collected a sufficient number of
images to pose, in my own way, by giving the images their ontological
value, the dialectics of within and without, which leads to a dialectics
of open and closed.

Directly following this chapter on the dialectics of within and without
is a chapter titled "The Phenomenology of Roundness." The difficulty
that had to be overcome in writing this chapter was to avoid all
geometrical evidence. In other words, I had to start with a sort of
intimacy of roundness. I discovered images of this direct roundness
among thinkers and poets, images---and this, for me, was
essential---that were not mere metaphors. This furnished me with a
further opportunity to expose the intellectualism of metaphor and,
consequently, to show once more the activity that is characteristic of
pure imagination.

It was my idea that these two last chapters, which are full of
metaphysical implications, would tie into another book that I should
still like to write. This book would be a condensation of the many
public lectures that I gave at the Sorbonne during the three last years
of my teaching career. But shall I have the strength to write this book?
For there is a great distance between the words we speak uninhibitedly
to a friendly audience and the discipline needed to write a book. When
we are lecturing, we become animated by the joy of teaching and, at
times, our words think for us. But to write a book requires really
serious reflection.

[GASTON BACHELARD]{.scap1}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-9 .calibre}
::: basic-text-frame
# [1]{.osf1} {#calibre_link-516 .chaptnum}

# THE HOUSE. FROM CELLAR TO GARRET. THE [SIGNIFICANCE]{.pt} OF THE HUT {#calibre_link-517 .chapttitle}

*A la porte de la maison qui viendra frapper?*

*Une porte ouverte on entre*

*Une porte fermée un antre*

*Le monde bat de l'autre côté de ma porte.*

[PIER]{.scap1}[RE-ALBERT BIROT]{.scap1}

*Les amusements naturels,* p. [217]{.scap1}

(At the door of the house who will come knocking?

An open door, we enter

A closed door, a den

The world pulse beats beyond my door.)

The house, quite obviously, is a privileged entity for a
phenomenological study of the intimate values of inside space, provided,
of course, that we take it in both its unity and its complexity, and
endeavor to integrate all the special values in one fundamental value.
For the house furnishes us dispersed images and a body of images at the
same time. In both cases, I shall prove that imagination augments the
values of reality. A sort of attraction for images concentrates them
about the house. Transcending our memories of all the houses in which we
have found shelter, above and beyond all the houses we have dreamed we
lived in, can we isolate an intimate, concrete essence that would be a
justification of the uncommon value of all of our images of protected
intimacy? This, then, is the main problem.

In order to solve it, it is not enough to consider the house as an
"object" on which we can make our judgments and daydreams react. For a
phenomenologist, a psychoanalyst, or a psychologist (these three points
of view being named in the order of decreasing efficacy), it is not a
question of describing houses, or enumerating their picturesque features
and analyzing for which reasons they are comfortable. On the contrary,
we must go beyond the problems of description---whether this description
be objective or subjective, that is, whether it give facts or
impressions---in order to attain to the primary virtues, those that
reveal an attachment that is native in some way to the primary function
of inhabiting. A geographer or an ethnographer can give us descriptions
of very varied types of dwellings. In each variety, the phenomenologist
makes the effort needed to seize upon the germ of the essential, sure,
immediate well-being it encloses. In every dwelling, even the richest,
the first task of the phenomenologist is to find the original shell.

But the related problems are many if we want to determine the profound
reality of all the subtle shadings of our attachment for a chosen spot.
For a phenomenologist, these shadings must be taken as the first rough
outlines of a psychological phenomenon. The shading is not an
additional, superficial coloring. We should therefore have to say how we
inhabit our vital space, in accord with all the dialectics of life, how
we take root, day after day, in a "corner of the world."

For our house is our corner of the world. As has often been said, it is
our first universe, a real cosmos in every sense of the word. If we look
at it intimately, the humblest dwelling has beauty. Authors of books on
"the humble home" often mention this feature of the poetics of space.
But this mention is much too succinct. Finding little to describe in the
humble home, they spend little time there; so they describe it as it
actually is, without really experiencing its primitiveness, a
primitiveness which belongs to all, rich and poor alike, if they are
willing to dream.

But our adult life is so dispossessed of the essential benefits, its
anthropocosmic ties have become so slack, that we do not feel their
first attachment in the universe of the house. There is no dearth of
abstract, "world-conscious" philosophers who discover a universe by
means of the dialectical game of the I and the non-I. In fact, they know
the universe before they know the house, the far horizon before the
resting-place; whereas the real beginnings of images, if we study them
phenomenologically, will give concrete evidence of the values of
inhabited space, of the non-I that protects the I.

Indeed, here we touch upon a converse whose images we shall have to
explore: all really inhabited space bears the essence of the notion of
home. In the course of this work, we shall see that the imagination
functions in this direction whenever the human being has found the
slightest shelter: we shall see the imagination build "walls" of
impalpable shadows, comfort itself with the illusion of protection---or,
just the contrary, tremble behind thick walls, mistrust the staunchest
ramparts. In short, in the most interminable of dialectics, the
sheltered being gives perceptible limits to his shelter. He experiences
the house in its reality and in its virtuality, by means of thought and
dreams. It is no longer in its positive aspects that the house is really
"lived," nor is it only in the passing hour that we recognize its
benefits. An entire past comes to dwell in a new house. The old saying:
"We bring our *lares* with us" has many variations. And the daydream
deepens to the point where an immemorial domain opens up for the dreamer
of a home beyond man's earliest memory. The house, like fire and water,
will permit me, later in this work, to recall flashes of daydreams that
illuminate the synthesis of immemorial and recollected. In this remote
region, memory and imagination remain associated, each one working for
their mutual deepening. In the order of values, they both constitute a
community of memory and image. Thus the house is not experienced from
day to day only, on the thread of a narrative, or in the telling of our
own story. Through dreams, the various dwelling-places in our lives
co-penetrate and retain the treasures of former days. And after we are
in the new house, when memories of other places we have lived in come
back to us, we travel to the land of Motionless Childhood, motionless
the way all Immemorial things are. We live fixations, fixations of
happiness.[[]{#calibre_link-296 .pt}]{.osf}[[1]{.osf}](#calibre_link-71)
We comfort ourselves by reliving memories of protection. Something
closed must retain our memories, while leaving them their original value
as images. Memories of the outside world will never have the same
tonality as those of home and, by recalling these memories, we add to
our store of dreams; we are never real historians, but always near
poets, and our emotion is perhaps nothing but an expression of a poetry
that was lost.

Thus, by approaching the house images with care not to break up the
solidarity of memory and imagination, we may hope to make others feel
all the psychological elasticity of an image that moves us at an
unimaginable depth. Through poems, perhaps more than through
recollections, we touch the ultimate poetic depth of the space of the
house.

This being the case, if I were asked to name the chief benefit of the
house, I should say: the house shelters daydreaming, the house protects
the dreamer, the house allows one to dream in peace. Thought and
experience are not the only things that sanction human values. The
values that belong to daydreaming mark humanity in its depths.
Daydreaming even has a privilege of autovalorization. It derives direct
pleasure from its own being. Therefore, the places in which we have
*experienced daydreaming* reconstitute themselves in a new daydream, and
it is because our memories of former dwelling-places are relived as
daydreams that these dwelling-places of the past remain in us for all
time.

Now my aim is clear: I must show that the house is one of the greatest
powers of integration for the thoughts, memories and dreams of mankind.
The binding principle in this integration is the daydream. Past, present
and future give the house different dynamisms, which often interfere, at
times opposing, at others, stimulating one another. In the life of a
man, the house thrusts aside contingencies, its councils of continuity
are unceasing. Without it, man would be a dispersed being. It maintains
him through the storms of the heavens and through those of life. It is
body and soul. It is the human being's first world. Before he is "cast
into the world," as claimed by certain hasty metaphysics, man is laid in
the cradle of the house. And always, in our daydreams, the house is a
large cradle. A concrete metaphysics cannot neglect this fact, this
simple fact, all the more, since this fact is a value, an important
value, to which we return in our daydreaming. Being is already a value.
Life begins well, it begins enclosed, protected, all warm in the bosom
of the house.

From my viewpoint, from the phenomenologist's viewpoint, the conscious
metaphysics that starts from the moment when the being is "cast into the
world" is a secondary metaphysics. It passes over the preliminaries,
when being is being-well, when the human being is deposited in a
being-well, in the well-being originally associated with being. To
illustrate the metaphysics of consciousness we should have to wait for
the experiences during which being is cast out, that is to say, thrown
out, outside the being of the house, a circumstance in which the
hostility of men and of the universe accumulates. But a complete
metaphysics, englobing both the conscious and the unconscious, would
leave the privilege of its values within. Within the being, in the being
of within, an enveloping warmth welcomes being. Being reigns in a sort
of earthly paradise of matter, dissolved in the comforts of an adequate
matter. It is as though in this material paradise, the human being were
bathed in nourishment, as though he were gratified with all the
essential benefits.

When we dream of the house we were born in, in the utmost depths of
revery, we participate in this original warmth, in this well-tempered
matter of the material paradise. This is the environment in which the
protective beings live. We shall come back to the maternal features of
the house. For the moment, I should like to point out the original
fullness of the house's being. Our daydreams carry us back to it. And
the poet well knows that the house holds childhood motionless "in its
arms"[]{#calibre_link-297}[[2]{.osf}](#calibre_link-72):

*Maison, pan de prairie, ô lumière du soir*

*Soudain vous acquérez presque une face humaine*

*Vous êtes près de nous, embrassants, embrassés.*

(House, patch of meadow, oh evening light

Suddenly you acquire an almost human face

You are very near us, embracing and embraced.)

II

Of course, thanks to the house, a great many of our memories are housed,
and if the house is a bit elaborate, if it has a cellar and a garret,
nooks and corridors, our memories have refuges that are all the more
clearly delineated. All our lives we come back to them in our daydreams.
A psychoanalyst should, therefore, turn his attention to this simple
localization of our memories. I should like to give the name of
topoanalysis to this auxiliary of psychoanalysis. Topoanalysis, then,
would be the systematic psychological study of the sites of our intimate
lives. In the theater of the past that is constituted by memory, the
stage setting maintains the characters in their dominant rôles. At times
we think we know ourselves in time, when all we know is a sequence of
fixations in the spaces of the being's stability---a being who does not
want to melt away, and who, even in the past, when he sets out in search
of things past, wants time to "suspend" its flight. In its countless
alveoli space contains compressed time. That is what space is for.

And if we want to go beyond history, or even, while remaining in
history, detach from our own history the always too contingent history
of the persons who have encumbered it, we realize that the calendars of
our lives can only be established in its imagery. In order to analyze
our being in the hierarchy of an ontology, or to psychoanalyze our
unconscious entrenched in primitive abodes, it would be necessary, on
the margin of normal psychoanalysis, to *desocialize* our important
memories, and attain to the plane of the daydreams that we used to have
in the places identified with our solitude. For investigations of this
kind, daydreams are more useful than dreams. They show moreover that
daydreams can be very different from dreams.[[]{#calibre_link-298
.pt}]{.osf}[[3]{.osf}](#calibre_link-73)[]{.osf}

And so, faced with these periods of solitude, the topoanalyst starts to
ask questions: Was the room a large one? Was the garret cluttered up?
Was the nook warm? How was it lighted? How, too, in these fragments of
space, did the human being achieve silence? How did he relish the very
special silence of the various retreats of solitary daydreaming?

Here space is everything, for time ceases to quicken memory.
Memory---what a strange thing it is!---does not record concrete
duration, in the Bergsonian sense of the word. We are unable to relive
duration that has been destroyed. We can only think of it, in the line
of an abstract time that is deprived of all thickness. The finest
specimens of fossilized duration concretized as a result of long
sojourn, are to be found in and through space. The unconscious abides.
Memories are motionless, and the more securely they are fixed in space,
the sounder they are. To localize a memory in time is merely a matter
for the biographer and only corresponds to a sort of external history,
for external use, to be communicated to others. But hermeneutics, which
is more profound than biography, must determine the centers of fate by
ridding history of its conjunctive temporal tissue, which has no action
on our fates. For a knowledge of intimacy, localization in the spaces of
our intimacy is more urgent than determination of dates.

Psychoanalysis too often situates the passions "in the century." In
reality, however, the passions simmer and resimmer in solitude: the
passionate being prepares his explosions and his exploits in this
solitude.

And all the spaces of our past moments of solitude, the spaces in which
we have suffered from solitude, enjoyed, desired and compromised
solitude, remain indelible within us, and precisely because the human
being wants them to remain so. He knows instinctively that this space
identified with his solitude is creative; that even when it is forever
expunged from the present, when, henceforth, it is alien to all the
promises of the future, even when we no longer have a garret, when the
attic room is lost and gone, there remains the fact that we once loved a
garret, once lived in an attic. We return to them in our night dreams.
These retreats have the value of a shell. And when we reach the very end
of the labyrinths of sleep, when we attain to the regions of deep
slumber, we may perhaps experience a type of repose that is pre-human;
pre-human, in this case, approaching the immemorial. But in the daydream
itself, the recollection of moments of confined, simple, shut-in space
are experiences of heartwarming space, of a space that does not seek to
become extended, but would like above all still to be possessed. In the
past, the attic may have seemed too small, it may have seemed cold in
winter and hot in summer. Now, however, in memory recaptured through
daydreams, it is hard to say through what syncretism the attic is at
once small and large, warm and cool, always comforting.

III

This being the case, we shall have to introduce a slight nuance at the
very base of topoanalysis. I pointed out earlier that the unconscious is
housed. It should be added that it is well and happily housed, in the
space of its happiness. The normal unconscious knows how to make itself
at home everywhere, and psychoanalysis comes to the assistance of the
ousted unconscious, of the unconscious that has been roughly or
insidiously dislodged. But psychoanalysis sets the human being in
motion, rather than at rest. It calls on him to live outside the abodes
of his unconscious, to enter into life's adventures, to come out of
himself. And naturally, its action is a salutary one. Because we must
also give an exterior destiny to the interior being. To accompany
psychoanalysis in this salutary action, we should have to undertake a
topoanalysis of all the space that has invited us to come out of
ourselves.

*Emmenez-moi, chemins! . . .*

(Carry me along, oh roads! . . . )

wrote Marceline Desbordes-Valmore, recalling her native Flanders (*Un
ruisseau de la Scarpe*).

And what a dynamic, handsome object is a path! How precise the familiar
hill paths remain for our muscular consciousness! A poet has expressed
all this dynamism in one single line:

*O, mes chemins et leur cadence*

Jean Caubère, *Déserts*

(Oh, my roads and their cadence.)

When I relive dynamically the road that "climbed" the hill, I am quite
sure that the road itself had muscles, or rather, counter-muscles. In my
room in Paris, it is a good exercise for me to think of the road in this
way. As I write this page, I feel freed of my duty to take a walk: I am
sure of having gone out of my house.

And indeed we should find countless intermediaries between reality and
symbols if we gave things all the movements they suggest. George Sand,
dreaming beside a path of yellow sand, saw life flowing by. "What is
more beautiful than a road?" she wrote. "It is the symbol and the image
of an active, varied life" (*Consuelo,* vol. II, p. [116]{.scap1}).

Each one of us, then, should speak of his roads, his crossroads, his
roadside benches; each one of us should make a surveyor's map of his
lost fields and meadows. Thoreau said that he had the map of his fields
engraved in his soul. And Jean Wahl once wrote:

*Le moutonnement des haies*

*C'est en moi que je l'ai.*

*Poème,* p. 46

(The frothing of the hedges

I keep deep inside me.)

Thus we cover the universe with drawings we have lived. These drawings
need not be exact. They need only to be tonalized on the mode of our
inner space. But what a book would have to be written to decide all
these problems! Space calls for action, and before action, the
imagination is at work. It mows and ploughs. We should have to speak of
the benefits of all these imaginary actions. Psychoanalysis has made
numerous observations on the subject of projective behavior, on the
willingness of extroverted persons to exteriorize their intimate
impressions. An exteriorist topoanalysis would perhaps give added
precision to this projective behavior by defining our daydreams of
objects. However, in this present work, I shall not be able to
undertake, as should be done, the two-fold imaginary geometrical and
physical problem of extroversion and introversion. Moreover, I do not
believe that these two branches of physics have the same psychic weight.
My research is devoted to the domain of intimacy, to the domain in which
psychic weight is dominant.

I shall therefore put my trust in the power of attraction of all the
domains of intimacy. There does not exist a real intimacy that is
repellent. All the spaces of intimacy are designated by an attraction.
Their being is well-being. In these conditions, topoanalysis bears the
stamp of a topophilia, and shelters and rooms will be studied in the
sense of this valorization.

IV

These virtues of shelter are so simple, so deeply rooted in our
unconscious that they may be recaptured through mere mention, rather
than through minute description. Here the nuance bespeaks the color. A
poet's word, because it strikes true, moves the very depths of our
being.

Over-picturesqueness in a house can conceal its intimacy. This is also
true in life. But it is truer still in daydreams. For the real houses of
memory, the houses to which we return in dreams, the houses that are
rich in unalterable oneirism, do not readily lend themselves to
description. To describe them would be like showing them to visitors. We
can perhaps tell everything about the present, but about the past! The
first, the oneirically definitive house, must retain its shadows. For it
belongs to the literature of depth, that is, to poetry, and not to the
fluent type of literature that, in order to analyze intimacy, needs
other people's stories. All I ought to say about my childhood home is
just barely enough to place me, myself, in an oneiric situation, to set
me on the threshold of a daydream in which I shall *find* repose in the
past. Then I may hope that my page will possess a sonority that will
ring true---a voice so remote within me, that it will be the voice we
all hear when we listen as far back as memory reaches, on the very
limits of memory, beyond memory perhaps, in the field of the immemorial.
All we communicate to others is an *orientation* towards what is secret
without ever being able to tell the secret objectively. What is secret
never has total objectivity. In this respect, we orient oneirism but we
do not accomplish it.[[]{#calibre_link-299
.pt}]{.osf}[[4]{.osf}](#calibre_link-74)[]{.osf}

What would be the use, for instance, in giving the plan of the room that
was really *my* room, in describing the little room at the *end* of the
garret, in saying that from the window, across the indentations of the
roofs, one could see the hill. I alone, in my memories of another
century, can open the deep cupboard that still retains for me alone that
unique odor, the odor of raisins drying on a wicker tray. The odor of
raisins! It is an odor that is beyond description, one that it takes a
lot of imagination to smell. But I've already said too much. If I said
more, the reader, back in his own room, would not open that unique
wardrobe, with its unique smell, which is the signature of intimacy.
Paradoxically, in order to suggest the values of intimacy, we have to
induce in the reader a state of suspended reading. For it is not until
his eyes have left the page that recollections of my room can become a
threshold of oneirism for him. And when it is a poet speaking, the
reader's soul reverberates; it experiences the kind of reverberation
that, as Minkowski has shown, gives the energy of an origin to being.

It therefore makes sense from our standpoint of a philosophy of
literature and poetry to say that we "write a room," "read a room," or
"read a house." Thus, very quickly, at the very first word, at the first
poetic overture, the reader who is "reading a room" leaves off reading
and starts to think of some place in his own past. You would like to
tell everything about your room. You would like to interest the reader
in yourself, whereas you have unlocked a door to daydreaming. The values
of intimacy are so absorbing that the reader has ceased to read your
room: he sees his own again. He is already far off, listening to the
recollections of a father or a grandmother, of a mother or a servant, of
"the old faithful servant," in short, of the human being who dominates
the corner of his most cherished memories.

And the house of memories becomes psychologically complex. Associated
with the nooks and corners of solitude are the bedroom and the living
room in which the leading characters held sway. The house we were born
in is an inhabited house. In it the values of intimacy are scattered,
they are not easily stabilized, they are subjected to dialectics. In how
many tales of childhood---if tales of childhood were sincere---we should
be told of a child that, lacking a room, went and sulked in his corner!

But over and beyond our memories, the house we were born in is
physically inscribed in us. It is a group of organic habits. After
twenty years, in spite of all the other anonymous stairways, we would
recapture the reflexes of the "first stairway," we would not stumble on
that rather high step. The house's entire being would open up, faithful
to our own being. We would push the door that creaks with the same
gesture, we would find our way in the dark to the distant attic. The
feel of the tiniest latch has remained in our hands.

The successive houses in which we have lived have no doubt made our
gestures commonplace. But we are very surprised, when we return to the
old house, after an odyssey of many years, to find that the most
delicate gestures, the earliest gestures suddenly come alive, are still
faultless. In short, the house we were born in has engraved within us
the hierarchy of the various functions of inhabiting. We are the diagram
of the functions of inhabiting that particular house, and all the other
houses are but variations on a fundamental theme. The word "habit" is
too worn a word to express this passionate liaison of our bodies, which
do not forget, with an unforgettable house.

But this area of detailed recollections that are easily retained because
of the names of things and people we knew in the first house can be
studied by means of general psychology. Memories of dreams, however,
which only poetic meditation can help us to recapture, are more
confused, less clearly drawn. The great function of poetry is to give us
back the situations of our dreams. The house we were born in is more
than an embodiment of home, it is also an embodiment of dreams. Each one
of its nooks and corners was a resting-place for daydreaming. And often
the resting-place particularized the daydream. Our habits of a
particular daydream were acquired there. The house, the bedroom, the
garret in which we were alone, furnished the framework for an
interminable dream, one that poetry alone, through the creation of a
poetic work, could succeed in achieving completely. If we give their
function of shelter for dreams to all of these places of retreat, we may
say, as I pointed out in an earlier
work,[]{#calibre_link-300}[[5]{.osf}](#calibre_link-75) that there
exists for each one of us an oneiric house, a house of dream-memory,
that is lost in the shadow of a beyond of the real past. I called this
oneiric house the crypt of the house that we were born in. Here we find
ourselves at a pivotal point around which reciprocal interpretations of
dreams, through thought and thought through dreams, keep turning. But
the word *interpretation* hardens this about-face unduly. In point of
fact, we are in the unity of image and memory, in the functional
composite of imagination and memory. The positivity of psychological
history and geography cannot serve as a touchstone for determining *the
real being* of our childhood, for childhood is certainly greater than
reality. In order to sense, across the years, our attachment for the
house we were born in, dream is more powerful than thought. It is our
unconscious force that crystalizes our remotest memories. If a compact
center of daydreams of repose had not existed in this first house, the
very different circumstances that surround actual life would have
clouded our memories. Except for a few medallions stamped with the
likeness of our ancestors, our child-memory contains only worn coins. It
is on the plane of the daydream and not on that of facts that childhood
remains alive and poetically useful within us. Through this permanent
childhood, we maintain the poetry of the past. To inhabit oneirically
the house we were born in means more than to inhabit it in memory; it
means living in this house that is gone, the way we used to dream in it.

What special depth there is in a child's daydream! And how happy the
child who really possesses his moments of solitude! It is a good thing,
it is even salutary, for a child to have periods of boredom, for him to
learn to know the dialectics of exaggerated play and causeless, pure
boredom. Alexander Dumas tells in his *Mémoires* that, as a child, he
was bored, bored to tears. When his mother found him like that, weeping
from sheer boredom, she said: "And what is Dumas crying about?" "Dumas
is crying because Dumas has tears," replied the six-year-old child. This
is the kind of anecdote people tell in their memoirs. But how well it
exemplifies absolute boredom, the boredom that is not the equivalent of
the absence of playmates. There are children who will leave a game to go
and be bored in a corner of the garret. How often have I wished for the
attic of my boredom when the complications of life made me lose the very
germ of all freedom!

And so, beyond all the positive values of protection, the house we were
born in becomes imbued with dream values which remain after the house is
gone. Centers of boredom, centers of solitude, centers of daydream group
together to constitute the oneiric house which is more lasting than the
scattered memories of our birthplace. Long phenomenological research
would be needed to determine all these dream values, to plumb the depth
of this dream ground in which our memories are rooted.

And we should not forget that these dream values communicate poetically
from soul to soul. To read poetry is essentially to daydream.

V

A house constitutes a body of images that give mankind proofs or
illusions of stability. We are constantly re-imagining its reality: to
distinguish all these images would be to describe the soul of the house;
it would mean developing a veritable psychology of the house.

To bring order into these images, I believe that we should consider two
principal connecting themes: [1]{.scap1}) A house is imagined as a
vertical being. It rises upward. It differentiates itself in terms of
its verticality. It is one of the appeals to our consciousness of
verticality. [2]{.scap1}) A house is imagined as a concentrated being.
It appeals to our consciousness of centrality.[[]{#calibre_link-301
.pt}]{.osf}[[6]{.osf}](#calibre_link-76)[]{.osf}

These themes are no doubt very abstractly stated. But with examples, it
is not hard to recognize their psychologically concrete nature.

 • • • 

Verticality is ensured by the polarity of cellar and attic, the marks of
which are so deep that, in a way, they open up two very different
perspectives for a phenomenology of the imagination. Indeed, it is
possible, almost without commentary, to oppose the rationality of the
roof to the irrationality of the cellar. A roof tells its *raison
d'être* right away: it gives mankind shelter from the rain and sun he
fears. Geographers are constantly reminding us that, in every country,
the slope of the roofs is one of the surest indications of the climate.
We "understand" the slant of a roof. Even a dreamer dreams rationally;
for him, a pointed roof averts rain clouds. Up near the roof all our
thoughts are clear. In the attic it is a pleasure to see the bare
rafters of the strong framework. Here we participate in the carpenter's
solid geometry.

As for the cellar, we shall no doubt find uses for it. It will be
rationalized and its conveniences enumerated. But it is first and
foremost the *dark entity* of the house, the one that partakes of
subterranean forces. When we dream there, we are in harmony with the
irrationality of the depths.

We become aware of this dual vertical polarity of a house if we are
sufficiently aware of the function of inhabiting to consider it as an
imaginary response to the function of constructing. The dreamer
constructs and reconstructs the upper stories and the attic until they
are well constructed. And, as I said before, when we dream of the
heights we are in the rational zone of intellectualized projects. But
for the cellar, the impassioned inhabitant digs and re-digs, making its
very depth active. The fact is not enough, the dream is at work. When it
comes to excavated ground, dreams have no limit. I shall give later some
deep-cellar reveries. But first let us remain in the space that is
polarized by the cellar and the attic, to see how this polarized space
can serve to illustrate very fine psychological nuances.

Here is how the psychoanalyst, C. G. Jung, has used the dual image of
cellar and attic to analyze the fears that inhabit a house. In Jung's
*Modern Man in Search of a
Soul[]{#calibre_link-302}*[[7]{.osf}](#calibre_link-77) we find a
comparison which is used to make us understand the conscious being's
hope of "destroying the autonomy of complexes by debaptising them." The
image is the following: "Here the conscious acts like a man who, hearing
a suspicious noise in the cellar, hurries to the attic and, finding no
burglars there decides, consequently, that the noise was pure
imagination. In reality, this prudent man did not dare venture into the
cellar."

To the extent that the explanatory image used by Jung convinces us, we
readers relive phenomenologically both fears: fear in the attic and fear
in the cellar. Instead of facing the cellar (the unconscious), Jung's
"prudent man" seeks alibis for his courage in the attic. In the attic
rats and mice can make considerable noise. But let the master of the
house arrive unexpectedly and they return to the silence of their holes.
The creatures moving about in the cellar are slower, less scampering,
more mysterious.

In the attic, fears are easily "rationalized." Whereas in the cellar,
even for a more courageous man than the one Jung mentions,
"rationalization" is less rapid and less clear; also it is never
*definitive.* In the attic, the day's experiences can always efface the
fears of night. In the cellar, darkness prevails both day and night, and
even when we are carrying a lighted candle, we see shadows dancing on
the dark walls.

If we follow the inspiration of Jung's *explanatory* example to a
complete grasp of psychological reality, we encounter a co-operation
between psychoanalysis and phenomenology which must be stressed if we
are to dominate the human phenomenon. As a matter of fact, the image has
to be understood phenomenologically in order to give it psychoanalytical
efficacy. The phenomenologist, in this case, will accept the
psychoanalyst's image in a spirit of shared trepidation. He will revive
the primitivity and the specificity of the fears. In our civilization,
which has the same light everywhere, and puts electricity in its
cellars, we no longer go to the cellar carrying a candle. But the
unconscious cannot be civilized. It takes a candle when it goes to the
cellar. The psychoanalyst cannot cling to the superficiality of
metaphors or comparisons, and the phenomenologist has to pursue every
image to the very end. Here, so far from reducing and explaining, so far
from comparing, the phenomenologist will exaggerate his exaggeration.
Then, when they read Poe's *Tales* together, both the phenomenologist
and the psychoanalyst will understand the value of this achievement. For
these tales are the realization of childhood fears. The reader who is a
"devotee" of reading will hear the accursed cat, which is a symbol of
unredeemed guilt, mewing behind the wall.[[]{#calibre_link-303
.pt}]{.osf}[[8]{.osf}](#calibre_link-78) The cellar dreamer knows that
the walls of the cellar are buried walls, that they are walls with a
single casing, walls that have the entire earth behind them. And so the
situation grows more dramatic, and fear becomes exaggerated. But where
is the fear that does not become exaggerated? In this spirit of shared
trepidation, the phenomenologist listens intently, as the poet Thoby
Marcelin puts it, "flush with madness." The cellar then becomes buried
madness, walled-in tragedy. Stories of criminal cellars leave indelible
marks on our memory, marks that we prefer not to deepen; who would like
to re-read Poe's "The Cask of Amontillado"? In this instance, the
dramatic element is too facile, but it exploits natural fears, which are
inherent to the dual nature of both man and house.

Although I have no intention of starting a file on the subject of human
drama, I shall study a few ultra-cellars which prove that the cellar
dream irrefutably increases reality.

If the dreamer's house is in a city it is not unusual that the dream is
one of dominating in depth the surrounding cellars. His abode wants the
undergrounds of legendary fortified castles, where mysterious passages
that run under the enclosing walls, the ramparts and the moat put the
heart of the castle into communication with the distant forest. The
château planted on the hilltop had a cluster of cellars for roots. And
what power it gave a simple house to be built on this underground clump!

In the novels of Henri Bosco, who is a great dreamer of houses, we come
across ultra-cellars of this kind. Under the house in *L'Antiquaire*
(The Antique Dealer, p. [60]{.scap1}), there is a "vaulted rotunda into
which open four doors." Four corridors lead from the four doors,
dominating, as it were, the four cardinal points of an underground
horizon. The door to the East opens and "we advance subterraneously far
under the house in this neighborhood . . ." There are traces of
labyrinthine dreams in these pages. But associated with the labyrinths
of the corridor, in which the air is "heavy," are rotundas and chapels
that are the sanctuaries of the secret. Thus, the cellar in
*L'Antiquaire* is oneirically complex. The reader must explore it
through dreams, certain of which refer to the suffering in the
corridors, and others to the marvelous nature of underground palaces. He
may become quite lost (actually as well as figuratively). At first he
does not see very clearly the necessity for such a complicated geometry.
Just here, a phenomenological analysis will prove to be effective. But
what does the phenomenological attitude advise? It asks us to produce
within ourselves a reading pride that will give us the illusion of
participating in the work of the author of the book. Such an attitude
could hardly be achieved on first reading, which remains too passive.
For here the reader is still something of a child, a child who is
entertained by reading. But every good book should be re-read as soon as
it is finished. After the sketchiness of the first reading comes the
creative work of reading. We must then know *the problem* that
confronted the author. The second, then the third reading . . . give us,
little by little, the solution of this problem. Imperceptibly, we give
ourselves the illusion that both the problem and the solution are ours.
The psychological nuance: "I should have written that," establishes us
as phenomenologists of reading. But so long as we have not acknowledged
this nuance, we remain psychologists, or psychoanalysts.

What, then, was Henri Bosco's literary problem in his description of the
ultra-cellar? It was to present in one central concrete image a novel
which, in its broad lines, is the novel of *underground maneuvers.* This
worn-out metaphor is illustrated, in this instance, by countless
cellars, a network of passages, and a group of individual cells with
frequently padlocked doors. There, secrets are pondered, projects are
prepared. And, underneath the earth, action gets under way. We are
really in the intimate space of underground maneuvers. It is in a
basement such as this that the antique dealers, who carry the novel
forward, claim to link people's fates. Henri Bosco's cellar, with its
four subdivisions, is a loom on which fates are woven. The hero relating
his adventures has himself a ring of fate, a ring carved with signs that
date from some remote time. However, the strictly underground, strictly
diabolical, activities of the *Antiquaires* fail. For at the very moment
when two great destinies of love are about to be joined, one of the
loveliest sylphs dies in the vault of the accursed house---a creature of
the garden and the tower, the one who was supposed to confer happiness.
The reader who is alive to the accompaniment of cosmic poetry that is
always active beneath the psychological story in Bosco's novels, will
find evidence, in many pages of this book, of the dramatic tension
between the aerial and the terrestrial. But to live such drama as this,
we must re-read the book, we must be able to displace the interest or
carry out our reading in the dual interest of man and things, at the
same time that we neglect nothing of the anthropo-cosmic tissue of a
human life.

 • • • 

In another dwelling into which this novelist takes us, the ultra-cellar
is no longer under the sign of the sinister projects of diabolical men,
but is perfectly natural, inherent to the nature of an underground
world. By following Henri Bosco, we shall experience a house with cosmic
roots.

This house with cosmic roots will appear to us as a stone plant growing
out of the rock up to the blue sky of a tower.

The hero of *L'Antiquaire* having been caught on a compromising visit,
has been obliged to take to the cellar. Right away, however, interest in
the actual story is transferred to the cosmic story. Realities serve
here to reveal dreams. At first we are in the labyrinth of corridors
carved in the rock. Then, suddenly, we come upon a body of murky water.
At this point, description of events in the novel is left in abeyance
and we only find compensation for our perseverance if we participate by
means of our own night dreams. Indeed, a long dream that has an
elemental sincerity is inserted in the story. Here is this poem of the
cosmic cellar:[]{#calibre_link-304}[[9]{.osf}](#calibre_link-79)[]{.osf}

"Just in front of me, water appeared from out of the darkness.

"Water! . . . An immense body of water! . . . And what water! . . .
Black, stagnant, so perfectly smooth that not a ripple, not a bubble,
marred its surface. No spring, no source. It had been there for
thousands of years and remained there, caught unawares by the rock,
spread out in a single, impassive sheet. In its stone matrix, it had
itself become this black, still rock, a captive of the mineral world. It
had been subjected to the crushing mass, the enormous upheavals, of this
oppressive world. Under this heavy weight, its very nature appeared to
have been changed as it seeped through the thicknesses of the lime slabs
that held its secret fast. Thus it had become the densest fluid element
of the underground mountain. Its opacity and
unwonted[]{#calibre_link-305}[[10]{.osf}](#calibre_link-80) consistency
made an unknown substance of it, a substance charged with
phosphorescences that only appeared on the surface in occasional
flashes. These electric tints, which were signs of the dark powers lying
on the bottom, manifested the latent life and formidable power of this
still dormant element. They made me shiver."

But this shiver, we sense, is no longer human fear; this is cosmic fear,
an anthropo-cosmic fear that echoes the great legend of man cast back
into primitive situations. From the cavern carved in the rock to the
underground, from the underground to stagnant water, we have moved from
a constructed to a dreamed world; we have left fiction for poetry. But
reality and dream now form a whole. The house, the cellar, the deep
earth, achieve totality through depth. The house has become a natural
being whose fate is bound to that of mountains and of the waters that
plough the land. The enormous stone plant it has become would not
flourish if it did not have subterranean water at its base. And so our
dreams attain boundless proportions.

The cosmic daydream in this passage of Bosco's book gives the reader a
sense of restfulness, in that it invites him to participate in the
repose to be derived from all deep oneiric experience. Here the story
remains in a suspended time that is favorable to more profound
psychological treatment. Now the account of real events may be resumed;
it has received its provision of "cosmicity" and daydream. And so,
beyond the underground water, Bosco's cellar recovers its stairways.
After this poetic pause, description can begin again to unreel its
itinerary. "A very narrow, steep stairway, which spiraled as it went
higher, had been carved in the rock. I started up it" (p.
[155]{.scap1}). By means of this gimlet, the dreamer succeeds in getting
out of the depths of the earth and begins his adventures in the heights.
In fact, at the very end of countless tortuous, narrow passages, the
reader emerges into a tower. This is the ideal tower that haunts all
dreamers of old houses: it is "perfectly round" and there is "brief
light" from "a narrow window." It also has a vaulted ceiling, which is a
great principle of the dream of intimacy. For it constantly reflects
intimacy at its center. No one will be surprised to learn that the tower
room is the abode of a gentle young girl and that she is haunted by
memories of an ardent ancestress. The round, vaulted room stands high
and alone, keeping watch over the past in the same way that it dominates
space.

On this young girl's missal, handed down from her distant ancestress,
may be read the following motto:

*The flower is always in the almond.*

With this excellent motto, both the house and the bedchamber bear the
mark of an unforgettable intimacy. For there exists no more compact
image of intimacy, none that is more sure of its center, than a flower's
dream of the future while it is still enclosed, tightly folded, inside
its seed. How we should love to see not happiness, but pre-happiness
remain enclosed in the round chamber!

Finally, the house Bosco describes stretches from earth to sky. It
possesses the verticality of the tower rising from the most earthly,
watery depths, to the abode of a soul that believes in heaven. Such a
house, constructed by a writer, illustrates the verticality of the human
being. It is also oneirically complete, in that it dramatizes the two
poles of house dreams. It makes a gift of a tower to those who have
perhaps never even seen a dove-cote. A tower is the creation of another
century. Without a past it is nothing. Indeed, a new tower would be
ridiculous. But we still have books, and they give our day-dreams
countless dwelling-places. Is there one among us who has not spent
romantic moments in the tower of a book he has read? These moments come
back to us. Daydreaming needs them. For on the keyboard of the vast
literature devoted to the function of inhabiting, the tower sounds a
note of immense dreams. How many times, since reading *L'Antiquaire,*
have I gone to live in Henri Bosco's tower!

 • • • 

This tower and its underground cellars extend the house we have just
been studying in both directions. For us, this house represents an
increase in the verticality of the more modest houses that, in order to
satisfy our daydreams, have to be differentiated in height. If I were
the architect of an oneiric house, I should hesitate between a
three-story house and one with four. A three-story house, which is the
simplest as regards essential height, has a cellar, a ground floor and
an attic; while a four-story house puts a floor between the ground floor
and the attic. One floor more, and our dreams become blurred. In the
oneiric house, topoanalysis only knows how to count to three or four.

Then there are the stairways: one to three or four of them, all
different. We always *go down* the one that leads to the cellar, and it
is this going down that we remember, that characterizes its oneirism.
But we go both up and down the stairway that leads to the bed-chamber.
It is more commonly used; we are familiar with it. Twelve-year-olds even
go up it in *ascending scales,* in thirds and fourths, trying to do
fifths, and liking, above all, to take it in strides of four steps at a
time. What joy for the legs to go up four steps at a time!

Lastly, we always *go up* the attic stairs, which are steeper and more
primitive. For they bear the mark of ascension to a more tranquil
solitude. When I return to dream in the attics of yester-year, I never
go down again.

Dreams of stairs have often been encountered in psychoanalysis. But
since it requires an all-inclusive symbolism to determine its
interpretations, psychoanalysis has paid little attention to the
complexity of mixed revery and memory. That is why, on this point, as
well as on others, psychoanalysis is better suited to the study of
dreams than of daydreams. The phenomenology of the daydream can untangle
the complex of memory and imagination; it becomes necessarily sensitive
to the differentiations of the symbol. And the poetic daydream, which
creates symbols, confers upon our intimate moments an activity that is
polysymbolic. Our recollections grow sharper, the oneiric house becomes
highly sensitized. At times, a few steps have engraved in our memories a
slight difference of level that existed in our childhood
home.[[]{#calibre_link-306 .pt}]{.osf}[[11]{.osf}](#calibre_link-81) A
certain room was not only a door, but a door plus three steps. When we
recall the old house in its longitudinal detail, everything that ascends
and descends comes to life again dynamically. We can no longer remain,
to quote Joë Bousquet, men with only one story. "He was a man with only
one story: he had his cellar in his
attic."[]{#calibre_link-307}[[12]{.osf}](#calibre_link-82)[]{.osf}

By way of antithesis, I shall make a few remarks on dwellings that are
oneirically incomplete.

 • • • 

In Paris there are no houses, and the inhabitants of the big city live
in superimposed boxes. "One's Paris room, inside its four walls," wrote
Paul Claudel, "is a sort of geometrical site, a conventional hole, which
we furnish with pictures, objects and wardrobes within a
wardrobe."[]{#calibre_link-308}[[13]{.osf}](#calibre_link-83) The number
of the street and the floor give the location of our "conventional
hole," but our abode has neither space around it nor verticality inside
it. "The houses are fastened to the ground with asphalt, in order not to
sink into the earth."[]{#calibre_link-309}[[14]{.osf}](#calibre_link-84)
They have no roots and, what is quite unthinkable for a dreamer of
houses, sky-scrapers have no cellars. From the street to the roof, the
rooms pile up one on top of the other, while the tent of a horizonless
sky encloses the entire city. But the height of city buildings is a
purely *exterior* one. Elevators do away with the heroism of stair
climbing so that there is no longer any virtue in living up near the
sky. *Home* has become mere horizontality. The different rooms that
compose living quarters jammed into one floor all lack one of the
fundamental principles for distinguishing and classifying the values of
intimacy.

But in addition to the intimate value of verticality, a house in a big
city lacks cosmicity. For here, where houses are no longer set in
natural surroundings, the relationship between house and space becomes
an artificial one. Everything about it is mechanical and, on every side,
intimate living flees. "The streets are like pipes into which men are
sucked up" (Max Picard, loc. cit., p. [119]{.scap1}).

Moreover, our houses are no longer aware of the storms of the outside
universe. Occasionally the wind blows a tile from a roof and kills a
passer-by in the street. But this roof crime is only aimed at the
belated passer-by. Or lightning may for an instant set fire to the
window-panes. The house does not tremble, however, when thunder rolls.
It trembles neither with nor through us. In our houses set close one up
against the other, we are less afraid. A hurricane in Paris has not the
same personal offensiveness towards the dreamer that it has towards the
hermit's house. We shall understand this better, in fact, when we have
studied, further on, *the house's situation in the world,* which gives
us, quite concretely, a variation of the metaphysically summarized
situation of man in the world.

Just here the philosopher who believes in the salutary nature of vast
daydreams is faced with a problem: how can one help confer greater
cosmicity upon the city space that is exterior to one's room? As an
example, here is one dreamer's solution to the problem of noise in
Paris:

When insomnia, which is the philosopher's ailment, is increased through
irritation caused by city noises; or when, late at night, the hum of
automobiles and trucks rumbling through the Place Maubert causes me to
curse my city-dweller's fate, I can recover my calm by living the
metaphors of the ocean. We all know that the big city is a clamorous
sea, and it has been said countless times that, in the heart of night in
Paris, one hears the ceaseless murmur of flood and tide. So I make a
sincere image out of these hackneyed ones, an image that is as much my
own as though I myself had invented it, in line with my gentle mania for
always believing that I am the subject of what I am thinking. If the hum
of cars becomes more painful, I do my best to discover in it the roll of
thunder, of a thunder that speaks to me and scolds me. And I feel sorry
for myself. So there you are, unhappy philosopher, caught up again by
the storm, by the storms of life! I dream an abstract-concrete daydream.
My bed is a small boat lost at sea; that sudden whistling is the wind in
the sails. On every side the air is filled with the sound of furious
klaxoning. I talk to myself to give myself cheer: there now, your skiff
is holding its own, you are safe in your stone boat. Sleep, in spite of
the storm. Sleep in the storm. Sleep in your own courage, happy to be a
man who is assailed by wind and wave.

And I fall asleep, lulled by the noise of Paris.[[]{#calibre_link-310
.pt}]{.osf}[[15]{.osf}](#calibre_link-85)[]{.osf}

In fact, everything corroborates my view that the image of the city's
ocean roar is in the very "nature of things," and that it is a true
image. It is also a salutary thing to naturalize sound in order to make
it less hostile. Just in passing, I have noted the following delicate
nuance of the beneficent image in the work of a young contemporary poet,
Yvonne Caroutch,[]{#calibre_link-311}[[16]{.osf}](#calibre_link-86) for
whom dawn in the city is the "murmur of an empty sea shell." Being
myself an early riser, this image helps me to wake up gently and
naturally. However, any image is a good one, provided we know how to use
it.

We could find many other images on the theme of the city-ocean. Here is
one that occurred to a painter. The art-critic and historian, Pierre
Courthion,[]{#calibre_link-312}[[17]{.osf}](#calibre_link-87) tells that
when Gustave Courbet was confined in the Sainte Pélagie prison, he
wanted to paint a view of Paris, as seen from the top floor of the
prison. In a letter to a friend, Courbet wrote that he was planning to
paint it "the way I do my marines: with an immensely deep sky, and all
its movement, all its houses and domes, imitating the tumultuous waves
of the ocean."

Pursuant to my method, I have retained the coalescence of images that
refuse an absolute anatomy. I had to mention incidentally the house's
"cosmicity." But we shall return later to this characteristic. Now,
after having examined the verticality of the oneiric house, we are going
to study the centers of condensation of intimacy, in which daydream
accumulates.

VI

We must first look for centers of simplicity in houses with many rooms.
For as Baudelaire said, in a palace, "there is no place for intimacy."

But simplicity, which at times is too rationally vaunted, is not a
source of high-powered oneirism. We must therefore experience the
primitiveness of refuge and, beyond situations that have been
experienced, discover situations that have been dreamed; beyond positive
recollections that are the material for a positive psychology, return to
the field of the primitive images that had perhaps been centers of
fixation for recollections left in our memories.

A demonstration of imaginary primitive elements may be based upon the
entity that is most firmly fixed in our memories: the childhood home.

For instance, in the house itself, in the family sitting-room, a dreamer
of refuges dreams of a hut, of a nest, or of nooks and corners in which
he would like to hide away, like an animal in its hole. In this way, he
lives in a region that is beyond human images. If a phenomenologist
could succeed in living the primitiveness of such images, he would
locate elsewhere, perhaps, the problems that touch upon the poetry of
the house. We find a very clear example of this concentration of the joy
of inhabiting in a fragment of Henri Bachelin's life of his
father.[[]{#calibre_link-313
.pt}]{.osf}[[18]{.osf}](#calibre_link-88)[]{.osf}

Henri Bachelin's childhood home could not have been simpler. Although no
different from the other houses in the oversized Morvan village where he
was born, it was nevertheless a roomy home with ample outbuildings in
which the family lived in security and comfort. The lamplit room where,
in the evening, the father read the lives of the saints---he was Church
sexton as well as day-laborer---was the scene of the little boy's
daydreaming of primitiveness, daydreaming that accentuated solitude to
the point of imagining that he lived in a hut in the depth of the
forest. For a phenomenologist who is looking for the roots of the
function of inhabiting, this passage in Henri Bachelin's book represents
a document of great purity. The essential lines are the following (p.
[97]{.scap1}): "At these moments, I felt very strongly---and I swear to
this---that we were cut off from the little town, from the rest of
France, and from the entire world. I delighted in imagining (although I
kept my feelings to myself) that we were living in the heart of the
woods, in the well-heated hut of charcoal burners; I even hoped to hear
wolves sharpening their claws on the heavy granite slab that formed our
doorstep. But our house replaced the hut for me, it sheltered me from
hunger and cold; and if I shivered, it was merely from well-being."
Addressing his father---his novel is constantly written in the second
person---Bachelin adds: "Comfortably seated in my chair, I basked in the
sensation of your strength."

Thus, the author attracts us to the center of the house as though to a
center of magnetic force, into a major zone of protection. He goes to
the very bottom of the "hut dream," which is well-known to everyone who
cherishes the legendary images of primitive houses. But in most hut
dreams we hope to live elsewhere, far from the over-crowded house, far
from city cares. We flee in thought in search of a real refuge. Bachelin
is more fortunate than dreamers of distant escape, in that he finds the
root of the hut dream in the house itself. He has only to give a few
touches to the spectacle of the family sitting-room, only to listen to
the stove roaring in the evening stillness, while an icy wind blows
against the house, to know that at the house's center, in the circle of
light shed by the lamp, he is living in the round house, the primitive
hut, of prehistoric man. How many dwelling places there would be, fitted
one into the other, if we were to realize in detail, and in their
hierarchical order, all the images by means of which we live our
daydreams of intimacy. How many scattered values we should succeed in
concentrating, if we lived the images of our daydreams in all sincerity.

In this passage from Bachelin's book, the hut appears to be the tap-root
of the function of inhabiting. It is the simplest of human plants, the
one that needs no ramifications in order to exist. Indeed, it is so
simple that it no longer belongs to our memories---which at times are
too full of imagery---but to legend; it is a center of legend. When we
are lost in darkness and see a distant glimmer of light, who does not
dream of a thatched cottage or, to go more deeply still into legend, of
a hermit's hut?

A hermit's hut. What a subject for an engraving! Indeed real images are
*engravings,* for it is the imagination that engraves them on our
memories. They deepen the recollections we have experienced, which they
replace, thus becoming imagined recollections. The hermit's hut is a
theme which needs no variations, for at the simplest mention of it,
"phenomenological reverberation" obliterates all mediocre resonances.
The hermit's hut is an engraving that would suffer from any exaggeration
of picturesqueness. Its truth must derive from the intensity of its
essence, which is the essence of the verb "to inhabit." The hut
immediately becomes centralized solitude, for in the land of legend,
there exists no adjoining hut. And although geographers may bring back
photographs of hut villages from their travels in distant lands, our
legendary past transcends everything that has been seen, even everything
that we have experienced personally. The image leads us on towards
extreme solitude. The hermit is *alone* before God. His hut, therefore,
is just the opposite of the monastery. And there radiates about this
centralized solitude a universe of meditation and prayer, a universe
outside the universe. The hut can receive none of the riches "of this
world." It possesses the felicity of intense poverty; indeed, it is one
of the glories of poverty; as destitution increases it gives us access
to absolute refuge.

This valorization of a center of concentrated solitude is so strong, so
primitive, and so unquestioned, that the image of the distant light
serves as a reference for less clearly localized images. When Thoreau
heard the sound of a horn in the depths of the woods, this image with
its hardly determined center, this sound image that filled the entire
nocturnal landscape, suggested repose and confidence to him. That sound,
he said, is as friendly as the hermit's distant candle. And for those of
us who remember, from what intimate valley do the horns of other days
still reach us? Why do we immediately accept the common friendship of
this sound world awakened by the horn, or the hermit's world lighted by
its distant gleam? How is it that images as rare as these should possess
such power over the imagination?

Great images have both a history and a prehistory; they are always a
blend of memory and legend, with the result that we never experience an
image directly. Indeed, every great image has an unfathomable oneiric
depth to which the personal past adds special color. Consequently it is
not until late in life that we really revere an image, when we discover
that its roots plunge well beyond the history that is fixed in our
memories. In the realm of absolute imagination, we remain young late in
life. But we must lose our earthly Paradise in order actually to live in
it, to experience it in the reality of its images, in the absolute
sublimation that transcends all passion. A poet meditating upon the life
of a great poet, that is, Victor-Emile Michelet meditating upon the life
of Villiers de I'Isle-Adam, wrote: "Alas! we have to grow old to conquer
youth, to free it from its fetters and live according to its original
impulse."

Poetry gives not so much a nostalgia for youth, which would be vulgar,
as a nostalgia for the expressions of youth. It offers us images as we
should have imagined them during the "original impulse" of youth. Primal
images, simple engravings are but so many invitations to start imagining
again. They give us back areas of being, houses in which the human
being's certainty of being is concentrated, and we have the impression
that, by living in such images as these, in images that are as
stabilizing as these are, we could start a new life, a life that would
be our own, that would belong to us in our very depths. When we look at
images of this kind, when we read the images in Bachelin's book, *we
start musing on primitiveness.* And because of this very primitiveness,
restored, desired and experienced through simple images, an album of
pictures of huts would constitute a textbook of simple exercises for the
phenomenology of the imagination.

In line with the distant light in the hermit's hut, symbolic of the man
who keeps vigil, a rather large dossier of literary documentation on the
poetry of houses could be studied from the single angle of the lamp that
glows in the window. This image would have to be placed under one of the
greatest of all theorems of the imagination of the world of light: *Tout
ce qui brille voit* (All that glows sees). Rimbaud expressed in three
syllables the following cosmic theorem: "Nacre voit" (Mother-of-pearl
sees).[[]{#calibre_link-314 .pt}]{.osf}[[19]{.osf}](#calibre_link-89)
The lamp keeps vigil, therefore it is vigilant. And the narrower the ray
of light, the more penetrating its vigilance.

The lamp in the window is the house's eye and, in the kingdom of the
imagination, it is never lighted out-of-doors, but is enclosed light,
which can only filter to the outside. A poem entitled *Emmuré*
(Walled-in), begins as follows:

*Une lampe allumée derrière la fenêtre*

*Veille au coeur secret de la nuit.*

(A lighted lamp in the window

Watches in the secret heart of night.)

while a few lines above the same poet speaks:

*Du regard emprisonné*

*Entre ses quatre murs de
pierre[]{#calibre_link-315}*[[20]{.osf}](#calibre_link-90)[]{.osf}

(Of a gaze imprisoned

Between its four stone walls.)

In Henri Bosco's novel *Hyacinthe*, which, together with another story,
*Le jardin d'Hyacinthe* (Hyacinth's Garden), constitutes one of the most
astounding psychological novels of our time, a lamp *is waiting* in the
window, and through it, the house, too, is waiting. The lamp is the
symbol of prolonged waiting.

By means of the light in that far-off house, the house sees, keeps
vigil, vigilantly waits.

When I let myself drift into the intoxication of inverting daydreams and
reality, that faraway house with its light becomes for me, before me, a
house that is looking out---its turn now!---through the keyhole. Yes,
there is someone in that house who is keeping watch, a man is working
there while I dream away. He leads a dogged existence, whereas I am
pursuing futile dreams. Through its light alone, the house becomes
human. It sees like a man. It is an eye open to night.

But countless other images come to embellish the poetry of the house in
the night. Sometimes it glows like a firefly in the grass, a creature
with a solitary light:

*Je verrai vos maisons comme des vers luisants au creux des
collines[]{#calibre_link-316}*[[21]{.osf}](#calibre_link-91)[]{.osf}

(I shall see your houses like fireflies in the hollow of the hills.)

Another poet calls houses that shine on earth "stars of grass"; and
Christiane Barucoa speaks elsewhere of the lamp in the human house as an

*Etoile prisonnière prise au gel de l'instant*

(Imprisoned star caught in the instant's freezing.)

In such images we have the impression that the stars in heaven come to
live on earth, that the houses of men form earthly constellations.

With ten villages and their lights, G.-E. Clancier nails a Leviathan
constellation to the earth:

*Une nuit, dix villages, une montagne,*

*Un léviathan noir clouté d'or.*[[]{#calibre_link-317
.pt}]{.osf}[[22]{.osf}](#calibre_link-92)[]{.osf}

(A night, ten villages, a mountain,

A black, gold-studded Leviathan.)

Erich Neumann has analyzed the dream of a patient who, while looking at
the stars from the top of a tower, saw them rise and shine under the
earth; they emerged from the bowels of the earth. In this obsession, the
earth was not, however, a mere likeness of the starry sky, but the great
life-giving mother of the world, the creator of night and the
stars.[[]{#calibre_link-318 .pt}]{.osf}[[23]{.osf}](#calibre_link-93) In
his patient's dream, Neumann shows the force of the Mother-Earth
(*Mutter-Erde*) archetype. Poetry comes naturally from a daydream, which
is less *insistent* than a night-dream; it is only a matter of an
"instant's freezing." But the poetic document is none the less
indicative. A terrestrial sign is set upon a celestial being. The
archeology of images is thus illumined by the poet's swift,
instantaneous image.

I have dwelt somewhat at length on this apparently commonplace image, in
order to show that images are incapable of repose. Poetic revery, unlike
somnolent revery, never falls asleep. Starting with the simplest of
images, it must always set the waves of the imagination radiating. But
however cosmic the isolated house lighted by the star of its lamp may
become, it will always symbolize solitude. I should like to quote one
last text which stresses this solitude.

In the *Fragments from an intimate diary* that precede a French
collection of Rilke's
letters,[]{#calibre_link-319}[[24]{.osf}](#calibre_link-94) we find the
following scene: one very dark night, Rilke and two friends perceive
"the lighted casement of a distant hut, the hut that stands quite alone
on the horizon before one comes to fields and marshlands." This image of
solitude symbolized by a single light moves the poet's heart in so
personal a way that it isolates him from his companions. Speaking of
this group of three friends, Rilke adds: "Despite the fact that we were
very close to one another, we remained three isolated individuals,
seeing night for the first time." This expression can never be meditated
upon enough, for here the most commonplace image, one that the poet had
certainly seen hundreds of times, is suddenly marked with the sign of
"the first time," and it transmits this sign to the familiar night. One
might even say that light emanating from a lone watcher, who is also a
determined watcher, attains to the power of hypnosis. We are hypnotized
by solitude, hypnotized by the gaze of the solitary house; and the tie
that binds us to it is so strong that we begin to dream of nothing but a
solitary house in the night.

*O Licht im schlafenden
Haus\![]{#calibre_link-320}*[[25]{.osf}](#calibre_link-95)[]{.osf}

(O light in the sleeping house!)

With the example of the hut and the light that keeps vigil on the far
horizon, we have shown the concentration of intimacy in the refuge, in
its most simplified form. At the beginning of this chapter, on the
contrary, I tried to differentiate the house according to its
verticality. Now, still with the aid of pertinent literary documents, I
shall attempt to give a better account of the house's powers of
protection against the forces that besiege it. Then, after having
examined this dynamic dialectics of the house and the universe, we shall
study a number of poems in which the house is a world in itself.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-10 .calibre}
::: basic-text-frame
# [2]{.osf1} {#calibre_link-518 .chaptnum}

# HOUSE AND UNIVERSE {#calibre_link-519 .chapttitle}

*Quand les cimes de notre ciel se rejoindront*

*Ma maison aura un toit.*[[]{#calibre_link-321
.pt}]{.osf}[[1]{.osf}](#calibre_link-96)[]{.osf}

(When the peaks of our sky come together

My house will have a roof.)

In the preceding chapter, I pointed out that it was reasonable to say we
"read a house," or "read a room," since both room and house are
psychological diagrams that guide writers and poets in their analysis of
intimacy. We shall now read slowly several houses and rooms "written" by
great writers.

I

Although at heart a city man, Baudelaire sensed the increased intimacy
of a house when it is besieged by winter. In *Les paradis artificiels*
(p. [280]{.scap1}) he speaks of Thomas de Quincey's joy when, a prisoner
of winter, he read Kant, with the help of the idealism furnished by
opium. The scene takes place in a cottage in Wales. *"Une jolie
habitation ne rend-elle pas l'hiver plus poétique, et l'hiver
n'augmente-t-il pas la poésie de l'habitation? Le blanc cottage était*
[ASSIS]{.scap1} *au fond d'une* [PETITE]{.scap1} *vallé*
[FERMÉE]{.scap1} *de montagnes* [SUFFISAMENT HAUTES;]{.scap1} *il était
comme emmailloté d'arbustes."* ("Isn't it true that a pleasant house
makes winter more poetic, and doesn't winter add to the poetry of a
house? The white cottage sat at the end of a *little* valley, *shut in*
by *rather high* mountains; and it seemed to be *swathed* in shrubs.")

I have underlined the words in this short sentence that belong to the
imagination of repose. And what a quiet setting for an opium-eater,
reading Kant in the combined solitudes of dream and thought! As for the
passage Baudelaire devoted to it, no doubt we can read it the way we can
read any easy, too easy, passage. A literary critic might even be
surprised by the naturalness with which this great poet has used
commonplace images. But if, while reading this over-simplified passage,
we accept the daydreams of repose it suggests; if we pause over the
underlined words, it soon brings tranquility to body and soul. We feel
that we are living in the protective center of the house in the valley.
We too are "swathed" in the blanket of winter.

And we feel warm *because* it is cold out-of-doors. Further on in this
deep-winter "artificial Paradise" Baudelaire declares that dreamers like
a severe winter. "Every year they ask the sky to send down as much snow,
hail and frost as it can contain. What they really need are Canadian or
Russian winters. Their own nests will be all the warmer, all the
downier, all the better
beloved . . ."[]{#calibre_link-322}[[2]{.osf}](#calibre_link-97) Like
Edgar Allan Poe, a great dreamer of curtains, Baudelaire, in order to
protect the winter-girt house from cold added "heavy draperies that hung
down to the floor." Behind dark curtains, snow seems to be whiter.
Indeed, everything comes alive when contradictions accumulate.

Here Baudelaire has furnished us with a centered picture that leads to
the heart of a dream which we can then take over for ourselves. No doubt
we shall give it certain personal features, such as peopling Thomas de
Quincey's cottage with persons from our own past. In this way we receive
the benefits of this evocation without its exaggerations; our most
personal recollections can come and live here. And through some
indefinable current of sympathy, Baudelaire's description has ceased to
be commonplace. But it is always like that: well-determined centers of
revery are means of communication between men who dream as surely as
well-defined concepts are means of communication between men who think.

In *Curiosités esthétiques* (p. [331]{.scap1}) Baudelaire also speaks of
a canvas by Lavieille which shows "a thatched cottage on the edge of a
wood" in winter, "the sad season." "Certain of the effects that
Lavieille often got," wrote Baudelaire, "seem to me to constitute the
very essence of winter happiness." A reminder of winter strengthens the
happiness of inhabiting. In the reign of the imagination alone, a
reminder of winter increases the house's value as a place to live in.

If I were asked to make an expert evaluation of the oneirism in De
Quincey's cottage, as relived by Baudelaire, I should say that there
lingers about it the insipid odor of opium, an atmosphere of drowsiness.
But we are told nothing about the strength of the walls, or the
fortitude of the roof. The house puts up no struggle. It is as though
Baudelaire knew of nothing to shut himself in with but curtains.

This absence of struggle is often the case of the winter houses in
literature. The dialectics of the house and the universe are too simple,
and snow, especially, reduces the exterior world to nothing rather too
easily. It gives a single color to the entire universe which, with the
one word, snow, is both expressed and nullified for those who have found
shelter. In *Les déserts de l'amour* (p. [104]{.scap1}), Rimbaud himself
said: *"C'était comme une nuit d'hiver, avec une neige pour étouffer le
monde décidément."* (It was like a winter's night, with snow to stifle
the world for certain.)

In any case, outside the occupied house, the winter cosmos is a
simplified cosmos. It is a non-house in the same way that metaphysicians
speak of a non-I, and between the house and the non-house it is easy to
establish all sorts of contradictions. Inside the house, everything may
be differentiated and multiplied. The house derives reserves and
refinements of intimacy from winter; while in the outside world, snow
covers all tracks, blurs the road, muffles every sound, conceals all
colors. As a result of this universal whiteness, we feel a form of
cosmic negation in action. The dreamer of houses knows and senses this,
and because of the diminished entity of the outside world, experiences
all the qualities of intimacy with increased intensity.

II

Winter is by far the oldest of the seasons. Not only does it confer age
upon our memories, taking us back to a remote past, but, on snowy days,
the house too is old. It is as though it were living in the past of
centuries gone by. This feeling is described by Bachelin in a passage
that presents winter in all its hostility.[[]{#calibre_link-323
.pt}]{.osf}[[3]{.osf}](#calibre_link-98) "Those were evenings when, in
old houses exposed to snow and icy winds, the great stories, the
beautiful legends that men hand down to one another, take on concrete
meaning and, for those who delve into them, become immediately
applicable. And thus it was, perhaps, that one of our ancestors, who lay
dying in the year one thousand, should have come to believe in the end
of the world." For here the stories that were told were not the fireside
fairy tales recounted by old women; they were stories about men, stories
that reflect upon forces and signs. During these winters, Bachelin
writes elsewhere (p. [58]{.scap1}), "it seems to me that, under the hood
of the great fireplace, the old legends must have been much older then
than they are today." What they really had was the immemorial quality of
the tragic cataclysms that can presage the end of the world.

Recalling these evenings during the dramatic winters in his father's
house, Bachelin writes (p. [104]{.scap1}): "When our companions left us,
their feet deep in snow and their faces in the teeth of the blizzard, it
seemed to me that they were going very far away, to unknown
owl-and-wolf-infested lands. I was tempted to call after them, as people
did in my early history books: "May God help you!"

And what a striking thing it is that a mere image of the old homestead
in the snow-drifts should be able to integrate images of the year one
thousand in the mind of a child.

III

We come now to a case which is more complex, and may even appear to be
paradoxical. It is taken from a passage in Rilke's
correspondence.[[]{#calibre_link-324
.pt}]{.osf}[[4]{.osf}](#calibre_link-99)[]{.osf}

Contrary to the general thesis I set forth in the preceding chapter, for
Rilke, storms are particularly aggressive in cities, where heaven's ire,
too, is most clearly manifested. In the country, apparently, hurricanes
are less hostile to us. From my point of view, this is a paradox of
cosmic origin. But, needless to say, the Rilke fragment is very fine,
and it lends itself to interesting comment.

Here is what Rilke wrote to his fair "musician." "Do you know that when
I am in a city I am frightened by hurricanes at night. It is as though,
in their elemental pride, they did not see us. But they do see a lonely
house in the country; they take it in their powerful arms and, in that
way, they inure it, and when you are there, you would like to be
out-of-doors, in the roaring garden, or at least, stand at the window
and applaud the infuriated old trees that twist and turn as though
possessed by the spirits of the prophets."

Photographically speaking, these lines of Rilke seem to me to be a
"negative" of the house, the reverse of the function of inhabiting. When
the storm rages and lashes the trees, in the shelter of the house, Rilke
would like to be out-of-doors, not through any desire to enjoy the wind
and the rain, but in order to pursue his own revery. So he shares, we
feel, the anger reflex of the tree attacked by the anger of the wind.
But he does not share the house's resistance. He puts his trust in the
wisdom of the storm, in the clear vision of the lightning, and in all
the elements which, even in their rage, see the abodes of men and agree
to spare them.

But this "negative" of an image is nonetheless revealing, for it gives
evidence of a dynamism in combat that is cosmic in its proportions.
Rilke has furnished many proofs---to which we shall often refer---of his
cognizance of the drama that attaches to the dwellings of men. At
whatever dialectical pole the dreamer stands, whether in the house or in
the universe, the dialectics become dynamic. House and space are not
merely two juxtaposed elements of space. In the reign of the
imagination, they awaken daydreams in each other, that are opposed.
Rilke is ready to concede that the old house is "inured" by its trials.
The house capitalizes its victories over the hurricanes. And since, in
all research concerning the imagination, we must leave the realm of
facts behind, we know perfectly that we feel calmer and more confident
when in the old home, in the house we were born in, than we do in the
houses on streets where we have only lived as transients.

IV

Contrary to the "negative" we have just been considering, let us now
take the example of a "positive" that constitutes total adherence to the
drama of the house besieged by storms.

In Henri Bosco's *Malicroix,* the house is called La
Redousse.[[]{#calibre_link-325 .pt}]{.osf}[[5]{.osf}](#calibre_link-100)
It is built on an island in the Camargue region, not far from the great
Rhône river. It is a humble house and appears to lack resistance. We
shall see what fortitude it possessed.

The author takes many pages to prepare us for the storm that is brewing.
A poetic weather forecast goes to the very source from whence the sound
and the movement are to come. With what art, to begin with, he achieves
absolute silence, the immensity of these silent stretches of space!
"There is nothing like silence to suggest a sense of unlimited space.
Sounds lend color to space, and confer a sort of sound body upon it. But
absence of sound leaves it quite pure and, in the silence, we are seized
with the sensation of something vast and deep and boundless. It took
complete hold of me and, for several moments, I was overwhelmed by the
grandeur of this shadowy peace.

"It asserted itself like a person.

"This peace had a body. It was caught up in the night, made of night. A
real, a motionless body."

In this vast prose poem, we come upon passages that contain the same
progression of sounds and fears as is to be found in certain stanzas of
Victor Hugo's *Les Djinns.* Only here, the author takes the time to show
the narrowing of the space at the center of which the house is to live
like an anguished heart. A kind of cosmic anguish precedes the storm.
Then the wind starts to howl at the top of its lungs. Soon the entire
menagerie of the hurricane lifts its voice. If one had the leisure to
analyze the dynamics of storms, what a bestiary of the wind could be
found not only in these pages but throughout Bosco's work. For this
author knows instinctively that all aggression, whether it come from man
or from the world, is of animal origin. However subtle, however
indirect, hidden or contrived a human act of aggression may be, it
reveals an origin that is unredeemed. In the tiniest of hatreds, there
is a little, live, animal filament. And the poet-psychologist---or the
psychologist-poet, if such a one exists---cannot go wrong in marking the
different types of aggression with an animal cry. It is also a terrible
trait of men that they should be incapable of understanding the forces
of the universe intuitively, otherwise than in terms of a psychology of
wrath.

And faced with this pack, which gradually breaks loose, the house
becomes the real being of a pure humanity which defends itself without
ever being responsible for an attack. La Redousse is man's Resistance;
it is *human virtue,* man's grandeur.

Here is the passage that describes the house's human resistance at the
height of the storm (p. [115]{.scap1}):

"The house was fighting gallantly. At first it gave voice to its
complaints; the most awful gusts were attacking it from every side at
once, with evident hatred and such howls of rage that, at times, I
trembled with fear. But it stood firm. From the very beginning of the
storm, snarling winds had been taking the roof to task, trying to pull
it off, to break its back, tear it into shreds, suck it off. But it only
hunched over further and clung to the old rafters. Then other winds,
rushing along close to the ground, charged against the wall. Everything
swayed under the shock of this blow, but the flexible house stood up to
the beast. No doubt it was holding firmly to the soil of the island by
means of the unbreakable roots from which its thin walls of mud-coated
reeds and planks drew their supernatural strength. Though the shutters
and doors were insulted, though huge threats were proferred, and there
was loud bugling in the chimney, it was of no avail. The already human
being in whom I had sought shelter for my body yielded nothing to the
storm. The house clung close to me, like a she-wolf, and at times, I
could smell her odor penetrating maternally to my very heart. That night
she was really my mother.

"She was all I had to keep and sustain me. We were alone."

Discussing maternity in my book, *La terre et les rêveries du
repos,[]{#calibre_link-326}*[[6]{.osf}](#calibre_link-101) I quoted the
following magnificent lines by
Milosz,[]{#calibre_link-327}[[7]{.osf}](#calibre_link-102) in which the
Mother image and the House image are united:

*Je dis ma Mère. Et c'est à vous que je pense, ô Maison!*

*Maison des beaux étés obscurs de mon enfance.*

*(Mélancolie)*

(I say Mother. And my thoughts are of you, oh, House!

House of the lovely dark summers of my childhood.)

(Melancholy)

It was imperative to find a similar image to express the deep gratitude
of the inhabitant of La Redousse. Here, however, the image does not come
from a nostalgia for childhood, but is given in its actuality of
protection. Here, too, in addition to community of affection, there is
community of forces, the concentrated courage and resistance of both
house and man. And what an image of concentrated being we are given with
this house that "clings" to its inhabitant and becomes the cell of a
body with its walls close together. The refuge shrinks in size. And with
its protective qualities increased, it grows outwardly stronger. From
having been a refuge, it has become a redoubt. The thatched cottage
becomes a fortified castle for the recluse, who must learn to conquer
fear within its walls. Such a dwelling has an educative value, for in
this passage of Bosco's book there is a sort of dovetailing of the
reserves of strength with the inner fortresses of courage. In a house
that has become for the imagination the very heart of a cyclone, we have
to go beyond the mere impressions of consolation that we should feel in
any shelter. We have to participate in the dramatic cosmic events
sustained by the combatant house. But the real drama of Malicroix is an
ordeal by solitude. The inhabitant of La Redousse must dominate solitude
in a house on an island where there is no village. He must attain to the
dignity of solitude that had been achieved by one of his ancestors, who
had become a man of solitude as a result of a deep tragedy in his life.
He must live alone in a cosmos which is not that of his childhood. This
man, who comes of gentle, happy people, must cultivate courage in order
to confront a world that is harsh, indigent and cold. The isolated house
furnishes him with strong images, that is, with counsels of resistance.

And so, faced with the bestial hostility of the storm and the hurricane,
the house's virtues of protection and resistance are transposed into
human virtues. The house acquires the physical and moral energy of a
human body. It braces itself to receive the downpour, it girds its
loins. When forced to do so, it bends with the blast, confident that it
will right itself again in time, while continuing to deny any temporary
defeats. Such a house as this invites mankind to heroism of cosmic
proportions. It is an instrument with which to confront the cosmos. And
the metaphysical systems according to which man is "cast into the world"
might meditate concretely upon the house that is cast into the
hurricane, defying the anger of heaven itself. Come what may the house
helps us to say: I will be an inhabitant of the world, in spite of the
world. The problem is not only one of being, it is also a problem of
energy and, consequently, of counter-energy.

In this dynamic rivalry between house and universe, we are far removed
from any reference to simple geometrical forms. A house that has been
experienced is not an inert box. Inhabited space transcends geometrical
space.

But can this transposition of the being of a house into human values be
considered as an activity of metaphor? Isn't this merely a matter of
linguistic imagery? As metaphors, a literary critic would certainly find
them exaggerated. On the other hand, a positivist psychologist would
immediately reduce this language to the psychological reality of the
fear felt by a man immured in his solitude, far from all human
assistance. But phenomenology of the imagination cannot be content with
a reduction which would make the image a subordinate means of
expression: it demands, on the contrary, that images be lived directly,
that they be taken as sudden events in life. When the image is new, the
world is new.

And in reading applied to life, all passivity disappears if we try to
become aware of the creative acts of the poet expressing the world, a
world that becomes accessible to our daydreaming. In Bosco's *Malicroix*
the world influences solitary man more than the characters are able to
do. Indeed, if the many prose-poems the book contains were to be
deleted, all that remained would be the story of a legacy, and a duel
between the notary and the heir. But much is to be gained for a
psychologist of the imagination if to "social" he adds "cosmic" reading.
He comes to realize that the cosmos molds mankind, that it can transform
a man of the hills into a man of islands and rivers, and that the house
remodels man.

With the house that has been experienced by a poet, we come to a
delicate point in anthropo-cosmology. The house, then, really is an
instrument of topoanalysis; it is even an efficacious instrument, for
the very reason that it is hard to use. In short, discussion of our
theses takes place on ground that is unfavorable to us. For, in point of
fact, a house is first and foremost a geometrical object, one which we
are tempted to analyze rationally. Its prime reality is visible and
tangible, made of well hewn solids and well fitted framework. It is
dominated by straight lines, the plumbline having marked it with its
discipline and balance.[[]{#calibre_link-328
.pt}]{.osf}[[8]{.osf}](#calibre_link-103) A geometrical object of this
kind ought to resist metaphors that welcome the human body and the human
soul. But transposition to the human plane takes place immediately
whenever a house is considered as space for cheer and intimacy, space
that is supposed to condense and defend intimacy. Independent of all
rationality, the dream world beckons. And as I read and re-read
*Malicroix,* to quote Pierre-Jean Jouve, "I hear the iron hooves of
dream" on the roof of La Redousse.

But the complex of reality and dream is never definitively resolved. The
house itself, when it starts to live humanly, does not lose all its
"objectivity." We shall therefore have to examine more closely how
houses of the past appear in dream geometry. For these are the houses in
which we are going to recapture the intimacy of the past in our
daydreams. We shall have to apply ourselves increasingly to studying
how, by means of the house, the warm substance of intimacy resumes its
form, the same form that it had when it enclosed original warmth.

*Et l'ancienne maison,*

*Je sens sa rousse tiédeur*

*Vient des sens à l'esprit.*[[]{#calibre_link-329
.pt}]{.osf}[[9]{.osf}](#calibre_link-104)[]{.osf}

(And the old house

I feel its russet warmth

Comes from the senses to the mind.)

V

First of all, these old houses can be drawn---we can make a
representation that has all the characteristics of a copy. An objective
drawing of this kind, independent of all daydreaming, is a forceful,
reliable document that leaves its mark on a biography.

But let this exteriorist representation manifest an art of drawing, or a
talent for representation, and it becomes insistent, inviting. Merely to
judge it as a good, well executed likeness leads to contemplation and
daydreaming. Daydreams return to inhabit an exact drawing and no dreamer
ever remains indifferent for long to a picture of a house.

Long before the time when I began to read poetry every day, I had often
said to myself that I should like to live in a house such as one sees in
old prints. I was most attracted by the bold outlines of the houses in
woodcuts which, it seemed to me, demanded simplicity. Through them, my
daydreams inhabited the essential house.

These naïve daydreams, which I thought were my own, were a source of
astonishment to me when I found traces of them in my reading.

In [1913]{.scap1}, André Lafon had written:

*Je rêve d'un logis, maison basse à fenêtres*

*Hautes, aux trois degrés usés, plats et verdis*

*Logis pauvre et secret à l'air d'antique estampe*

*Qui ne vit qu'en moi-même, où je rentre parfois*

*M'asseoir pour oublier le jour gris et la
pluie[]{#calibre_link-330}*[[10]{.osf}](#calibre_link-105)[]{.osf}

(I dream of a house, a low house with high

Windows, three worn steps, smooth and green

A poor secret house, as in an old print,

That only lives in me, where sometimes I return

To sit down and forget the gray day and the rain.)

André Lafon wrote many other poems under the sign of "the poor house."
In his literary "prints" the house welcomes the reader like a host. A
bit more and he would be ready to seize the chisel and engrave his own
reading.

Certain types of prints end by specifying types of houses. Annie Duthil
wrote:

*Je suis dans une maison d'estampes japonaises*

*Le soleil est partout, car tout est transparent.*[[]{#calibre_link-331
.pt}]{.osf}[[11]{.osf}](#calibre_link-106)[]{.osf}

(I am in a house in a Japanese print

The sun is everywhere, for everything is transparent.)

There exist sunny houses in which, at all seasons, it is summer, houses
that are all windows.

And isn't the poet who wrote the following also an inhabitant of prints?

*Qui n'a pas au fond de son coeur*

*Un sombre château d'Elseneur*

*A l'instar des gens du passé*

*On construit en soi-même pierre*

*Par pierre un grand chateau
hante[]{#calibre_link-332}*[[12]{.osf}](#calibre_link-107)[]{.osf}

(Who has not deep in his heart

A dark castle of Elsinore

In the manner of men of the past

We build within ourselves stone

On stone a vast haunted castle.)

And so I am cheered by the pictures I find in my reading. I go to live
in the "literary prints" poets offer me. The more simple the engraved
house the more it fires my imagination as an inhabitant. It does not
remain a mere "representation." Its lines have *force* and, as a
shelter, it is *fortifying.* It asks to be lived in simply with all the
*security* that *simplicity* gives. The print house awakens a *feeling
for the hut* in me and, through it, I re-experience the *penetrating
gaze* of the *little window.* But see now what has happened! When I
speak the image sincerely, I suddenly feel a need to underline. And what
is *underlining* but *engraving* while we write?

VI

Sometimes the house grows and spreads so that, in order to live in it,
greater elasticity of daydreaming, a daydream that is less clearly
outlined, are needed. "My house," writes Georges
Spyridaki,[]{#calibre_link-333}[[13]{.osf}](#calibre_link-108) "is
diaphanous, but it is not of glass. It is more of the nature of vapor.
Its walls contract and expand as I desire. At times, I draw them close
about me like protective armor . . . But at others, I let the walls of
my house blossom out in their own space, which is infinitely
extensible."

Spyridaki's house breathes. First it is a coat of armor, then it extends
*ad infinitum,* which amounts to saying that we live in it in alternate
security and adventure. It is both cell and world. Here, geometry is
transcended.

To give unreality to an image attached to a strong reality is in the
spirit of poetry. These lines by René
Cazelles[]{#calibre_link-334}[[14]{.osf}](#calibre_link-109) speak to us
of this expansion, if we can inhabit his images. The following was
written in the heart of Provence, a country of sharp contours:

"The undiscoverable house, where this lava flower blows, where storms
and exhausting bliss are born, when will my search for it cease?

"Symmetry abolished, to serve as fodder for the winds

"I should like my house to be similar to that of the ocean wind, all
quivering with gulls."

Thus, an immense cosmic house is a potential of every dream of houses.
Winds radiate from its center and gulls fly from its windows. A house
that is as dynamic as this allows the poet to inhabit the universe. Or,
to put it differently, the universe comes to inhabit his house.

Occasionally, in a moment of repose, the poet returns to the center of
his abode (p. [29]{.scap1}):

*. . . Tout respire à nouveau*

*La nappe est blanche*

(. . . Everything breathes again

The tablecloth is white.)

This bit of whiteness, this tablecloth suffices to anchor the house to
its center. The literary houses described by Georges Spyridaki and René
Cazelles are immense dwellings, the walls of which are on vacation.
There are moments when it is a salutary thing to go and live in them, as
a treatment for claustrophobia.

 • • • 

The image of these houses that integrate the wind, aspire to the
lightness of air, and bear on the tree of their impossible growth a nest
all ready to fly away, may perhaps be rejected by a positive, realistic
mind. But it is of value for a general thesis on the imagination
because, without the poet's knowing it apparently, it is touched by the
attraction of opposites, which lends dynamism to the great archetypes.
In an article[]{#calibre_link-335}[[15]{.osf}](#calibre_link-110) in the
*Eranos* yearbook, Erich Neumann shows that all strongly terrestrial
beings---and a house is strongly terrestrial---are nevertheless subject
to the attractions of an aereal, celestial world. The well-rooted house
likes to have a branch that is sensitive to the wind, or an attic that
can hear the rustle of leaves. The poet who wrote

*L'escalier des arbres*

*On y monte[]{#calibre_link-336}*[[16]{.osf}](#calibre_link-111)[]{.osf}

(On the stairs of the trees

We mount.)

was certainly thinking of an attic.

If we compose a poem about a house, it frequently happens that the most
flagrant contradictions come to wake us from our doldrums of concepts,
as philosophers would say, and free us from our utilitarian geometrical
notions. In this fragment by René Cazelles, solidity is achieved by an
imaginary dialectics. We inhale in it the impossible odor of lava, here
granite has wings. Conversely, the sudden wind is as rigid as a girder.
The house conquers its share of sky. It has the entire sky for its
terrace.

But my commentary is becoming too precise. Concerning the different
characteristics of the house, it is inclined to be hospitable to
fragmentary dialectics, and if I were to pursue it, I should destroy the
unity of the archetype. However, this is always the case. It is better
to leave the ambivalences of the archetypes wrapped in their dominant
quality. This is why a poet will always be more suggestive than a
philosopher. It is precisely his right to be suggestive. Pursuing the
dynamism that belongs to suggestion, then, the reader can go farther,
even too far. In reading and re-reading René Cazelles' poem, once we
have accepted the burst of the image, we know that we can reside not
only in the topmost heights of the house, but in a super-height. There
are many images with which I like to make super-height experiments. The
image of the house in the solid representation is folded lengthwise.
When the poet unfolds it and spreads it out, it presents a very pure
phenomenological aspect. Consciousness becomes "uplifted" in contact
with an image that, ordinarily, is "in repose." The image is no longer
descriptive, but resolutely inspirational.

It is a strange situation. The space we love is unwilling to remain
permanently enclosed. It deploys and appears to move elsewhere without
difficulty; into other times, and on different planes of dream and
memory.

Is there a reader who would fail to take advantage of the ubiquity of a
poem like this one:

*Une maison dressée au coeur*

*Ma cathédrale de silence*

*Chaque matin reprise en rêve*

*Et chaque soir abandonnée*

*Une maison couverte d'aube*

*Ouverte au vent de ma
jeunesse[]{#calibre_link-337}*[[17]{.osf}](#calibre_link-112)[]{.osf}

(A house that stands in my heart

My cathedral of silence

Every morning recaptured in dream

Every evening abandoned

A house covered with dawn

Open to the winds of my youth.)

This house, as I see it, is a sort of airy structure that moves about on
the breath of time. It really is open to the wind of another time. It
seems as though it could greet us every day of our lives in order to
give us confidence in life. In my daydreaming, I associate these lines
by Jean Laroche with the passage in which René
Char[]{#calibre_link-338}[[18]{.osf}](#calibre_link-113) dreams in "a
room that grew buoyant and, little by little, expanded into the vast
stretches of travel." If the Creator listened to poets, He would create
a flying turtle that would carry off into the blue the great safeguards
of earth.

If further proof of these weightless houses were needed, there is a poem
by Louis Guillaume, entitled *"Maison de
vent"[]{#calibre_link-339}*[[19]{.osf}](#calibre_link-114) (Wind House),
in which the poet dreams as follows:

*Longtemps je t'ai construite, ô maison!*

*A chaque souvenir je transportais des pierres*

*Du rivage au sommet de tes murs*

*Et je voyais, chaume couvé par les saisons*

*Ton toit changeant comme la mer*

*Danser sur le fond des nuages*

*Auxquels il mêlait ses fumées*

*Maison de vent demeure qu'un souffle effaçait.*

(Long did I build you, oh house!

With each memory I carried stones

From the bank to your topmost wall

And I saw your roof mellowed by time

Changing as the sea

Dancing against a background of clouds

With which it mingled its smoke.

Wind house, abode that a breath effaced.)

Some may wonder at this accumulation of examples. For the realist, the
matter is settled: "None of that holds water! It is nothing but vain,
inconsistent poetry; poetry that has lost all touch with reality." For
the positive man, everything that is unreal is alike, the forms being
submerged and drowned in unreality; and the only houses that are capable
of possessing individuality are real ones.

But a dreamer of houses sees them everywhere, and anything can act as a
germ to set him dreaming about them. Jean Laroche has written elsewhere:

*Cette pivoine est une maison vague*

*Où chacun retrouve la nuit*

(This peony is an empty house

In which each of us recaptures night.)

The peony encloses a sleeping insect in its red night:

*Tout calice est demeure*

(Every chalice is a dwelling-place.)

*Pivoines et pavots paradis taciturnes!*

(Peonies and poppies silent gardens of Paradise!)

writes Jean
Bourdeillette[]{#calibre_link-340}[[20]{.osf}](#calibre_link-115) in a
line that encloses infinity.

When we have dreamed as intensely as this in the hollow of a flower, the
way we recall our lives in the house that is lost and gone, dissolved in
the waters of the past, is no ordinary way. It is impossible to read the
four lines that follow without entering into a dream that is endless:

*La chambre meurt miel et tilleul*

*Où les tiroirs s'ouvrirent en deuil*

*La maison se mêle à la mort*

*Dans un miroir qui se ternit.*[[]{#calibre_link-341
.pt}]{.osf}[[21]{.osf}](#calibre_link-116)[]{.osf}

(The room is dying honey and linden

Where drawers opened in mourning

The house blends with death

In a mirror whose lustre is dimming.)

VII

If we go from these images, which are all light and shimmer, to images
that insist and force us to remember farther back into our past, we
shall have to take lessons from poets. For how forcefully they prove to
us that the houses that were lost forever continue to live on in us;
that they insist in us in order to live again, as though they expected
us to give them a supplement of living. How much better we should live
in the old house today! How suddenly our memories assume a living
possibility of being! We consider the past, and a sort of remorse at not
having lived profoundly enough in the old house fills our hearts, comes
up from the past, overwhelms us.
Rilke[]{#calibre_link-342}[[22]{.osf}](#calibre_link-117) expresses this
poignant regret in unforgettable lines which we painfully make our own,
not so much for their expression as for their dramatic depth of feeling:

*Ô* *nostalgie des lieux qui n'étaient point*

*Assez aimés à l'heure passagère*

*Que je voudrais leur rendre de loin*

*Le geste oublié, l'action supplémentaire.*

(Oh, longing for places that were not

Cherished enough in that fleeting hour

How I long to make good from far

The forgotten gesture, the additional act.)

Why were we so quickly sated with the happiness of living in the old
house? Why did we not prolong those fleeting hours? In that reality
something more than reality was lacking. We did not dream enough in that
house. And since it must be recaptured by means of daydreams, liaison is
hard to establish. Our memories are encumbered with facts. Beyond the
recollections we continually hark back to, we should like to relive our
suppressed impressions and the dreams that made us believe in happiness:

*Où vous ai-je perdue, mon imagerie piétinée?*[[]{#calibre_link-343
.pt}]{.osf}[[23]{.osf}](#calibre_link-118)[]{.osf}

(Where did I lose you, my trampled fantasies?)

If we have retained an element of dream in our memories, if we have gone
beyond merely assembling exact recollections, bit by bit the house that
was lost in the mists of time will appear from out the shadow. We do
nothing to reorganize it; with intimacy it recovers its entity, in the
mellowness and imprecision of the inner life. It is as though something
fluid had collected our memories and we ourselves were dissolved in this
fluid of the past. Rilke, who experienced this intimacy of fusion,
speaks of the fusion of being with the lost house: "I never saw this
strange dwelling again. Indeed, as I see it now, the way it appeared to
my child's eye, it is not a building, but is quite dissolved and
distributed inside me: here one room, there another, and here a bit of
corridor which, however, does not connect the two rooms, but is
conserved in me in fragmentary form. Thus the whole thing is scattered
about inside me, the rooms, the stairs that descended with such
ceremonious slowness, others, narrow cages that mounted in a spiral
movement, in the darkness of which we advanced like the blood in our
veins."[]{#calibre_link-344}[[24]{.osf}](#calibre_link-119)[]{.osf}

Indeed, at times dreams go back so far into an undefined, dateless past
that clear memories of our childhood home appear to be detached from us.
Such dreams unsettle our daydreaming and we reach a point where we begin
to doubt that we ever lived where we lived. Our past is situated
elsewhere, and both time and place are impregnated with a sense of
unreality. It is as though we sojourned in a limbo of being. And poets
and dreamers find themselves writing things upon which metaphysicians
would do well to meditate. Here, for instance, is a page of concrete
metaphysics which by overlaying our memory of the childhood house with
daydreams leads us to the ill-defined, vaguely located areas of being
where we are seized with astonishment at being. In his novel *The*
*House of Breath[]{#calibre_link-345}*[[25]{.osf}](#calibre_link-120)
(p. [40]{.scap1}), William Goyen writes: "That people could come into
the world in a place they could not at first even name and had never
known before; and that out of a nameless and unknown place they could
grow and move around in it until its name they knew and called with
love, and call it HOME, and put roots there and love others there; so
that whenever they left this place they would sing homesick songs about
it and write poems of yearning for it, like a lover; . . ." The soil in
which chance had sown the human plant was of no importance. And against
this background of nothingness human values grow! Inversely, if beyond
memories, we pursue our dreams to their very end, in this pre-memory it
is as though nothingness caressed and penetrated being, as though it
gently unbound the ties of being. We ask ourselves if what has been,
was. Have facts really the *value* that memory gives them? Distant
memory only recalls them by giving them a value, a halo, of happiness.
But let this value be effaced, and the facts cease to exist. Did they
ever exist? Something unreal seeps into the reality of the recollections
that are on the borderline between our own personal history and an
indefinite pre-history, in the exact place where, after us, the
childhood home comes to life in us. For before us---Goyen makes us
understand this---it was quite anonymous. It was a place that was lost
in the world. Thus, on the threshold of our space, before the era of our
own time, we hover between awareness of being and loss of being. And the
entire reality of memory becomes spectral.

But it would seem that this element of unreality in the dreams of memory
affects the dreamer when he is faced with the most concrete things, as
with the stone house to which he returns at night, his thoughts on
mundane things. William Goyen understands this unreality of reality
(*loc. cit.,* p. [56]{.scap1}): "So this is why when often as you came
home to it, down the road in a mist of rain, it seemed as if the house
were founded on the most fragile web of breath and you had blown it.
Then you thought it might not exist at all as built by carpenter's
hands, nor had ever; and that it was only an idea of breath breathed out
by you who, with that same breath that had blown it, could blow it all
away." In a passage like this, imagination, memory and perception
exchange functions. The image is created through co-operation between
real and unreal, with the help of the functions of the real and the
unreal. To use the implements of dialectical logic for studying, not
this alternative, but this fusion, of opposites, would be quite useless,
for they would produce the anatomy of a living thing. But if a house is
a living value, it must integrate an element of unreality. All values
must remain vulnerable, and those that do not are dead.

 • • • 

When two strange images meet, two images that are the work of two poets
pursuing separate dreams, they apparently strengthen each other. In
fact, this convergence of two exceptional images furnishes as it were a
counter-check for phenomenological analysis. The image loses its
gratuitousness; the free play of the imagination ceases to be a form of
anarchy. I should like, therefore, to compare Goyen's image in *The*
*House of Breath* with one that I quoted in my book *La terre et les
rêveries du repos* (p. [96]{.scap1}) and which, at the time, I was
unable to relate to any
other.[]{#calibre_link-346}[[26]{.osf}](#calibre_link-121)

In *Le domaine public* (p. [70]{.scap1}) Pierre Seghers writes:[]{.osf}

*Une maison où je vais seul en appelant*

*Un nom que le silence et les murs me renvoient*

*Une étrange maison qui se tient dans ma voix*

*Et qu'habite le vent.*

*Je l'invente, mes mains dessinent un nuage*

*Un bateau de grand ciel au-dessus des forêts*

*Une brume qui se dissipe et disparaît*

*Comme au jeu des images.*

(A house where I go alone calling

A name that silence and the walls give back to me

A strange house contained in my voice

Inhabited by the wind

I invent it, my hands draw a cloud

A heaven-bound ship above the forests

Mist that scatters and disappears

As in the play of images.)

In order to build better this house in the mist and wind, we should
need, according to the poet,

. . . *Une voix plus forte et l'encens*

*Bleu du coeur et des mots*

(. . . A more sonorous voice and the blue

Incense of heart and word.)

Like the house of breath, the house of wind and voice is a value that
hovers on the frontier between reality and unreality. No doubt a
realistic mind will remain well this side of this region. But for the
poetry lover who reads with joy and imagination, it is a red-letter day
when he can hear echoes of the lost house in two registers. The old
house, for those who know how to listen, is a sort of geometry of
echoes. The voices of the past do not sound the same in the big room as
in the little bed chamber, and calls on the stairs have yet another
sound. Among the most difficult memories, well beyond any geometry that
can be drawn, we must recapture the quality of the light; then come the
sweet smells that linger in the empty rooms, setting an aerial seal on
each room in the house of memory. Still farther it is possible to
recover not merely the timbre of the voices, "the inflections of beloved
voices now silent," but also the resonance of each room in the sound
house. In this extreme tenuousness of memory, only poets may be expected
to furnish us with documents of a subtly psychological nature.

VIII

Sometimes the house of the future is better built, lighter and larger
than all the houses of the past, so that the image of *the dream house*
is opposed to that of the childhood home. Late in life, with indomitable
courage, we continue to say that we are going to do what we have not yet
done: we are going to build a house. This dream house may be merely a
dream of ownership, the embodiment of everything that is considered
convenient, comfortable, healthy, sound, desirable, by other people. It
must therefore satisfy both pride and reason, two irreconcilable terms.
If these dreams are realized, they no longer belong in the domain of
this study, but in that of the psychology of projects. However, as I
have said many times, for me, a project is short-range oneirism, and
while it gives free play to the mind, the soul does not find in it its
vital expression. Maybe it is a good thing for us to keep a few dreams
of a house that we shall live in later, always later, so much later, in
fact, that we shall not have time to achieve it. For a house that was
final, one that stood in symmetrical relation to the house we were born
in, would lead to thoughts---serious, sad thoughts---and not to dreams.
It is better to live in a state of impermanence than in one of finality.

The following anecdote contains a certain wisdom.

It is told by Campenon, who has been discussing poetry with the poet,
Ducis: "When we came to the little poems, indited to *his home, his
flower-beds, his kitchen garden, his little wood, or his
wine-cellar* . . . I could not help remarking jokingly that, a hundred
years hence, he risked obliging his commentators to rack their brains.
He began to laugh, and told me that having desired vainly ever since he
was young, to have a house in the country, with a small garden, he had
made up his mind, at the age of seventy, to give them to himself on his
own authority as a poet, and without putting his hand in his pocket. He
had begun by acquiring a house, then, as the charm of ownership
increased, had added the *garden,* the *little wood,* etc. None of this
existed outside his imagination; but it sufficed for these little
fancied possessions to take on reality in his eyes. He spoke of them and
derived pleasure from them as though they were real; and so powerful was
his imagination that I should not be surprised if, on frosty April
nights, he didn't show signs of anxiety about his Marly vineyards.

"In this connection, he told me that a decent, honest country fellow,
having read in the papers some of his lyrical pieces on the subject of
his estate, had written to offer his services as overseer, adding that
all he asked was a place to live and whatever wages might be considered
fair."

Housed everywhere but nowhere shut in, this is the motto of the dreamer
of dwellings. In the last house as well as in the actual house, the
daydream of inhabiting is thwarted. A daydream of elsewhere should be
left open, therefore, at all times.

An excellent exercise for the function of inhabiting the dream house
consists in taking a train trip. Such a voyage unreels a film of houses
that are dreamed, accepted and refused, without our ever having been
tempted to stop, as we are when motoring. We are sunk deep in
daydreaming with all verification healthily forbidden. But lest this
manner of travel be merely a gentle mania of mine, I should like to
quote the following passage from Thoreau's Journals, of October
[31]{.scap1}, [1850]{.scap1}:

"I am wont to think that I could spend my days contentedly in any
retired country house that I see; for I see it to advantage now and
without incumbrance; I have not yet imported my humdrum thoughts, my
prosaic habits, into it to mar the landscape." On August [28]{.scap1},
[1861]{.scap1}, Thoreau addresses in thought the fortunate owners of the
houses he has seen: "Give me but the eyes to see the things which you
possess."

George Sand said that people could be classified according to whether
they aspired to live in a cottage or in a palace. But the question is
more complex than that. When we live in a manor house we dream of a
cottage, and when we live in a cottage we dream of a palace. Better
still, we all have our cottage moments and our palace moments. We
descend to living close to the ground, on the floor of a cottage, then
would like to dominate the entire horizon from a castle in Spain. And
when reading has given us countless inhabited places, we know how to let
the dialectics of cottage and manor sound inside us. This was
experienced by a great poet, Saint-Pol Roux, whose book, *Féeries
intérieurs* (Inner Enchantments), contains two stories that need only be
compared to obtain two quite different pictures of Brittany, and indeed
two different worlds. From one world to the other, from one dwelling to
the other, dreams come and go. The first story is entitled: *Adieux à la
chaumière* (Farewell to the Cottage, p. [205]{.scap1}) and the second:
*Le châtelain et le paysan* (Squire and Peasant, p. [359]{.scap1}).

The minute they entered the cottage, it opened its heart and soul: "At
dawn, your freshly white-washed being opened its arms to us: the
children felt that they had entered into the heart of a dove, and we
loved the ladder---your stairway---right away." Elsewhere the poet tells
how generously a cottage radiates peasant humanity and fraternity. This
dove-house was a hospitable ark.

One day, however, Saint-Pol Roux left the cottage for the manor house.
"Before leaving for a life of 'luxury and pride,'" according to
Théophile Briant,[]{#calibre_link-347}[[27]{.osf}](#calibre_link-122)
"his Franciscan soul lamented, and he lingered a while longer under the
lintel of Roscanvel." Briant quotes him as follows: "One last time, oh
cottage, let me kiss your humble walls, even in their shadow, which is
the color of my woe . . ."

The Camaret manor, which became Saint-Pol Roux's home, is undoubtedly a
poetic creation, in every sense of the word; it is the realization of a
poet's dream castle. For he first bought a fisherman's cottage situated
right by the sea, on the crest of the dune that the inhabitants of this
Breton peninsula call the Lion of Toulinguet. With the help of a friend,
an artillery officer, he then drew up plans for a manor house with eight
towers, the center of which was to be the house he had just bought. An
architect modified somewhat this poetic project and the manor with the
cottage heart was built.

"One day," Théophile Briant recalls (*loc. cit.,* p. [37]{.scap1}), "to
synthesize the little Camaret peninsula for me, Saint-Pol Roux took a
sheet of paper and drew a stone pyramid showing the hatchings of the
wind and the roll of the sea. Underneath it he wrote: 'Camaret is a
stone in the wind on a lyre.'"

A few pages back we discussed poems that sing of breath and wind houses,
poems with which we seemed to have attained the *ultimate degree of
metaphor.* And here we see a poet who follows the working draft of these
metaphors to build his house!

We should find ourselves indulging in similar daydreams if we started
musing under the cone-shaped roof of a windmill. We should sense its
terrestrial nature, and imagine it to be a primitive hut stuck together
with mud, firmly set on the ground in order to resist the wind. Then, in
an immense synthesis, we should dream at the same time of a winged house
that whines at the slightest breeze and refines the energies of the
wind. Millers, who are wind thieves, make good flour from storms.

In the second tale in *Féeries intérieures,* Saint-Pol Roux tells how he
lived a peasant's life at the same time that he was lord of the Camaret
manor. Never, perhaps, have the dialectics of cottage and manor been so
simply or so powerfully inverted as here. "As I stand riveted to the
first steps of the perron by my hob-nailed boots, I hesitate to emerge
suddenly from my rustic's chrysalis in the rôle of
lord."[]{#calibre_link-348}[[28]{.osf}](#calibre_link-123) And further
on (p. [362]{.scap1}) he writes: "My flexible nature adapts itself
easily to this eagle's well-being, high above town and sea, a well-being
in which my imagination loses no time conferring supremacy upon me, over
elements and persons. And soon, bound up in my egoism, I forget, upstart
peasant that I am, that the original reason for the manor house was,
through antithesis, to enable me to really see the cottage."

The word *chrysalis* alone is an unmistakable indication that here two
dreams are joined together, dreams that bespeak both the repose and
flight of being, evening's crystallization and wings that open to the
light. In the body of the winged manor, which dominates both town and
sea, man and the universe, he retained a cottage chrysalis in order to
be able to hide alone, in complete repose.

Referring to the work of the Brazilian philosopher, Lucio Alberto
Pinheiro dos Santos,[]{#calibre_link-349}[[29]{.osf}](#calibre_link-124)
I once said that by examining the rhythms of life in detail, by
descending from the great rhythms forced upon us by the universe to the
finer rhythms that play upon man's most exquisite sensibilities, it
would be possible to work out a rhythmanalysis that would tend to
reconcile and lighten the ambivalences that psychoanalysts find in the
disturbed psyche. But if what poets say is true, alternating daydreams
cease to be rivals. The two extreme realities of cottage and manor, to
be found in the case of Saint-Pol Roux, take into account our need for
retreat and expansion, for simplicity and magnificence. For here we
experience a rhythmanalysis of the function of inhabiting. To sleep well
we do not need to sleep in a large room, and to work well we do not have
to work in a den. But to dream of a poem, then write it, we need both.
It is the creative psyche that benefits from rhythmanalysis.

Thus the dream house must possess every virtue. However spacious, it
must also be a cottage, a dove-cote, a nest, a chrysalis. Intimacy needs
the heart of a nest. Erasmus, his biographer tells us, was long "in
finding a nook in his fine house in which he could put *his little body*
with safety. He ended by confining himself to one room until he could
breathe *the parched air* that was necessary to
him."[]{#calibre_link-350}[[30]{.osf}](#calibre_link-125)[]{.osf}

And how many dreamers look everywhere in their house, or in their room,
for the garment that suits them!

But I repeat: nest, chrysalis and garment only constitute one moment of
a dwelling place. The more concentrated the repose, the more hermetic
the chrysalis, the more the being that emerges from it is a being from
elsewhere, the greater is his expansion. And, in my opinion, as the
reader goes from one poet to the other, he is made more dynamic by his
reader's imagination if he listens to Supervielle inviting the entire
universe to come back into the house through all the wide-open doors and
windows.[[]{#calibre_link-351
.pt}]{.osf}[[31]{.osf}](#calibre_link-126)[]{.osf}

*Tout ce qui fait les bois, les rivières ou l' air*

*A place entre ces murs qui croient fermer une chambre*

*Accourez, cavaliers qui traversez les mers*

*Je n'ai qu'un toit du ciel, vous aurez de la place.*

(All that makes the woods, the rivers or the air

Has its place between these walls which believe they close a room

Make haste, ye gentlemen, who ride across the seas

I've but one roof from heaven, there'll be room for you.)

The house's welcome is so genuine that even what may be seen from the
windows belongs to it.

*Le corps de la montagne hésite à ma fenêtre:*

*"Comment peut-on entrer si l'on est la montagne,*

*Si l'on est en hauteur, avec roches, cailloux,*

*Un morceau de la Terre altéré par le Ciel?"*

(The body of the mountain hesitates before my window:

"How can one enter if one is the mountain,

If one is tall, with boulders and stones,

A piece of Earth, altered by Sky?")

When we have been made aware of a rhythmanalysis by moving from a
concentrated to an expanded house, the oscillations reverberate and grow
louder. Like Supervielle, great dreamers profess intimacy with the
world. They learned this intimacy, however, meditating on the house.

IX

Supervielle's house is a house that is eager to see, one for which
seeing is having. It both sees the world and has it. But like a greedy
child, its eyes are bigger than its stomach. It has furnished us with
one of those exaggerated images that a philosopher of the imagination is
obliged to note right away with a reasonably critical smile.

But after this holiday of the imagination we shall have to return to
reality, in order to speak of daydreams that accompany household
activities. For they keep vigilant watch over the house, they link its
immediate past to its immediate future, they are what maintains it in
the security of being.

But how can housework be made into a creative activity?

The minute we apply a glimmer of consciousness to a mechanical gesture,
or practice phenomenology while polishing a piece of old furniture, we
sense new impressions come into being beneath this familiar domestic
duty. For consciousness rejuvenates everything, giving a quality of
beginning to the most everyday actions. It even dominates memory. How
wonderful it is to really become once more the inventor of a mechanical
action! And so, when a poet rubs a piece of furniture---even
vicariously---when he puts a little fragrant wax on his table with the
woolen cloth that lends warmth to everything it touches, he creates a
new object; he increases the object's human dignity; he registers this
object officially as a member of the human household. Henri Bosco once
wrote:[]{#calibre_link-352}[[32]{.osf}](#calibre_link-127) "The soft wax
entered into the polished substance under the pressure of hands and the
effective warmth of a woolen cloth. Slowly the tray took on a dull
luster. It was as though the radiance induced by magnetic rubbing
emanated from the hundred-year-old sapwood, from the very heart of the
dead tree, and spread gradually, in the form of light, over the tray.
The old fingers possessed of every virtue, the broad palm, drew from the
solid block with its inanimate fibers, the latent powers of life itself.
This was creation of an object, a real act of faith, taking place before
my enchanted eyes."

Objects that are cherished in this way really are born of an intimate
light, and they attain to a higher degree of reality than indifferent
objects, or those that are defined by geometric reality. For they
produce a new reality of being, and they take their place not only in an
order but in a community of order. From one object in a room to another,
housewifely care weaves the ties that unite a very ancient past to the
new epoch. The housewife awakens furniture that was asleep.

If we attain to the limit at which dream becomes exaggerated, we
experience a sort of consciousness of constructing the house, in the
very pains we take to keep it alive, to give it all its essential
clarity. A house that shines from the care it receives appears to have
been rebuilt from the inside; it is as though it were new inside. In the
intimate harmony of walls and furniture, it may be said that we become
conscious of a house that is built by women, since men only know how to
build a house from the outside, and they know little or nothing of the
"wax" civilization.

No one has written better of this integration of revery into work, of
our vastest dreams into the humblest of occupations, than Henri Bosco,
in his description of the old faithful servant, Sidoine (*op. cit.,* p.
[173]{.scap1}): "This vocation for happiness, so far from prejudicing
her practical life, nurtured its action. When she washed a sheet or a
tablecloth, when she polished a brass candlestick, little movements of
joy mounted from the depths of her heart, enlivening her household
tasks. She did not wait to finish these tasks before withdrawing into
herself, where she could contemplate to her heart's content the
supernatural images that dwelt there. Indeed, figures from this land
appeared to her familiarly, however commonplace the work she was doing,
and without in the least seeming to dream, she washed, dusted and swept
in the company of angels."

I once read an Italian novel in which there was a street sweeper who
swung his broom with the majestic gesture of a reaper. In his daydream
he was reaping an imaginary field on the asphalt, a wide field in real
nature in which he recaptured his youth and the noble calling of reaper
under the rising sun.

We should need, then, purer "reagents" than those of psychoanalysis to
determine the "composition" of a poetic image. The fine determinations
required by poetry bring us into the field of micro-chemistry, and a
reagent that had been adulterated by the ready-made interpretations of a
psychoanalyst could cloud the solution. No phenomenologist re-living
Supervielle's invitation to the mountains to come in through the window
would see in it a sexual monstrosity. This is rather the poetic
phenomenon of pure liberation, of absolute sublimation. The image is no
longer under the domination of things, nor is it subject to the
pressures of the unconscious. It floats and soars, immense, in the free
atmosphere of a great poem. Through the poet's window the house
converses about immensity with the world. And as metaphysicians would
say, it too, the house of men, opens its doors to the world.

In the same way, the phenomenologist who follows women's construction of
the house through daily polishing must go beyond the psychoanalyst's
interpretations. I myself held to these interpretations in some of my
earlier books.[[]{#calibre_link-353
.pt}]{.osf}[[33]{.osf}](#calibre_link-128) But I now believe that we can
go deeper, that we can sense how a human being can devote himself to
things and make them his own by perfecting their beauty. A little more
beautiful and we have something quite different.

Here we have the paradox of an incipience of a very customary action.
Through housewifely care a house recovers not so much its originality as
its origin. And what a great life it would be if, every morning, every
object in the house could be made anew by our hands, could "issue" from
our hands. In a letter to his brother Theo, Vincent van Gogh tells him
that we should "retain something of the original character of a Robinson
Crusoe" (p. [25]{.scap1}). Make and remake everything oneself, make a
"supplementary gesture" toward each object, give another facet to the
polished reflections, all of which are so many boons the imagination
confers upon us by making us aware of the house's inner growth. To have
an active day I keep saying to myself, "Every morning I must give a
thought to Saint Robinson."

When a dreamer can reconstruct the world from an object that he
transforms magically through his care of it, we become convinced that
everything in the life of a poet is germinal. The following long
fragment by Rilke, in spite of a certain overloading (gloves and
costumes), gives us a feeling of naïve simplicity.

In *Lettres à une musicienne,* Rilke writes to Benvenuta that in the
absence of his cleaning woman, he had been polishing his furniture. "I
was, as I said, magnificently alone . . . when suddenly I was seized by
my old passion. I should say that this was undoubtedly my greatest
childhood passion, as well as my first contact with music, since our
little piano fell under my jurisdiction as duster. It was, in fact, one
of the few objects that lent itself willingly to this operation and gave
no sign of boredom. On the contrary, under my zealous dustcloth, it
suddenly started to purr mechanically . . . and its fine, deep black
surface became more and more beautiful. When you've been through this
there's little you don't know! I was quite proud, if only of my
indispensable costume, which consisted of a big apron and little
washable suède gloves to protect one's dainty hands. Politeness tinged
with mischief was my reaction to the friendliness of these objects,
which seemed happy to be so well treated, so meticulously renovated. And
even today, I must confess that, while everything about me grew brighter
and the immense black surface of my work table, which dominated its
surroundings . . . became newly aware, somehow, of the size of the room,
reflecting it more and more clearly: pale gray and almost square, . . .
well, yes, I felt moved, as though something were happening, something,
to tell the truth, which was not purely superficial but immense, and
which touched my very soul: I was an emperor washing the feet of the
poor, or Saint Bonaventure, washing dishes in his convent."

Benvenuta's comment[]{#calibre_link-354}[[34]{.osf}](#calibre_link-129)
on these episodes detracts from their charm somewhat when she tells us
that Rilke's mother, "while he was still a mere child, forced him to
dust the furniture and perform other household tasks." But one cannot
help sensing the *nostalgia for work* that emanates from this fragment
by Rilke, or realizing that this is an accumulation of psychological
documents from different mental ages, since to the joy of helping his
mother is added the glory of being one of the great of the earth,
washing the feet of the poor. The whole thing is a complex of
sentiments, with its association of politeness and mischief, of humility
and action. Then, too, there is the striking line with which it opens:
"I was magnificently alone"! Alone, as we are at the origin of all real
action that we are not "obliged" to perform. And the marvelous thing
about easy actions is that they do, in fact, place us at the origin of
action.

Removed from its context, this long passage seems to me to be a good
test of the reader's interest. Some may disdain it or wonder that it
should interest anyone; whereas to others it may seem alive, effective
and stimulating, since it offers each one of us a means of becoming
aware of our room by strongly synthesizing everything that lives in it,
every piece of furniture that wants to be friends.

There is also the courage of the writer who braves the kind of
censorship that forbids "insignificant" confidences. But what a joy
reading is, when we recognize the importance of these insignificant
things, when we can add our own personal daydreams to the
"insignificant" recollections of the author! Then insignificance becomes
the sign of extreme sensitivity to the intimate meanings that establish
spiritual understanding between writer and reader.

And what charm it confers upon our memories to be able to say to
ourselves that, except for the suède gloves, we have lived moments
similar to those lived by Rilke!

X

All great, simple images reveal a psychic state. The house, even more
than the landscape, is a "psychic state," and even when reproduced as it
appears from the outside, it bespeaks intimacy. Psychologists generally,
and Françoise Minkowska in particular, together with those whom she has
succeeded interesting in the subject, have studied the drawings of
houses made by children, and even used them for testing. Indeed, the
house-test has the advantage of welcoming spontaneity, for many children
draw a house spontaneously while dreaming over their paper and pencil.
To quote Anne Balif:[]{#calibre_link-355}[[35]{.osf}](#calibre_link-130)
"Asking a child to draw his house is asking him to reveal the deepest
dream shelter he has found for his happiness. If he is happy, he will
succeed in drawing a snug, protected house which is well built on
deeply-rooted foundations." It will have the right shape, and nearly
always there will be some indication of its inner strength. In certain
drawings, quite obviously, to quote Mme. Balif, "it is warm indoors, and
there is a fire burning, such a big fire, in fact, that it can be seen
coming out of the chimney." When the house is happy, soft smoke rises in
gay rings above the roof.

If the child is unhappy, however, the house bears traces of his
distress. In this connection, I recall that Françoise Minkowska
organized an unusually moving exhibition of drawings by Polish and
Jewish children who had suffered the cruelties of the German occupation
during the last war. One child, who had been hidden in a closet every
time there was an alert, continued to draw narrow, cold, closed houses
long after those evil times were over. These are what Mme. Minkowska
calls "motionless" houses, houses that have become motionless in their
rigidity. "This rigidity and motionlessness are present in the *smoke*
as well as in the window curtains. The surrounding trees are quite
*straight* and give the impression of standing guard over the house"
(*loc. cit.,* p. [55]{.scap1}). Mme Minkowska knows that a live house is
not really "motionless," that, particularly, it integrates the movements
by means of which one accedes to the door. Thus the path that leads to
the house is often a climbing one. At times, even, it is inviting. In
any case, it always possesses certain kinesthetic features. If we were
making a Rorschach test, we should say that the house has "K."

Often a simple detail suffices for Mme. Minkowska, a distinguished
psychologist, to recognize the way the house functions. In one house,
drawn by an eight-year-old child, she notes that there is "a knob on the
door; people go in the house, they live there." It is not merely a
constructed house, it is also a house that is "lived-in." Quite
obviously the door-knob has a functional significance. This is the
kinesthetic sign, so frequently forgotten in the drawings of "tense"
children.

Naturally, too, the door-knob could hardly be drawn in scale with the
house, its function taking precedence over any question of size. For it
expresses the function of opening, and only a logical mind could object
that it is used to close as well as to open the door. In the domain of
values, on the other hand, a key closes more often than it opens,
whereas the door-knob opens more often than it closes. And the gesture
of closing is always sharper, firmer and briefer than that of opening.
It is by weighing such fine points as these that, like Françoise
Minkowska, one becomes a psychologist of houses.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-11 .calibre}
::: basic-text-frame
# [3]{.osf1} {#calibre_link-520 .chaptnum}

# DRAWERS, CHESTS AND WARDROBES {#calibre_link-521 .chapttitle}

I always feel a slight shock, a certain mild, philological pain,
whenever a great writer uses a word in a derogatory sense. To begin
with, all words do an honest job in our everyday language, and not even
the most ordinary among them, those that are attached to the most
commonplace realities, lose their poetic possibilities as a result of
this fact. But somehow, when Bergson uses the word "drawer," he does it
disdainfully. Indeed, the word always appears in the rôle of a
controversial metaphor, giving orders and passing judgment, always in
the same way. Our philosopher dislikes compartmented arguments.

This seems to me to be a good example for demonstrating the radical
difference between image and metaphor. I shall therefore insist upon
this difference before returning to my examination of the images of
intimacy that are in harmony with drawers and chests, as also with all
the other hiding-places in which human beings, great dreamers of locks,
keep or hide their secrets.

Although there is a superabundance of metaphor in Bergson's writings, in
the last analysis, his images are rare. It is as though, for him,
imagination were entirely metaphorical. Now a metaphor gives concrete
substance to an impression that is difficult to express. Metaphor is
related to a psychic being from which it differs. An image, on the
contrary, product of absolute imagination, owes its entire being to the
imagination. Later, when I plan to go more deeply into the comparison
between metaphor and image, we shall see that metaphor could not be
studied phenomenologically, and that in fact, it is not worth the
trouble, since it has no phenomenological value. At the most, it is a
*fabricated image*, without deep, true, genuine roots. It is an
ephemeral expression. It is, or should be, one that is used only once,
in passing. We must be careful, therefore, not to give it too much
thought; nor should the reader think too much about it. And yet, what a
success the drawer metaphor has had with Bergson's followers!

Contrary to metaphor, we can devote our reading being to an image, since
it confers being upon us. In fact, the image, which is the pure product
of absolute imagination, is a phenomenon of being; it is also one of the
specific phenomena of the speaking creature.

II

As is well known, the drawer metaphor, in addition to certain others,
such as "ready-made garments," is used by Bergson to convey the
inadequacy of a philosophy of concept. Concepts are drawers in which
knowledge may be classified; they are also ready-made garments which do
away with the individuality of knowledge that has been experienced. The
concept soon becomes lifeless thinking since, by definition, it is
classified thinking.

I should like to point out a few passages which show the polemical
nature of the drawer metaphor in Bergsonian philosophy.

In *L'evolution creatrice* ([1907]{.scap1}, p. [5]{.scap1}) we read:
"Memory, as I have tried to
prove,[]{#calibre_link-356}[[1]{.osf}](#calibre_link-131) is not the
faculty for classifying recollections in a drawer, or writing them down
in a register. Neither register nor drawer exists . . ."

Faced with any new object, reason asks (see *L'Evolution creatrice,* p.
[52]{.scap1}) "in which of its earlier categories the new object
belongs? In which ready-to-open drawer shall we put it? With which
ready-made garments shall we invest it?" Because, of course, a
ready-made garment suffices to clothe a poor rationalist. In the second
Oxford conference of May [27]{.scap1}, [1911]{.scap1} (later included in
*La pensée et le mouvant,* p. [172]{.scap1}), Bergson shows the
indigence of the image according to which there exist "here and there in
the brain, keep-sake boxes that preserve fragments of the past."

In the Introduction to Metaphysics (*La pensée et le mouvant,* p.
[221]{.scap1}) Bergson states that all Kant saw in science was "frames
within frames."

He was still haunted by this metaphor when he wrote his essay entitled
*La pensée et le mouvant,* [1922]{.scap1}, which, in many respects,
summarizes his philosophy. On page [80]{.scap1} of the [26]{.scap1}th
edition, he says again that in memory words are not deposited "in a
cerebral or any other kind of drawer."

If this were the occasion to do so, it could be demonstrated that in
contemporary science, the active invention of concepts, necessitated by
the evolution of scientific thinking, is greater than those determined
by simple classifications that "fit into one another," as Bergson
expresses it (*La pensée et le mouvant*). In opposition to a philosophy
that seeks to discover the conceptualistic features in contemporary
science, the "drawer" metaphor remains a crude instrument for polemical
discussion. But for our present problem, which is that of distinguishing
between metaphor and image, this is an example of a metaphor that
hardens and loses even the spontaneousness of the image. This is
particularly noticeable in the simplified Bergsonism taught in the
classrooms, where the polemical metaphor of the drawer in the filing
cabinet comes back time and again in elementary analyses that set out to
attack stereotyped ideas. It is even possible, when listening to certain
lectures, to foresee that the drawer metaphor is about to appear. And
when we sense a metaphor in advance there can be no question of
imagination. This metaphor---which, I repeat, is a crude polemical
instrument---together with a few others that hardly vary at all, has
mechanized the debates that Bergsonians carry on with the philosophies
of knowledge, particularly with what Bergson himself, using an epithet
that passed quick judgment, called "dry" rationalism.

III

These rapid remarks are intended to show that a metaphor should be no
more than an accident of expression, and that it is dangerous to make a
thought of it. A metaphor is a false image, since it does not possess
the direct virtue of an image formed in spoken revery.

A great novelist has used this Bergsonian metaphor but it was for the
purpose of characterizing the psychology of an arrant fool, rather than
that of a Kantian rationalist. I refer to Henri Bosco's *Monsieur
Carre-Benoit à la campagne,* in which the drawer metaphor is presented
in reverse: it is not the intelligence that is a filing cabinet; the
filing cabinet is an intelligence.

The only piece of furniture, among all that he possessed, for which
Carre-Benoit felt real affection was his solid oak filing cabinet, which
he contemplated with satisfaction whenever he passed in front of it.
Here, at least, was something that was reliable, that could be counted
on. You saw what you were looking at and you touched what you were
touching. Its proportions were what they should be, everything about it
had been designed and calculated by a meticulous mind for purposes of
utility. And what a marvelous tool! It replaced everything, memory as
well as intelligence. In this well-fitted cube there was not an iota of
haziness or shiftiness. Once you had put something in it, even if you
put it a hundred or ten thousand more times, you could find it again in
the twinkling of an eye, as it were. Forty-eight drawers! Enough to hold
an entire well-classified world of positive knowledge. M. Carre-Benoit
attributed a sort of magic power to these drawers concerning which he
said that they were "the foundations of the human
mind."[]{#calibre_link-357}[[2]{.osf}](#calibre_link-132)[]{.osf}

It should not be forgotten that in the novel, this is said by a very
commonplace man. But the novelist who makes him say it is an unusually
gifted one. For with this filing cabinet he has succeeded in embodying
the dull administrative spirit. And since stupidity must be turned to
ridicule, Henri Bosco's hero has hardly spoken when, as he opens the
drawers of the "august cabinet," he finds that the maid has used it as a
place to put mustard, salt, rice, coffee, peas and lentils. His
reasoning cabinet had become a larder.

Perhaps, after all, this image could be used to illustrate a "philosophy
of having," since it may be taken both literally and figuratively. There
are many erudite minds that lay in provisions. We shall see later, they
say to themselves, whether or not we'll use them.

IV

By way of preamble to our positive study of images of secrecy, we began
by examining a hastily formulated metaphor that does not really unite
exterior realities with intimate reality. Then, in this passage from
Bosco's book, we succeeded in getting a direct, characterological hold,
based on a clearly outlined reality. Now we must return to our studies
of the imagination, all of them positive. With the theme of drawers,
chests, locks and wardrobes, we shall resume contact with the
unfathomable store of daydreams of intimacy.

Wardrobes with their shelves, desks with their drawers, and chests with
their false bottoms are veritable organs of the secret psychological
life. Indeed, without these "objects" and a few others in equally high
favor, our intimate life would lack a model of intimacy. They are hybrid
objects, subject objects. Like us, through us and for us, they have a
quality of intimacy.

Does there exist a single dreamer of words who does not respond to the
word wardrobe? . . .

And to fine words correspond fine things, to grave-sounding words, an
entity of depth. Every poet of furniture---even if he be a poet in a
garret, and therefore has no furniture---knows that the inner space of
an old wardrobe is deep. A wardrobe's inner space is also *intimate
space,* space that is not open to just anybody.

But words carry with them obligations. Only an indigent soul would put
just anything in a wardrobe. To put just anything, just any way, in just
any piece of furniture, is the mark of unusual weakness in the function
of inhabiting. In the wardrobe there exists a center of order that
protects the entire house against uncurbed disorder. Here order reigns,
or rather, this is the reign of order. Order is not merely geometrical;
it can also remember the family history. A poet knew
this:[]{#calibre_link-358}[[3]{.osf}](#calibre_link-133)[]{.osf}

*Ordonnance. Harmonie.*

*Piles de draps de l'armoire*

*Lavande dans le linge.*

(Orderliness. Harmony.

Piles of sheets in the wardrobe

Lavender in the linen.)

With the presence of lavender the history of the seasons enters into the
wardrobe. Indeed, lavender alone introduces a *Bergsonian durée* into
the hierarchy of the sheets. Should we not wait, before using them, for
them to be, as they say in France, sufficiently "lavendered"? What
dreams are reserved for us if we can recall, if we can return to, the
land of tranquility! Memories come crowding when we look back upon the
shelf on which the lace-trimmed, batiste and muslin pieces lay on top of
the heavier materials: "A wardrobe," writes
Milosz,[]{#calibre_link-359}[[4]{.osf}](#calibre_link-134) "is filled
with the mute tumult of memories."

Bergson did not want the faculty of memory to be taken for a wardrobe of
recollections. But images are more demanding than ideas. And the most
Bergsonian of his disciples, being a poet, recognized that memory is a
wardrobe. The following great line was written by Charles Péguy:

*Aux rayons de mémoire et aux temples de
l'armoire[]{#calibre_link-360}*[[5]{.osf}](#calibre_link-135)[]{.osf}

(On the shelves of memory and in the temples of the wardrobe)

But the real wardrobe is not an everyday piece of furniture. It is not
opened every day, and so, like a heart that confides in no one, the key
is not on the door.

*---L'armoire était sans clefs! . . . Sans clefs la grande armoire*

*On regardait souvent sa porte brune et noire*

*Sans clefs! . . . C'était étrange!---On rêvait bien des fois*

*Aux mystères dormant entre ses flancs de bois*

*Et l'on croyait ouir, au fond de la serrure*

*Béante, un bruit lointain, vague et joyeux
murmure.*[[]{#calibre_link-361
.pt}]{.osf}[[6]{.osf}](#calibre_link-136)[]{.osf}

(The wardrobe had no keys! . . . No keys had the big wardrobe

Often we used to look at its brown and black door

No keys! . . . It was strange! Many a time we dreamed

Of the mysteries lying dormant between its wooden flanks

And we thought we heard, deep in the gaping lock

A distant sound, a vague and joyful murmur.)

Here Rimbaud designates a perspective of hope: what good things are
being kept in reserve in the locked wardrobe? This time it is filled
with promise, it is something more than a family chronicle.

André Breton, with a single word, shows us the marvels of unreality by
adding a blessed impossibility to the riddle of the wardrobe. In
*Revolver aux cheveux blancs* (p. [110]{.scap1}) he writes with typical
surrealist
imperturbability:[]{#calibre_link-362}[[7]{.osf}](#calibre_link-137)[]{.osf}

*L'armoire est pleine de linge*

*Il y a même des rayons de lune que je peux déplier.*

(The wardrobe is filled with linen

There are even moonbeams which I can unfold.)

This carries the image to a point of exaggeration that no reasonable
mind would care to attain. But exaggeration is always at the summit of
any living image. And to add fantasy linen is to draw a picture, by
means of a volute of words, of all the superabundant blessings that lie
folded in piles between the flanks of an abandoned wardrobe. How big,
how enveloping, is an old sheet when we unfold it. And how white the old
tablecloth was, white as the moon on the wintry meadow! If we dream a
bit, Breton's image seems perfectly natural.

Nor should we be surprised by the fact that an entity which possesses
such great wealth of intimacy should be so affectionately cared for by
housewives. Anne de Tourville says of a poor woodcutter's wife: "She had
started rubbing, and the high-lights that played on the wardrobe cheered
the heart."[]{#calibre_link-363}[[8]{.osf}](#calibre_link-138) An
armoire radiates a very soft light in the room, a communicative light.
It is understandable, therefore, that a poet watching the October light
play over the wardrobe should write

*Le reflet de l'armoire ancienne sous*

*La braise du crépuscule
d'octobre[]{#calibre_link-364}*[[9]{.osf}](#calibre_link-139)[]{.osf}

(The reflection on the old wardrobe

Cast by the live coals of an October twilight.)

If we give objects the friendship they should have, we do not open a
wardrobe without a slight start. Beneath its russet wood, a wardrobe is
a very white almond. To open it is to experience an event of whiteness.

V

An anthology devoted to small boxes, such as chests and caskets, would
constitute an important chapter in psychology. These complex pieces that
a craftsman creates are very evident witnesses of the *need for
secrecy,* of an intuitive sense of hiding-places. It is not merely a
matter of keeping a possession well guarded. The lock doesn't exist that
could resist absolute violence, and all locks are an invitation to
thieves. A lock is a psychological threshold. And how it defies
indiscretion when it is covered with ornaments! What "complexes" are
attached to an ornamented lock! Denise
Paulme[]{#calibre_link-365}[[10]{.osf}](#calibre_link-140) writes that
among the Bambaras, the center of the lock is sculptured "in the form of
a crocodile, or a lizard, or a turtle. . . ." The power that opens and
shuts must possess the power of life, human power, or the power of a
sacred animal. "And among the Dogons, in the Sudan, locks are decorated
with two human figures representing the first man and first woman"
(*loc. cit.,* p. [35]{.scap1}).

But rather than challenge the trespasser, rather than frighten him by
signs of power, it is preferable to mislead him. This is where boxes
that fit into one another come in. The least important secrets are put
in the first box, the idea being that they will suffice to satisfy his
curiosity, which can also be fed on false secrets. In other words, there
exists a type of cabinet work that is "complexualistic."

For many people, the fact that there should exist a homology between the
geometry of the small box and the psychology of secrecy does not call
for protracted comment. However, novelists occasionally make note of
this homology in a few lines. One of Franz Hellens' characters, wishing
to make his daughter a present, hesitates between a silk scarf and a
small, Japanese lacquer box. He chooses the box "because it seems to be
better suited to her reserved
nature."[]{#calibre_link-366}[[11]{.osf}](#calibre_link-141) A rapid,
simple notation of this kind may well escape the attention of the
hurried reader. And yet it is at the very core of a strange tale, in
which father and daughter hide the *same* mystery. This same mystery is
heading toward the same fate, and the author applies all his talents to
making us feel this identity of intimate spirits. Indeed, this is a book
that should be added to a dossier on the pent-up soul, with the box for
emblem. For it shows us that the psychology of reserved persons is not
depicted by listing their negative attitudes, cataloguing their
detachments or recounting their moments of silence! Watch them, rather,
in the moment of positive joy that accompanies the opening of a new box,
like this young girl who receives implicit permission from her father to
hide her secrets; that is to say, to conceal her mystery. In this story
by Franz Hellens, two human beings "understand" each other without a
word, without knowing it, in fact. Two pent-up human beings communicate
by means of the same symbol.

VI

In an earlier chapter, I stated that to say one "reads" a house or a
room makes sense. We might also say that writers let us read their
treasure-boxes, it being understood that a well-calculated geometrical
description is not the only way to write "a box." And yet Rilke has
spoken of the pleasure he felt when he saw a box that closed well. "A
box-top that is in good condition," he wrote, "with its edges
unbattered, should have no other desire than to be on its
box."[]{#calibre_link-367}[[12]{.osf}](#calibre_link-142) A literary
critic will probably ask how it was possible, in as well-written a work
as the *Cahiers,* for Rilke to have overlooked such a "commonplace" as
this. The objection will be overridden, however, if one accepts the germ
of daydream contained in the gently closed box. And how far the word
*desire* goes! I am reminded of an optimistic proverb according to
which: "Every pot has its cover." The world would get along better if
pots and covers could always stay together.

Gentle closing calls for gentle opening, and we should want life always
to be well oiled.

If we "read" a Rilke box, we shall see how inevitably a secret thought
encounters the box image. In a letter to
Liliane,[]{#calibre_link-368}[[13]{.osf}](#calibre_link-143) Rilke
wrote: "Everything that touches upon this ineffable experience must
remain quite remote, or only give rise to the most cautious handling at
some future time. Yes, I must admit that I imagine it taking place one
day the way those heavy, imposing seventeenth-century locks work; the
kind that filled the entire top of a chest with all sorts of bolts,
clamps, bars and levers, while a single, easily turned key pulled this
entire apparatus of defense and deterrence from its most central point.
But the key is not alone. You know too that the keyholes of such chests
are concealed under a button or under a leather tongue which also only
responds to some secret pressure." What concrete images to express the
"Open, Sesame" formula! And what secret pressure, what soft words, are
needed to gain access to a spirit, to calm a Rilkean heart!

There is no doubt that Rilke liked locks. But who doesn't like both
locks and keys? There is an abundant psychoanalytical literature on this
theme, so that it would be easy to find documentation on the subject.
For our purpose, however, if we emphasized sexual symbols, we should
conceal the depth of the dreams of intimacy. Indeed, one is probably
never more aware of the monotony of the symbols used in psychoanalysis
than in such an example. When a conflict between lock and key appears in
a night dream, for psychoanalysis this is a clear sign, so clear, in
fact, that it cuts the story short. When we dream of locks and keys
there's nothing more to confess. But poetry extends well beyond
psychoanalysis on every side. From a dream it always makes a daydream.
And the poetic daydream cannot content itself with the rudiments of a
story; it cannot be tied to a knotty complex. The poet lives a daydream
that is awake, but above all, his daydream remains in the world, facing
worldly things. It gathers the universe together around and in an
object. We see it open chests, or condense cosmic wealth in a slender
casket. If there are jewels and precious stones in the casket, it is the
past, a long past, a past that goes back through generations, that will
set the poet romancing. The stones will speak of love, of course. But of
power too, and fate. All of that is so much greater than a key and its
lock!

The casket contains the things that are *unforgettable,* unforgettable
for us, but also unforgettable for those to whom we are going to give
our treasures. Here the past, the present and a future are condensed.
Thus the casket is memory of what is immemorial.

If we take advantage of images to indulge in psychology, we find that
every important recollection---Bergson's pure recollection---is set in
its little casket. The pure recollection, the image that belongs to us
alone, we do not *want* to communicate; we only give its picturesque
details. Its very core, however, is our own, and we should never want to
tell all there is to tell about it. This in no way resembles unconscious
repression, which is an awkward form of dynamism, with symbols that are
conspicuous. But every secret has its little casket, and this absolute,
well-guarded secret is independent of all dynamism. Here the intimate
life achieves a synthesis of Memory and Will. This is *Iron Will,* not
against the outside, or against other persons, but beyond all the
psychology of being "against." Surrounding certain recollections of our
inner self, we have the security of an *absolute
casket*.[[]{#calibre_link-369
.pt}]{.osf}[[14]{.osf}](#calibre_link-144)[]{.osf}

But with this absolute casket, I too am now talking in metaphors. Let's
get back to our images.

VII

Chests, especially small caskets, over which we have more complete
mastery, are objects *that may be opened*. When a casket is closed, it
is returned to the general community of objects; it takes its place in
exterior space. But it opens! For this reason, a
philosopher-mathematician would say that it is the first differential of
discovery. In a later chapter I plan to study the dialectics of inside
and outside. But from the moment the casket is opened, dialectics no
longer exist. The outside is effaced with one stroke, an atmosphere of
novelty and surprise reigns. The outside has no more meaning. And quite
paradoxically, even cubic dimensions have no more meaning, for the
reason that a new dimension---the dimension of intimacy---has just
opened up.

For someone who is a good judge of values, and who sees things from the
angle of the values of intimacy, this dimension can be an infinite one.

As proof, I should like to quote a marvelously perceptive fragment from
an article by Jean-Pierre
Richard,[]{#calibre_link-370}[[15]{.osf}](#calibre_link-145) which
offers a veritable theorem of the topoanalysis of intimate space.
Jean-Pierre Richard is a writer who analyzes literary works in terms of
their dominant images. Here he allows us to relive the moment in Poe's
story, *The Gold Bug,* when the casket is opened. To begin with, the
jewels found in it are of inestimable value. They could not, of course,
be "ordinary" jewels. However, the treasure was not inventoried by a
lawyer, but by a poet. It is fraught with "unknown and possible
elements, it becomes again an imaginary object, generating hypotheses
and dreams, it deepens and escapes from itself toward an infinite number
of other treasures." Thus it seems that at the moment when the story
reaches its conclusion, a conclusion that is as cold as a police record,
it has lost nothing of its oneiric richness. The imagination can never
say: was that all, for there is always more than meets the eye. And as I
have said several times, an image that issues from the imagination is
not subject to verification by reality.

Having achieved valorization of the contents by valorization of the
container, Jean-Pierre Richard makes the following penetrating comment:
"We shall never reach the bottom of the casket." The infinite quality of
the intimate dimension could not be better expressed.

Sometimes, a lovingly fashioned casket has interior perspectives that
change constantly as a result of daydream. We open it and discover that
it is a dwelling-place, that a house is hidden in it. To illustrate,
there exists a marvel of this kind in a prose poem by Charles Cros, in
which the poet carries on where the cabinet-maker left off. Beautiful
objects created by skillful hands are quite naturally "carried on" by a
poet's daydream. And for Charles Cros, imaginary beings are born of the
"secret" of a marquetry casket.

"In order to detect its mystery, in order to go beyond the perspectives
of marquetry, to reach the imaginary world through the little mirrors,"
one had to possess a "rapid glance, fine hearing, and be keenly
attentive." Indeed, the imagination sharpens all of our senses. The
imagining attention prepares our attention for instantaneousness.

And the poet continues: "Finally I caught a glimpse of the clandestine
festivity. I heard the tiny minutes, I guessed the complicated web of
entanglements that was being woven inside the casket.

"The doors open, and we see what appears to be a parlor for insects, the
white, brown and black floors are seen in exaggerated
perspective."[]{#calibre_link-371}[[16]{.osf}](#calibre_link-146)[]{.osf}

But when the poet closes the casket, inside it, he sets a nocturnal
world into motion (p. [88]{.scap1}).

"When the casket is closed, when the ears of the importunate are stopped
with sleep, or filled with outside noises, when the thoughts of men
dwell upon some positive object,

"Then strange scenes take place in the casket's parlor, several persons
of unwonted size and appearance step forth from the little mirrors."

This time, in the darkness of the casket, it is the enclosed reflections
that reproduce objects. The inversion of interior and exterior is
experienced so intensely by the poet that it brings about an inversion
of objects and reflections.

And once more, after dreaming of this tiny parlor enlivened by the
dancing of figurines of another day, the poet opens the casket (p.
[90]{.scap1}): "The lights go out, the guests, composed of belles and
their beaux, and a few aging relatives, disappear pell-mell, into the
mirrors and along the corridors and colonnades, without giving a thought
to their dignity, while chairs and tables and hangings evaporate into
thin air.

"And the parlor remains empty, silent and clean." Serious-minded persons
may then say with the poet, "It's a marquetry casket, and that's all."
Echoing this reasonable opinion, the reader who is averse to playing
with inversions of large and small, exterior and intimacy, may also say:
"It's a poem and that's all." "And nothing
more."[]{#calibre_link-372}[[17]{.osf}](#calibre_link-147)[]{.osf}

In reality, however, the poet has given concrete form to a very general
psychological theme, namely, that there will always be more things in a
closed, than in an open, box. To verify images kills them, and it is
always more enriching to *imagine* than to *experience*.

The action of the secret passes continually from the hider of things to
the hider of self. A casket is a dungeon for objects. And here is a
dreamer who feels that he shares the dungeon of its secret. We should
like to open it, and we should also like to open our hearts. The
following lines by Jules Supervielle can be read in a dual
sense:[]{#calibre_link-373}[[18]{.osf}](#calibre_link-148)[]{.osf}

*Je cherche dans des coffres qui m'entourent brutalement*

*Mettant des ténèbres sens dessus dessous*

*Dans des caisses profondes, profondes*

*Comme si elles n'étaient plus de ce monde.*

(Roughly I search in coffers that surround me

Putting disarray in the darkness

Of cases that are deep, deep

As though they had departed this life.)

He who buries a treasure buries himself with it. A secret is a grave,
and it is not for nothing that a man who can be trusted with a secret
boasts that he is "like the grave."

All intimacy hides from view, and I recall that the late Joë Bousquet
wrote:[]{#calibre_link-374}[[19]{.osf}](#calibre_link-149) "No one sees
me changing. But who sees me? I am my own hiding-place."

It is not my intention, in this volume, to recall the problem presented
by the intimacy of substances, which I have outlined
elsewhere.[[]{#calibre_link-375
.pt}]{.osf}[[20]{.osf}](#calibre_link-150) I shall, however, point out
the nature of the two dreamers who seek the intimacy of man and the
intimacy of matter. Jung has shown very clearly this correspondence
between dreamers of alchemy (cf. *Psychologie und Alchemie*). In other
words, there is only one *place* for the *superlative* element of what
is *hidden*. The hidden in men and the hidden in things belong in the
same topoanalysis, as soon as we enter into this strange region of the
*superlative,* which is a region that has hardly been touched by
psychology. And to tell the truth, all positivity makes the superlative
fall back upon the comparative. To enter into the domain of the
superlative, we must leave the positive for the imaginary. We must
listen to poets.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-12 .calibre}
::: basic-text-frame
# [4]{.osf1} {#calibre_link-522 .chaptnum}

# NESTS {#calibre_link-523 .chapttitle}

*Je cueillis un nid dans le squelette du lierre*

*Un nid doux de mousse champêtre et herbe de songe.*

[YVAN GOLL, ]{.scap1}*Tombeau du père, in Poètes d'aujourd'hui*
[1950]{.scap1}[ (]{.scap1}Ed. Séghers, p. [156]{.scap1}[.)]{.scap1}

(I found a nest in the skeleton of the ivy

A soft nest of country moss and dream herb.)

*Nids blancs vos oiseaux vont fleurir*

*Vous volerez, sentiers de plume.*

[ROBER]{.scap1}[T GANZO, ]{.scap1}*L'oeuvre poétique* (Ed. Grasset, p.
[63]{.scap1}[.)]{.scap1}[]{.scapital}

(White nests your birds will flower

You will fly, feather paths.)

In one short sentence, Victor Hugo associates the images and beings of
the function of inhabiting. For Quasimodo, he
says,[]{#calibre_link-376}[[1]{.osf}](#calibre_link-151) the cathedral
had been successively "egg, nest, house, country and universe." "One
might almost say that he had espoused its form the way a snail does the
form of its shell. It was his home, his hole, his envelope . . . He
adhered to it, as it were, like a turtle to its carapace. This rugged
cathedral was his armor." All of these images were needed to tell how an
unfortunate creature assumed the contorted forms of his numerous
hiding-places in the corners of this complex structure. In this way, by
multiplying his images, the poet makes us aware of the powers of the
various refuges. But he immediately adds a sign of moderation to the
abundance of images. "It is useless," he continues, "to warn the reader
not to take literally the figures of speech that I am obliged to use
here to express the strange, symmetrical, immediate, almost
consubstantial flexibility of a man and an edifice."

It is striking that even in our homes, where there is light, our
consciousness of well-being should call for comparison with animals in
their shelters. An example may be found in the following lines by the
painter, Vlaminck, who, when he wrote them, was living quietly in the
country:[]{#calibre_link-377}[[2]{.osf}](#calibre_link-152) "The
well-being I feel, seated in front of my fire, while bad weather rages
out-of-doors, is entirely animal. A rat in its hole, a rabbit in its
burrow, cows in the stable, must all feel the same contentment that I
feel." Thus, well-being takes us back to the primitiveness of the
refuge. Physically, the creature endowed with a sense of refuge huddles
up to itself, takes to cover, hides away, lies snug, concealed. If we
were to look among the wealth of our vocabulary for verbs that express
the dynamics of retreat, we should find images based on animal movements
of withdrawal, movements that are engraved in our muscles. How
psychology would deepen if we could know the psychology of each muscle!
And what a quantity of animal beings there are in the being of a man!
But our research does not go that far. It would already be a good deal
if we were able to enhance the value of these images of refuge by
showing that by understanding them, in a way, we live them.

With nests and, above all, shells, we shall find a whole series of
images that I am going to try to characterize as primal images; images
that bring out the primitiveness in us. I shall then show that a human
being likes to "withdraw into his corner," and that it gives him
physical pleasure to do so.

II

Already, in the world of inanimate objects, extraordinary significance
is attached to nests. We want them to be perfect, to bear the mark of a
very sure instinct. We ourselves marvel at this instinct, and a nest is
generally considered to be one of the marvels of animal life. An example
of this much vaunted perfection may be found in one of Ambroise Paré's
works:[]{#calibre_link-378}[[3]{.osf}](#calibre_link-153) "The
enterprise and skill with which animals make their nests is so efficient
that it is not possible to do better, so entirely do they surpass all
masons, carpenters and builders; for there is not a man who would be
able to make a house better suited to himself and to his children than
these little animals build for themselves. This is so true, in fact,
that we have a proverb according to which men can do everything except
build a bird's nest."

A book that is limited to facts soon dampens this enthusiasm, as, for
instance, Arthur Landsborough Thomson's book, in which we are told that
nests are often barely started, and at times, botched. "When the golden
eagle nests in a tree, it sometimes makes an enormous pile of branches
to which every year it adds others, until one day the entire thing falls
to pieces under its own
weight."[]{#calibre_link-379}[[4]{.osf}](#calibre_link-154) Between
enthusiasm and scientific criticism one could find countless shades of
opinion if one followed the history of ornithology. But this is not our
subject. Let us note in passing, however, that we have here a
controversy over values that often deforms the facts on both sides. And
who knows if this fall, not of the eagle, but of the eagle's nest, does
not furnish the author with the minor delight of being disrespectful.

III

Positively speaking, there is nothing more absurd than images that
attribute *human* qualities to a nest. For a bird, a nest is no doubt a
good warm home, it is even a life-giving home, since it continues to
shelter the bird that has come out of the egg. It also serves as a sort
of downy coverlet for the baby bird until its quite naked skin grows its
own down. But why hasten to make a human image, an image for man's use,
out of such a paltry thing? The ridiculous nature of this image would
become evident if the cosy "little nest," the warm "little nest" that
lovers promise each other, were actually compared with the real nest,
lost in the foliage. Among birds, need I recall, love is a strictly
extracurricular affair, and the nest is not built until later, when the
mad love-chase across the fields is over. If we were obliged to reflect
upon all this and deduce from it a lesson for human beings, we should
have to evolve a dialectics of forest love and love in a city room. But
this is not our subject, either. Only someone like André Theuriet would
compare a garret to a nest, and accompany the comparison with the
following single remark: "Haven't dreams always liked to perch on
high?"[]{#calibre_link-380}[[5]{.osf}](#calibre_link-155) In short, in
literature, the nest image is generally childish.

The "nest" that is "lived" was therefore a poor image to start with. And
yet it has certain initial virtues which a phenomenologist who likes
simple problems can discover. It offers a fresh opportunity to do away
with misunderstandings as to the principal function of philosophical
phenomenology. For it is not the task of this phenomenology to describe
the nests met with in nature, which is a quite positive task reserved
for ornithologists. A beginning of a philosophical phenomenology of
nests would consist in our being able to elucidate the interest with
which we look through an album containing reproductions of nests, or,
even more positively, in our capacity to recapture the naïve wonder we
used to feel when we found a nest. This wonder is lasting, and today
when we discover a nest it takes us back to our childhood or, rather, to
a childhood; to the childhoods we should have had. For not many of us
have been endowed by life with the full measure of its cosmic
implications.

How many times, in my garden, I have experienced the disappointment of
discovering a nest too late. Autumn was there, the leaves had already
begun to fall and in the fork of two branches there was an abandoned
nest. To think that they had all been there: the father bird, the mother
bird and the nestlings. And I had not seen them!

An empty nest found belatedly in the woods in winter mocks the finder. A
nest is a hiding-place for winged creatures. How could it have remained
invisible? Invisible from above, and yet far from the more dependable
hiding-places on the ground? But since, in order to determine the shades
of being in an image, we must add a super-impression to it, here is a
legend that carries the imagination of an invisible nest to its utmost
point. It is taken from Charbonneaux-Lassay's very fine book: *Le
bestiaire du Christ*.[[]{#calibre_link-381
.pt}]{.osf}[[6]{.osf}](#calibre_link-156) "People used to think that the
hoopoe bird could hide entirely from the sight of all living creatures,
which explains the fact that, at the end of the Middle Ages, it was
still believed that there was a multicolored herb in the hoopoe's nest
which made a man invisible when he wore it."

This may be Yvan Goll's "dream herb."

But the dreams of today do not go this far, and an abandoned nest no
longer contains the herb of invisibility. Indeed, the nest we pluck from
the hedge like a dead flower is nothing but a "thing." I have the right
to take it in my hands and pull it apart. In melancholy mood, I become
once more a man of the fields and thickets, and a bit vain at being able
to hand on my knowledge to a child, I say: "This is the nest of a
titmouse."

And so the old nest enters into the category of objects. The more varied
the objects, the simpler the concept. But as our collection of nests
grows, our imagination remains idle, and we lose contact with living
nests.

And yet it is living nests that could introduce a phenomenology of the
actual nest, of the nest found in natural surroundings, and which
becomes for a moment the center---the term is no exaggeration---of an
entire universe, the evidence of a cosmic situation. Gently I lift a
branch. In the nest is a setting bird. But it doesn't fly away, it only
quivers a little. I tremble at having caused it to tremble. I am afraid
that this setting bird will realize that I am a man, a being that has
lost the confidence of birds. I remain motionless. Slowly the bird's
fear and my own fear of causing fear are allayed---or so I imagine. I
breathe easily again, and let go of the branch. I'll come back tomorrow.
Today, I am happy, because some birds have built a nest in my garden.

And the next day when I come back, walking more softly than the day
before, I see eight pink-white eggs in the bottom of the nest. But how
small they are! How small these thicket eggs are!

This is a living, inhabited nest. A nest is a bird's house. I've known
this for a long time, people have told it to me for a long time. In
fact, it is such an old story that I hesitate to repeat it, even to
myself. And yet, I have just re-experienced it. And I recall very
clearly days in my life when I found a live nest. Such genuine
recollections as these are rare in life. And how well I understand these
lines from Toussenel's *Le monde des
oiseaux*:[]{#calibre_link-382}[[7]{.osf}](#calibre_link-157) "My
recollection of the first bird's nest that I found all by myself has
remained more deeply engraved in my memory than that of the first prize
I won in grammar school for a Latin version. It was a lovely linnet's
nest with four pinkish-gray eggs striated with red lines, like an
emblematical map. I was seized with an emotion of such indescribable
delight that I stood there for over an hour, glued to one spot, looking.
That day, by chance, I found my vocation." What a fine passage for those
who are always looking for primal interests! And the fact that from the
start, Toussenel reacted with such "emotion" helps us to understand that
he should have succeeded in integrating the entire harmonic philosophy
of a Fourier in both his life and work, and even added an emblematical
life of universal dimensions to the life of a bird.

But in everyday life too, for a man who lives in the woods and fields,
the discovery of a nest is always a source of fresh emotion. Fernand
Lequenne, the botanist, writes that one day while walking with his wife,
Matilda, he saw a warbler's nest in a black hawthorne bush: "Matilda
knelt down and, holding out one finger, barely touched the soft moss,
then withdrew her finger, only leaving it outstretched. . . .

"Suddenly I began to tremble.

"I had just discovered the feminine significance of a nest set in the
fork of two branches. The thicket took on such a human quality that I
called out: 'Don't touch it, above all, don't touch
it'!"[]{#calibre_link-383}[[8]{.osf}](#calibre_link-158)[]{.osf}

IV

Toussenel's "emotion" and Lequenne's "trembling" both bear the mark of
sincerity. I have recalled them in my reading, since it is in books that
we enjoy the surprise of "discovering a nest." Let us pursue our search
for nests in literature. The following is an example in which the author
sets the domiciliary value of the nest one tone higher. It is taken from
the *Journals* of Henry David Thoreau, March [17]{.scap1},
[1858]{.scap1}. Here the entire tree, for the bird, is the vestibule of
the nest. Already, a tree that has the honor of sheltering a nest
participates in its mystery. For a bird, a tree is already a refuge.
Thoreau tells of a green woodpecker that took an entire tree for its
home. He compares this taking possession with the joy of a family that
returns to live in a house it had long since abandoned.

"It is as when a family, your neighbors, return to an empty house after
a long absence, and you hear the cheerful hum of voices and the laughter
of children, and see the smoke from the kitchen fire. The doors are
thrown open, and children go screaming through the hall. So the flicker
dashes through the aisles of the grove, throws up a window here and
cackles out it, and then there, airing the house. It makes its voice
ring up-stairs and down-stairs, and so, as it were, fits it for its
habitation and ours, and takes possession."

In this passage Thoreau gives an expanded version of both nest and
house. We are struck too by the fact that the text comes alive in both
directions of the metaphor: the happy household is a flourishing nest.
The woodpecker's confidence in the shelter of the tree in which it has
hidden its nest represents taking possession of a home. Here we leave
well behind us the implications of comparisons and allegories. A
reasonable critic will no doubt consider that this woodpecker
"proprietor," who appears at the window of the tree and sings on its
balcony, is an "exaggeration." But a poetic spirit will be grateful to
Thoreau for giving it, with this nest that has the dimensions of a tree,
a fullness of image. A tree becomes a nest the moment a great dreamer
hides in it. In his *Mémoires d'Outretombe,* Chateaubriand made the
following confidential note: "I had set up my headquarters, like a nest,
in one of these willows, and there, isolated between heaven and earth, I
spent hours among the warblers."

And the fact is that, in a garden, we grow more attached to a tree
inhabited by birds. However mysterious and invisible among the leaves
the green-garbed woodpecker may be at times, he nevertheless becomes
familiar to us. For a woodpecker is not a silent dweller. It is not when
he sings, however, that we think of him, but when he works. Up and down
the tree-trunk, his beak pecks the wood with resounding taps, and
although he frequently disappears, we still hear him. He is a garden
worker.

And so the woodpecker enters into my sound world and I make a salutary
image of him for my own use. In my Paris apartment, when a neighbor
drives nails into the wall at an undue hour, I "naturalize" the noise by
imagining that I am in my house in Dijon, where I have a garden. And
finding everything I hear quite natural, I say to myself: "That's my
woodpecker at work in the acacia tree." This is my method for obtaining
calm when things disturb me.

V

A nest, like any other image of rest and quiet, is immediately
associated with the image of a simple house. When we pass from the image
of a nest to the image of a house, and *vice versa,* it can only be in
an atmosphere of *simplicity*. Van Gogh, who painted numerous nests, as
well as numerous peasant cottages, wrote to his brother: "The cottage,
with its thatched roof, made me think of a wren's
nest."[]{#calibre_link-384}[[9]{.osf}](#calibre_link-159) For a painter,
it is probably *twice* as interesting if, while painting a nest, he
dreams of a cottage and, while painting a cottage, he dreams of a nest.
It is as though one dreamed twice, in two registers, when one dreams of
an image cluster such as this. For the simplest image is doubled; it is
itself and something else than itself. Van Gogh's thatched cottages are
overladen with thatch. Thick, coarsely plaited straw emphasizes the will
to provide shelter by extending well beyond the walls. Indeed, in this
instance, among all the shelter virtues, the roof is the dominant
evidence. Under the roof's covering the walls are of earth and stone.
The openings are low. A thatched cottage is set on the ground like a
nest in a field.

And a wren's nest is a thatched cottage, because it is a covered, round
nest. The Abbé Vincelot has described it as follows: "The wren builds
its nest in the form of a very round ball, in the bottom of which it
makes a small hole to let the water out. Usually this hole is hidden
beneath a branch, and I have often examined a nest from every angle
before noticing this opening, which also serves as entrance for the
female bird."[]{#calibre_link-385}[[10]{.osf}](#calibre_link-160) By
living Van Gogh's nest-cottage in its obvious liaison, the words
suddenly seem to jest. I like to tell myself that a little king lives in
that cottage. Here is certainly a fairy-tale image, an image that
suggests any number of tales.

VI

A nest-house is never young. Indeed, speaking as a pedant, we might say
that it is the natural habitat of the function of inhabiting. For not
only do we *come back* to it, but we dream of coming back to it, the way
a bird comes back to its nest, or a lamb to the fold. This sign of
*return* marks an infinite number of daydreams, for the reason that
human returning takes place in the great rhythm of human life, a rhythm
that reaches back across the years and, through the dream, combats all
absence. An intimate component of faithful loyalty reacts upon the
related images of nest and house.

In this domain, everything takes place simply and delicately. The soul
is so sensitive to these simple images that it hears all the resonances
in a harmonic reading. Reading on the conceptual level, on the other
hand, would be insipid and cold; it would be purely linear. For here we
are asked to understand the images one after the other. And in this
domain of the nest image the lines are so simple that one is surprised
at the poet's delight in them. But simplicity brings forgetfulness, and
suddenly we feel grateful toward the poet who has the talent to renew it
with such rare felicity. No phenomenologist could help reacting to this
renewal of such a simple image. We are deeply moved when we read Jean
Caubère's simple poem entitled: *Le nid tiède* (The Warm Nest). This
poem becomes all the more meaningful when one considers that it appeared
in a rather austere volume on the theme of the
desert:[]{#calibre_link-386}[[11]{.osf}](#calibre_link-161)[]{.osf}

*Le nid tiède et calme*

*Où chante l' oiseau*

*Rappelle les chansons, les charmes*

*Le seuil pur*

*De la vieille maison.*

(The warm, calm nest

In which a bird sings

Recalls the songs, the charms,

The pure threshold

Of my old home.)

And here the threshold is a hospitable threshold, one that does not
intimidate us by its majesty. The two images: the calm nest and the old
home, weave the sturdy web of intimacy on the dream loom. And the images
are all simple ones, with no attempt at picturesqueness. The poet
rightly thought that, at the mention of a nest, a bird's song, and the
charms that take us back to the old home, to the first home, a sort of
musical chord would sound in the soul of the reader. But in order to
make so gentle a comparison between house and nest, one must have lost
the house that stood for happiness. So there is also an *alas* in this
song of tenderness. If we return to the old home as to a nest, it is
because memories are dreams, because the home of other days has become a
great image of lost intimacy.

VII

Thus values alter facts. The moment we love an image, it cannot remain
the copy of a fact. One of the greatest of dreamers of winged life,
Jules Michelet, has given us fresh evidence of this. And yet he only
devotes a few pages to "bird architecture." But these are pages that
think and dream at the same time.

According to Michelet, a bird is a worker without tools. It has "neither
the hand of the squirrel, nor the teeth of the beaver." "In reality," he
writes, "a bird's tool is its own body, that is, its breast, with which
it presses and tightens its materials until they have become absolutely
pliant, well-blended and adapted to the general
plan."[]{#calibre_link-387}[[12]{.osf}](#calibre_link-162) And Michelet
suggests a house built by and for the body, taking form from the inside,
like a shell, in an intimacy that works physically. The form of the nest
is commanded by the inside. "On the inside," he continues, "the
instrument that prescribes a circular form for the nest is nothing else
but the body of the bird. It is by constantly turning round and round
and pressing back the walls on every side, that it succeeds in forming
this circle." The female, like a living tower, hollows out the house,
while the male brings back from the outside all kinds of materials,
sturdy twigs and other bits. By exercising an active pressure, the
female makes this into a felt-like padding.

Michelet goes on: "The house is a bird's very person; it is its form and
its most immediate effort, I shall even say, its suffering. The result
is only obtained by constantly repeated pressure of the breast. There is
not one of these blades of grass that, in order to make it curve and
hold the curve, has not been pressed on countless times by the bird's
breast, its heart, surely with difficulty in breathing, perhaps even,
with palpitations."

What an incredible inversion of images! Here we have the breast created
by the embryo. Everything is a matter of inner pressure, physically
dominant intimacy. The nest is a swelling fruit, pressing against its
limits.

From the depths of what daydreams do such images arise? They might come,
of course, from the dream of the protection that is closest to us, a
protection adapted to our bodies. Dreams of a garment-house are not
unfamiliar to those who indulge in the imaginary exercise of the
function of inhabiting. And if we were to work at our dwelling-places
the way Michelet dreams of his nest, we should not be wearing the
ready-made clothes, so often viewed with disfavor by Bergson. On the
contrary, each one of us would have a personal house of his own, a nest
for his body, padded to his measure. In Romain Rolland's novel, *Colas
Breugnon*, when, after a life of trials, the leading character is
offered a larger, more convenient house, he refuses it as being a
garment that would not fit him. "Either it would hang on me too
loosely," he says, "or I should make it burst at the
seams."[]{#calibre_link-388}[[13]{.osf}](#calibre_link-163)[]{.osf}

By following the nest images collected by Michelet to the human level,
we realize that, from the start, these were human images. It is even
doubtful if an ornithologist would describe the building of a nest the
way Michelet does, and a nest built in this way would have to be called
a Michelet nest. Phenomenologists will use it to test the dynamisms of a
strange sort of withdrawal, which is active and in a state of constant
renewal. This is not a dynamics of insomnia, during which we turn and
toss in our beds. Michelet points out how the home is modeled by fine
touches, which make a surface originally bristling and composite into
one that is smooth and soft.

Incidentally, this passage by Michelet constitutes a rare and, for this
reason, all the more valuable, document on the subject of the material
imagination. Indeed, no one who likes images of matter can forget it,
because it describes *dry modeling*. This is the modeling, or shall we
say, the marriage, in the dry air and summer sunlight, of moss and down.
Michelet's nest is a paean of praise to its felt-like fabric.

It should be noted in closing that few dreamers of nests like a
swallow's nest which, they say, is made of saliva and mud. People have
even wondered where all the swallows lived before the existence of
houses and cities. Swallows, in other words, are not "regular" birds,
and Charbonneaux-Lassay wrote of them: "I have heard peasants in the
Vendée say that a swallow's nest could frighten the night devils away,
even in
winter."[]{#calibre_link-389}[[14]{.osf}](#calibre_link-164)[]{.osf}

VIII

If we go deeper into daydreams of nests, we soon encounter a sort of
paradox of sensibility. A nest---and this we *understand* right
away---is a precarious thing, and yet it sets us to *daydreaming of
security*. Why does this obvious precariousness not arrest daydreams of
this kind? The answer to this paradox is simple: when we dream, we are
phenomenologists without realizing it. In a sort of naïve way, we relive
the instinct of the bird, taking pleasure in accentuating the mimetic
features of the green nest in green leaves. We definitely saw it, but we
say that it was well hidden. This center of animal life is concealed by
the immense volume of vegetable life. The nest is a lyrical bouquet of
leaves. It participates in the peace of the vegetable world. It is a
point in the atmosphere of happiness that always surrounds large trees.

A poet once
wrote:[]{#calibre_link-390}[[15]{.osf}](#calibre_link-165)[]{.osf}

*J'ai rêvé d'un nid où les arbres repoussaient la mort*.

(I dreamed of a nest in which the trees repulsed death.)

And so when we examine a nest, we place ourselves at the origin of
confidence in the world, we receive a beginning of confidence, an urge
toward cosmic confidence. Would a bird build its nest if it did not have
its instinct for confidence in the world? If we heed this call and make
an absolute refuge of such a precarious shelter as a
nest---paradoxically no doubt, but in the very impetus of the
imagination---we return to the sources of the oneiric house. Our house,
apprehended in its dream potentiality, becomes a nest in the world, and
we shall live there in complete confidence if, in our dreams, we really
participate in the sense of security of our first home. In order to
experience this confidence, which is deeply graven in our sleep, there
is no need to enumerate material reasons for confidence. The nest, quite
as much as the oneiric house, and the oneiric house quite as much as the
nest---if we ourselves are at the origin of our dreams---knows nothing
of the hostility of the world. Human life starts with refreshing sleep,
and all the eggs in a nest are kept nicely warm. The experience of the
hostility of the world---and consequently, our dreams of defense and
aggressiveness---comes much later. In its germinal form, therefore, all
of life is well-being. Being starts with well-being. When a philosopher
considers a nest, he calms himself by meditating on the subject of his
own being in the calm world being. And if we were to translate the
absolute naïveté of his daydream into the metaphysical language of
today, a dreamer might say that the world is the nest of mankind.

For the world is a nest, and an immense power holds the inhabitants of
the world in this nest. In Herder's history of Hebrew poetry there is an
image of the immense sky resting on the immense earth: "The air," he
wrote, "is a dove which, as it rests on its nest, keeps its young
warm."[]{#calibre_link-391}[[16]{.osf}](#calibre_link-166)[]{.osf}

 • • • 

I was thinking these thoughts and dreaming these dreams when I read a
passage in the Autumn [1954]{.scap1} issue of *Cahiers G.L.M*. that
encouraged me to maintain the axiom that identifies the nest with the
world and makes it the center of the world. Here Boris Pasternak speaks
of "the instinct with the help of which, like the swallow, we construct
the world---an enormous nest, an agglomerate of earth and sky, of death
and life, and of two sorts of time, one we can dispose of and one that
is lacking."[]{#calibre_link-392}[[17]{.osf}](#calibre_link-167) Yes,
two sorts of time, for what a long time we should need before waves of
tranquility, spreading out from the center of our intimacy, reached the
ends of the world.

What a concentration of images in Pasternak's swallow's nest! And, in
reality, why should we stop building and molding the world's clay about
our own shelters? Mankind's nest, like his world, is never finished. And
imagination helps us to continue it. A poet cannot leave such a great
image as this, nor, to be more exact, can such an image leave its poet.
Boris Pasternak also wrote (*loc. cit*., p. [5]{.scap1}): "Man himself
is mute, and it is the image that speaks. For it is obvious that the
image *alone* can keep pace with nature."
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-13 .calibre}
::: basic-text-frame
# [5]{.osf1} {#calibre_link-524 .chaptnum}

# SHELLS {#calibre_link-525 .chapttitle}

The concept that corresponds to a shell is so clear, so hard and so sure
that a poet, unable simply to draw it, and reduced rather to speaking of
it, is at first at a loss for images. He is arrested in his flight
towards dream values by the geometrical reality of the forms. And these
forms are so numerous, often so original, that after a positive
examination of the shell world, the imagination is defeated by reality.
Here it is nature that imagines, and nature is very clever. One has only
to look at pictures of ammonites to realize that, as early as the
Mesozoic Age, mollusks constructed their shells according to the
teachings of a transcendental geometry. Ammonites built their homes
around the axis of a logarithmic spiral. (A very clear account of this
construction of geometrical forms by life may be read in Monod-Herzen's
excellent
book.)[]{#calibre_link-393}[[1]{.osf}](#calibre_link-168)[]{.osf}

A poet naturally understands this esthetic category of life, and Paul
Valéry's essay *Les coquillages* (Shells) fairly glows with the spirit
of geometry. For Valéry: "A *crystal*, a *flower* or a *shell* stands
out from the usual disorder that characterizes most perceptible things.
They are privileged forms that are more intelligible for the eye, even
though more mysterious for the mind, than all the others we see
indistinctly."[]{#calibre_link-394}[[2]{.osf}](#calibre_link-169) For
this poet, whose thinking was essentially Cartesian, a shell seems to
have been a truth of well solidified animal geometry, and therefore
"clear and distinct." The created object itself is highly intelligible;
and it is the *formation*, not the form, that remains mysterious. As to
the form it would eventually assume, a vital decision governed the
initial choice that involved knowing whether the shell would coil to the
left or to the right. This original vortex has provoked endless
commentary. Actually, however, life begins less by reaching upward, than
by turning upon itself. But what a marvelously insidious, subtle image
of life a coiling vital principle would be! And how many dreams the
leftward oriented shell, or one that did not conform to the rotation of
its species, would inspire!

Paul Valéry lingered long over the ideal of a modeled, or carved, object
that would justify its absolute value by the beauty and solidity of its
geometrical form, while remaining unconcerned with the simple matter of
protecting its substance. In this case, the mollusk's motto would be:
one must live to build one's house, and not build one's house to live
in.

However, in a second stage of his meditation, Valéry becomes aware of
the fact that a shell carved by a man would be obtained from the
outside, through a series of enumerable acts that would bear the mark of
touched-up beauty; whereas "the mollusk exudes its shell" (*loc. cit*.,
p. [10]{.scap1}), it lets the building material "seep through," "distill
its marvelous covering as needed." And when the seeping starts, the
house is already completed. In this way Valéry returns to the mystery of
form-giving life, the mystery of slow, continuous formation.

But this reference to slow formation is only one stage of his
meditation, and his book is an introduction to a museum of forms. The
collection is illustrated with watercolors by Paul-A. Robert, who,
before he started to paint, had prepared the object by polishing all the
valves. This delicate polishing laid bare the roots of the colors, which
made it possible to participate in a will to color, in the very history
of coloration. And at this point the house turns out to be so beautiful,
so deeply beautiful, that it would be a sacrilege even to dream of
living in it.

II

A phenomenologist who wants to experience the images of the function of
inhabiting must not be subject to the charms of external beauty. For
generally, beauty exteriorizes and disturbs intimate meditation. Nor can
a phenomenologist follow for long the conchologist, whose duty it is to
classify the immense variety of shells, and who is looking for
diversity. However, a phenomenologist could learn a lot from a
conchologist, if the latter were to share with him his own original
amazement.

For here too, as with nests, enduring interest should begin with the
original amazement of a naïve observer. Is it possible for a creature to
remain alive inside stone, inside this piece of stone? Amazement of this
kind is rarely felt twice. Life quickly wears it down. And besides, for
one "living" shell, how many dead ones there are! For one inhabited
shell, how many are empty!

But an empty shell, like an empty nest, invites daydreams of refuge. No
doubt we over-refine our daydreams when we follow such simple images as
these. But it is my belief that a phenomenologist should go in the
direction of maximum simplicity. And therefore I believe that it is
worthwhile proposing a phenomenology of the inhabited shell.

III

The surest sign of wonder is exaggeration. And since the inhabitant of a
shell can amaze us, the imagination will soon make amazing creatures,
more amazing than reality, issue from the shell. In Jurgis Baltrusaitis'
fine volume entitled: *Le moyen âge fantastique*, we find reproductions
of antique jewels in which "the most unexpected animals: a hare, a bird,
a stag, or a dog, come out of a shell, as from out of a magician's
hat."[]{#calibre_link-395}[[3]{.osf}](#calibre_link-170) This comparison
with a magician's hat will be quite useless to anyone who takes up his
position in the very center where images develop. When we accept slight
amazement, we prepare ourselves to imagine great amazement and, in the
world of the imagination, it becomes normal for an elephant, which is an
enormous animal, to come out of a snail shell. It would be exceptional,
however, if we were to ask him to go back into it. In a later chapter, I
shall have an opportunity to show that, in the imagination, to go in and
come out are never symmetrical images. "Large, free animals escape
mysteriously from some small object," writes Baltrusaitis, and he adds:
"Aphrodite was born in these
conditions."[]{#calibre_link-396}[[4]{.osf}](#calibre_link-171) Beauty
and magnitude cause spores to swell. As I shall show later, one of the
powers of attraction of smallness lies in the fact that large things can
issue from small ones.

Everything about a creature that comes out of a shell is dialectical.
And since it does not come out entirely, the part that comes out
contradicts the part that remains inside. The creature's rear parts
remain imprisoned in the solid geometrical forms. But life is in such
haste when it comes out that it does not always take on a designated
form, such as that of a young hare or a camel. Certain engravings show
strangely mixed creatures, as in the case of the snail shown in this
work by Baltrusaitis (p. [58]{.scap1}), "with a bearded human head and
hare's ears, wearing a bishop's mitre, and with four animal feet." The
shell is a witch's cauldron in which bestiality is brewing. According to
Baltrusaitis, "*Les heures de Marguerite de Beaujeu* are full of
grotesque figures of this kind. Several of them have discarded their
shells and remained coiled in the form of the shell. Heads of dogs,
wolves and birds, as well as human heads, are attached directly to
mollusks." And so, unbridled, bestial daydream produces a diagram for a
shortened version of animal evolution. In other words, in order to
achieve grotesqueness, it suffices to abridge an evolution.

And the fact is that a creature that comes out of its shell suggests
daydreams of a mixed creature that is not only "half fish, half flesh,"
but also half dead, half alive, and, in extreme cases, half stone, half
man. This is just the opposite of the daydream that petrifies us with
fear. Man is born of stone. If in C. G. Jung's book *Psychologie und
Alchemie*, we examine closely the figures shown on page [86]{.scap1}, we
see Melusines, not the romantic Melusines that spring from the waters of
lakes, but Melusines that are symbols of alchemy, who help us to
formulate dreams of the stone from which the principles of life are said
to come. Melusine actually comes forth from her scaly, gravelly tail,
which reaches back into the distant past, and is slightly spiraled. We
have not the impression that this inferior being has retained its
energy. The tail-shell does not eject its inhabitant. It is rather a
matter of an inferior form of life having been reduced to nothing by a
superior one. Here, as elsewhere, life is energetic at its summit. And
this summit acquires dynamism in the finished symbol of the human being,
for all dreamers of animal evolution have man in mind. In these drawings
of alchemical Melusines, the human form issues from a poor, frayed form,
to which the artist has devoted little care. But inertness does not
incite to daydreaming, and the shell is a covering that will be
abandoned. The forces of egress are such, the forces of production and
birth are so alive, that two human beings, both wearing diadems, may be
seen half emerged from the formless shell, in figure [11]{.scap1} of
Jung's book. This is the "Doppelköpfige," or two-headed Melusine.

All of these examples furnish us with phenomenological documents for a
phenomenology of the verb "to emerge," and they are all the more purely
phenomenological in that they correspond to invented types of
"emergence." In this case the animal is merely a pretext for multiplying
the images of "emerging." Man lives by images. Like all important verbs,
*to emerge from* would demand considerable research in the course of
which, besides concrete examples, one would collect the hardly
perceptible movements of certain abstractions. We sense little or no
more action in grammatical derivations, deductions or inductions. Even
verbs become congealed as if they were nouns. Only images can set verbs
in motion again.

IV

On the shell theme, in addition to the dialectics of small and large,
the imagination is stimulated by the dialectics of creatures that are
free and others that are in fetters: and what can we not expect from
those that are unfettered!

To be sure, in real life, a mollusk emerges from its shell indolently,
so if we were studying the actual phenomena of snail "behavior," this
behavior would yield to observations with no difficulty. If, however, we
were able to recapture absolute naïveté in our observation itself, that
is, really to re-experience our initial observation, we should give
fresh impetus to the complex of fear and curiosity that accompanies all
initial action on the world. We want to see and yet we are afraid to
see. This is the perceptible threshold of all knowledge, the threshold
upon which interest wavers, falters, then returns. The example at hand
for the purpose of indicating the fear and curiosity complex is not a
sizable one. Fear of a snail is calmed immediately, it is an old story,
it is "insignificant." But then this study is devoted to insignificant
things. Occasionally they reveal strange subtleties. In order to bring
them out I shall place them under the magnifying glass of the
imagination.

These undulations of fear and curiosity increase when reality is not
there to moderate them, that is, when we are imagining. However, let's
not invent, but rather give documents concerning images which have
actually been imagined or drawn, and which have remained engraved in
precious and other stones. There is a passage in the book by Jurgis
Baltrusaitis in which he recalls the *action* of an artist who shows a
dog that "leaps from its shell" and pounces upon a rabbit. One degree
more of aggressiveness and the shell-dog would attack a man. This is a
clear example of the progressing type of action by means of which
imagination surpasses reality. For here the imagination acts upon not
only geometrical dimensions, but upon elements of power and speed as
well---not in an enlarged space, either, but in a more rapid tempo. When
the motion picture camera accelerates the unfolding of a flower, we
receive a sublime image of offering; it is as though the flower we see
opening so quickly and without reservation, sensed the meaning of a
gift; as though it were a gift from the world. But if the cinema showed
us a snail emerging from its shell in fast motion, or pushing its horns
toward the sky very rapidly, what an aggression that would be! What
aggressive horns! All our curiosity would be blocked by fear, and the
fear-curiosity complex would be torn apart.

There is a sign of violence in all these figures in which an
over-excited creature emerges from a lifeless shell. Here the artist
precipitates his animal daydreams. Since they belong to the same type of
daydreams, we must associate abbreviations of animals that have their
heads and tails fastened together---the artist having neglected to show
the intermediary parts of their bodies---with these snail-shells from
which emerge quadrupeds, birds and human beings. To do away with what
lies between is, of course, an ideal of speed, and thanks to a sort of
acceleration of the imagined vital impulse, the creature that emerges
from the ground immediately assumes its physiognomy.

But the obvious dynamism of these extravagant figures lies in the fact
that they come alive in the dialectics of what is hidden and what is
manifest. A creature that hides and "withdraws into its shell" is
preparing a "way out." This is true of the entire scale of metaphors,
from the resurrection of a man in his grave, to the sudden outburst of
one who has long been silent. If we remain at the heart of the image
under consideration, we have the impression that, by staying in the
motionlessness of its shell, the creature is preparing temporal
explosions, not to say whirlwinds, of being. The most dynamic escapes
take place in cases of repressed being, and not in the flabby laziness
of the lazy creature whose only desire is to go and be lazy elsewhere.
If we experience the imaginary paradox of a vigorous mollusk---the
engravings in question give us excellent depictions of them---we attain
to the most decisive type of aggressiveness, which is postponed
aggressiveness, aggressiveness that bides its time. Wolves in shells are
crueler than stray ones.

V

By adhering to a method which seems to me decisive in a phenomenology of
images, and which consists of designating the image as an excess of the
imagination, I have accentuated the dialectics of large and small,
hidden and manifest, placid and aggressive, flabby and vigorous. I have
also followed the imagination to a point well beyond reality, in its
task of enlargement, for in order to surpass, one must first enlarge. We
have seen how freely the imagination acts upon space, time and elements
of power. But the action of the imagination is not limited to the level
of images. On the level of ideas too, it tends toward extremes, and
there are ideas that dream. For instance, certain theories which were
once thought to be scientific are, in reality, vast, boundless
daydreams. I should like to give an example of a dream-idea of this
type, which takes the shell as the clearest proof of life's ability to
constitute forms. According to this theory, which was propounded in the
eighteenth century by J. B. Robinet, everything that has form has a
shell ontogenesis, and life's principal effort is to make shells. It is
my opinion that at the center of Robinet's immense evolutionary table
there was a vast dream of shells. Indeed the title alone of one of his
books: *Vues philosophiques de la gradation naturelle des formes de
l'être, ou les essais de la nature qui apprend à faire I'homme*
(Philosophical Views on the Natural Gradation of Forms of Existence, or
the Attempts Made by Nature While Learning to Create Humanity,
Amsterdam, [1768]{.scap1}), describes the orientation of his thinking.
Those who have the patience to read the entire work will discover a
veritable commentary, in dogmatic form, on the type of drawings I
mentioned earlier. Here too *partial animal forms* appear on every side.
Fossils for Robinet are bits of life, roughcasts of separate organs,
which will find their coherent life at the summit of an evolution that
is preparing the way for man. We might say that the inside of a man's
body is an assemblage of shells. Each organ has its own causality, that
has already been tried out during the long centuries when nature was
teaching herself to make man, with one shell or another. The function
constructs its form from old models, and life, although only partial,
constructs its abode the way the shell-fish constructs its shell.

If one can succeed in reliving this partial life, in the precision of a
life that endows itself with a form, the being that possesses form
dominates thousands of years. For every form retains life, and a fossil
is not merely a being that once lived, but one that is still alive,
asleep in its form. The shell is the most obvious example of a universal
shell-oriented life.

All of this is firmly stated by Robinet.[[]{#calibre_link-397
.pt}]{.osf}[[5]{.osf}](#calibre_link-172) "I am persuaded that fossils
are alive," he writes, "if not from the standpoint of an exterior form
of life, for the reason that they lack perhaps certain limbs and senses
(I should hesitate to assert this, however), at least from that of an
interior, hidden form of life, which is very real of its kind, even
though quite inferior to that of a sleeping animal or a plant. But far
be it from me to deny them the organs necessary to the functioning of
their vital economy. And whatever their form, I consider it as a
progress toward the form of their analogues in the vegetable world,
among insects, large animals and, lastly, among men."

Robinet's book goes on to give descriptions, accompanied by very fine
engravings, of Lithocardites (heart stones), Encephalites (which are a
prelude to the brain), stones that imitate a jaw-bone, the foot, the
kidney, the ear, the eye, the hand, muscles---then Orchis, Diorchis,
Triorchis, the Priapolites, Colites and Phalloïds, which imitate the
male organs, and Histerapetia, which imitate the female organs.

It would be a mistake to see nothing in this but a reference to language
habits that name new objects by comparing them with other commonplace
ones. Here names think and dream, the imagination is active.
Lithocardites are heart shells, rough draughts of a heart that one day
will beat. Robinet's mineralogical collections are anatomical parts of
what man will be when nature learns to make him. A critical mind will
object that our eighteenth-century naturalist was a "victim of his
imagination." A phenomenologist, however, who avoids all criticism on
principle, cannot fail to recognize that in the very extravagance of the
being given to words, in the extravagance of his images, is manifested a
profound daydream. On all occasions Robinet thinks of form, from the
inside out. For him, life originates forms, and it is perfectly natural
that life, which is the cause of forms, should create living forms. Once
again, for such daydreams as these, form is the habitat of life.

Shells, like fossils, are so many attempts on the part of nature to
prepare forms of the different parts of the human body; they are bits of
man and bits of woman. In fact Robinet gives a description of the Conch
of Venus that represents a woman's vulva. A psychoanalyst would not fail
to see a sexual obsession in these designations and descriptions that
enter into such detail. Nor would he have any difficulty finding, in the
shell museum, such representations of phantasms as that of the toothed
vagina, which is one of the principal themes of Marie Bonaparte's study
of Edgar Allan Poe. Indeed, if we listened to Robinet, we should be
inclined to believe that nature went mad before man did. And one can
imagine the diverting reply that Robinet would make in defense of his
system to the observations of psychoanalysts or psychologists. With
simple gravity he wrote: "We should not be surprised at the assiduity
with which Nature has multiplied models of the generative organs, in
view of the importance of these organs" (*loc. cit.,* p. [73]{.scap1}).

 • • • 

With a dreamer of scholarly thoughts such as Robinet, who organized his
visionary ideas into a system, a psychoanalyst accustomed to untangling
family complexes would be quite powerless. We should need a cosmic
psychoanalysis, one that would abandon for a second human considerations
and concern itself with the contradictions of the Cosmos. We should also
need a psychoanalysis of matter which, at the same time that it accepted
the human accompaniment of the imagination of matter, would pay closer
attention to the profound play of the images of matter. Here, in the
very limited domain in which we are studying images, we should have to
resolve the contradictions of the shell, which at times is so rough
outside and so soft, so pearly, in its intimacy. How is it possible to
obtain this polish by means of friction with a creature that is so soft
and flabby? And doesn't the finger that dreams as it strokes the
intimate mother-of-pearl surface surpass our human, all too human,
dreams? The simplest things are sometimes psychologically complex.

But if we were to allow ourselves to indulge in all the daydreams of
inhabited stone there would be no end to it. Curiously enough, these
daydreams are at once long and brief. It is possible to go on with them
forever, and yet reflection can end them with a single word. At the
slightest sign, the shell becomes human, and yet we know immediately
that it is not human. With a shell, the vital inhabiting impulse comes
to a close too quickly, nature obtains too quickly the security of a
shut-in life. But a dreamer is unable to believe that the work is
finished when the walls are built, and thus it is that
shell-constructing dreams give life and action to highly geometrically
associated molecules. For these dreams, the shell, in the very tissue of
its matter, is alive. Proof of this may be found in a great natural
legend.

VI

A Jesuit priest, Father Kircher, once asserted that on the coast of
Sicily "the shells of shell-fish, after being ground to powder, come to
life again and start reproducing, if this powder is sprinkled with salt
water." The Abbé de
Vallemont[]{#calibre_link-398}[[6]{.osf}](#calibre_link-173) cites this
fable as a parallel to that of the phoenix that rises from its ashes.
Here, then, is a water phoenix. However, the Abbé de Vallemont gives
little credence to the fable of either one of these phoenixes. But for
me, whose outlook is governed by the imagination, there can be but one
conclusion: both phoenixes were products of the imagination. These are
*facts of the imagination,* the very positive facts of the imaginary
world.

Moreover, these facts of the imagination are related to allegories of
very ancient origin. Jurgis Baltrusaitis recalls (*loc. cit.,* p.
[57]{.scap1}) that "as late as the Carolingian epoch, burial grounds
often contained snail shells---an allegory of a grave in which man will
awaken." And in *Le bestiaire du Christ,* p. [922]{.scap1},
Charbonneaux-Lassay writes: "Taken as a whole, with both its hard
covering and its sentient organism, the shell, for the Ancients, was the
symbol of the human being in its entirety, body and soul. In fact,
ancient symbolics used the shell as a symbol for the human body, which
encloses the soul in an outside envelope, while the soul quickens the
entire being, represented by the organism of the mollusk. Thus, they
said, the body becomes lifeless when the soul has left it, in the same
way that the shell becomes incapable of moving when it is separated from
the part that gives it life." A wealth of documentation could be
assembled on the subject of "resurrection
shells."[]{#calibre_link-399}[[7]{.osf}](#calibre_link-174) There is no
need, however, given the simplicity of the problems treated in this
work, for us to insist on very remote traditions. All we have to do is
to ask ourselves how, in the case of certain naïve daydreams, the
simplest images can nurture a tradition. Charbonneaux-Lassay says these
things with all the simplicity and naïveté one could wish. After quoting
the Book of Job with its invincible hope of resurrection, he adds (*loc.
cit.,* p. [927]{.scap1}): "How did it happen that the quiet, earth-bound
snail should have been chosen to symbolize this ardent, invincible hope?
The explanation is that at the gloomy time of year, when Winter's death
holds earth in its grip, the snail plunges deep into the ground, shuts
itself up inside its shell, as though in a coffin, by means of a strong,
limestone epiphragm, until Spring comes and sings Easter Hallelujahs
over its grave . . . Then it tears down its wall and reappears in broad
daylight, full of life."

I shall ask readers who may be inclined to smile at such enthusiasm, to
try to imagine the amazement of the archeologist who discovered in a
grave in the Indre et Loire department "a coffin that contained nearly
three hundred snail shells placed about the skeleton from feet to
waistline." Such a contact with a belief places us at the origin of all
beliefs. A lost symbolism begins to collect dreams again.

All the proofs that we are obliged to present one after the other, of
capacity for renewal, of resurrection or reawakening of being, must be
taken as coalescence of reveries.

If we add to these allegories and symbols of resurrection the
synthesizing nature of dreams of the powers of matter, we understand the
fact that profound dreamers are unable to rule out the dream of a water
phoenix. The shell itself, in which a resurrection is being prepared in
the synthesizing dream, is subject to resurrection. For if the dust in
the shell can experience resurrection, there is no reason why the
pulverized shell should not recapture its spiraling force.

Of course, a critical mind will scoff at unconditioned images; and a
realist would soon demand control experiments. Here, as elsewhere, he
would want to verify the images by confronting them with reality. If he
were shown a mortar filled with crushed shells, he would say, now make a
snail! But a phenomenologist's projects are *more* ambitious: he wants
to live *as* the great dreamers of images lived before him. And since I
have underlined certain words, I shall ask the reader to note that the
word *as* is stronger than the word *like,* which as it happens, would
omit a phenomenological nuance. The word *like* imitates, whereas the
word *as* implies that one becomes the person who dreams the daydream.

And so, we shall never collect enough daydreams, if we want to
*understand phenomenologically* how a snail makes its house; how this
flabbiest of creatures constitutes such a hard shell; how, in this
creature that is entirely shut in, the great cosmic rhythm of winter and
spring vibrates nonetheless. And from the psychological standpoint, this
is not a vain problem. It arises automatically, in fact, as soon as we
return to the thing itself, as phenomenologists put it, as soon as we
start to dream of a house that grows in proportion to the growth of the
body that inhabits it. How can the little snail grow in its stone
prison? This is a *natural* question, which can be asked quite
naturally. (I should prefer not to ask it, however, because it takes me
back to the questions of my childhood.) But for the Abbé de Vallemont,
it is a question that remains unanswered, and he adds: "When it is a
matter of nature, we rarely find ourselves on familiar ground. At every
step, there is something that humiliates and mortifies proud minds." In
other words, a snail's shell, this house that grows with its inmate, is
one of the marvels of the universe. And the Abbé de Vallemont concludes
that, in general (*loc. cit.,* p. [255]{.scap1}), shells are "sublime
subjects of contemplation for the mind."

VII

It is always diverting to see a destroyer of fables become the victim of
a fable. At the beginning of the eighteenth century, the Abbé de
Vallemont believed no more in the fire phoenix than he did in the water
phoenix; but he did believe in palingenesis, that is, in a sort of
mixture of both. If we reduce a fern to ashes, which we dissolve in pure
water, then allow the water to evaporate, we obtain lovely crystals that
have the form of a fern frond. And many other examples could be
furnished of dreamers meditating in order to discover what I should call
saturated growth salts of formal causality.[[]{#calibre_link-400
.pt}]{.osf}[[8]{.osf}](#calibre_link-175)[]{.osf}

But closer to the problems with which we are concerned just now, one
feels in the Abbé de Vallemont's book the effect of a contamination of
the nest images and those of the shell. At one point, this author speaks
of the anatifère plant, or the anatifère shell-fish, that grows on the
wood of ships (*loc. cit.,* p. [243]{.scap1}). "It is an assemblage of
eight shells," he writes, "that looks rather like a bunch of
tulips . . . all of the same substance as mussel shells . . . The
entrance is at the top, and it is closed by means of little doors that
are joined together in a most admirable way. All that remains is to find
out how this sea-plant, and the little inmates that occupy these
artistically created apartments, are formed."

A few pages on, the contamination of the shell and the nest is presented
quite clearly. These shells are nests from which birds have flown (p.
[246]{.scap1}). "I say that the different shells of my anatifère
plant . . . are nests in which the birds of obscure origin that, in
France, we call *macreuses* (scoter-ducks), form and hatch."

Here we have a confusion of genres that is quite common to the daydreams
of pre-scientific epochs. Scoter-ducks were supposed to be cold-blooded
birds. If it was asked how these birds hatched their young, a frequent
reply was: Why should their hens set since, by nature, they can warm
neither the eggs nor the nestlings? The Abbé de Vallemont adds (p.
[250]{.scap1}) that "a group of theologians, assembled at the Sorbonne,
decided that they would withdraw scoter-ducks from the bird category and
put them into the fish category." This being the case, they can be eaten
in Lent.

Before it leaves its nest-shell the scoter-duck, which is half-bird,
half-fish, is attached to it by a pedunculated beak. Thus a learned
dream collects legendary hyphens. Here the great daydreams of nest and
shell are presented in two perspectives that could be said to be in
reciprocal anamorphosis. Nest and shell are two great images that
reflect back their daydreams. Here forms do not suffice to determine
such affinities. Indeed, the principle of the daydreams that welcome
such legends goes beyond experience. For here the dreamer has entered
into the domain in which convictions that originate beyond what we see
and touch are formed. If nests and shells were without significance,
their image would not be so easily or so imprudently synthesized. With
eyes closed, and without respect to form and color, the dreamer is
seized by convictions of a refuge in which life is concentrated,
prepared and transformed. Nests and shells cannot unite as strongly as
this otherwise than by virtue of their oneirism. Here an entire branch
of "dream houses" finds two remote roots that intermingle in the same
way that, in human daydreams, everything remote intermingles.

One hesitates to be too explicit about these daydreams, which no memory
can either clarify or explain. And if one takes them in the resurgence
manifested in the above-mentioned texts, one inclines to think that
imagination antedates memory.

VIII

After this long excursion into the more distant regions of daydream, let
us return to images that seem closer to reality. Yet I wonder if an
image of the imagination is ever close to reality. For often when we
think we are describing we merely imagine. We believe that we have
achieved a description that is at once instructive and amusing. This
false genre overlies an entire literature, as, for instance, in a
certain eighteenth-century volume that purports to be a textbook for the
instruction of a young
knight,[]{#calibre_link-401}[[9]{.osf}](#calibre_link-176) and in which
we find the following "description" of an open mussel attached to a
pebble: "With its cords and stakes it could be mistaken for a tent."
Naturally, the author doesn't fail to mention the fact that these tiny
cords can be woven into fabric, and it is true that at one time thread
actually was made from the mooring-cords of mussels. The author's
philosophical conclusion is presented in a very commonplace image:
"Snails build a little house which they carry about with them," so "they
are always at home in whatever country they travel." I should not repeat
such triviality as this if I had not found it hundreds of times in
various writings. And here it was offered for meditation to a knight of
sixteen!

There is also frequent reference to the perfection of natural dwellings.
"They are all built on the same plan," he writes (p. [256]{.scap1}),
"the object of which is to provide shelter for the animal. But what
variety in this very simple plan! Each one has its own perfections, its
own charms and conveniences."

Such images as these correspond to a childish, superficial, diffuse type
of wonderment. However, a psychology of the imagination must make note
of everything, since the most minor interests can prepare the way for
major ones.

There also comes a time when one rejects images that are too naïve, and
disdains those that have become too hackneyed. Certainly none is more
hackneyed than that of the shell-house. It is too simple to be
elaborated felicitously and too old to be rejuvenated. It says what it
has to say in a single word. But the fact remains that it is a *primal
image* as well as an indestructible one. It belongs in the
indestructible emporium that deals in cast-offs of the human
imagination.

Folklore is filled with ditties inviting the snail to show its horns.
Children love to tease it with a blade of grass to make it go back into
its shell, and the most unexpected comparisons have been made to explain
this retreat. According to one biologist, "a snail withdraws into its
kiosk the way a girl who has been teased goes and cries in her
room."[]{#calibre_link-402}[[10]{.osf}](#calibre_link-177)[]{.osf}

Images that are too clear---here we have an example---become
generalities, and for that reason block the imagination. We've seen,
we've understood, we've spoken. Everything is settled. So we must find a
particular image in order to restore life to the general image. Here is
one for reviving this paragraph, in which we seem to be victims of the
commonplace.

Robinet believed that it was by rolling over and over that the snail
built its "staircase." Thus, the snail's entire house would be a
stair-well. With each contortion, this limp animal adds a step to its
spiral staircase. It contorts itself in order to advance and grow. The
bird building its nest was content to turn round and round. Robinet's
dynamic shell image may be compared with Michelet's dynamic image of the
nest.

IX

Nature has a very simple way of amazing us---through exaggerated size.
In the case of the shell commonly known as the *Grand bénitier* (Great
Baptismal Font), we see nature dreaming an immense dream, a veritable
delirium of protection, that ends in a monstrosity of protection. This
mollusk "only weighs [14]{.scap1} pounds, but the weight of each of its
valves is between [500]{.scap1} and [600]{.scap1} pounds, and it
measures from a yard to a yard and a half in
length."[]{#calibre_link-403}[[11]{.osf}](#calibre_link-178) The author
of this book, which belongs in the famous *Bibliothèque des merveilles*
(Collection of Marvels), adds: "In China . . . certain rich mandarins
own bathtubs made of one of these shells." A bath taken in the abode of
such a mollusk must be very mollifying indeed. And what capacity for
relaxation must be felt by a [14]{.scap1}-pound animal that occupies
this much space! Being myself a mere dreamer of books, I know nothing
about biological realities. But when I read this account by Armand
Landrin, I sink into a vast dream of cosmicity. And who would not feel
cosmically cheered at the thought of taking a bath in the *Grand
bénitier*'s shell?

The *Grand bénitier*'s strength is on a par with the height and bulk of
its walls. Indeed, according to one observer, it would take two horses
hitched to each valve to force the *Grand bénitier* "to yawn, in spite
of itself."

I should love to see an engraving that represented this exploit. I can
imagine it, however, by recalling an old picture, which I have looked at
long and often, of horses hitched to the two hemispheres, between which
nothing existed but space. Here this image depicting the "Magdeburg
experiment," which is legendary in elementary scientific culture, would
have a biological illustration. Four horses to overcome fourteen pounds
of limp flesh!

But however exaggerated in size nature's creations may be, man can
easily imagine things that are bigger still. In an engraving by Cork,
based on a composition by Hieronymous Bosch, known as: *Shell Navigating
on the Water,* we see an enormous mussel shell in which some ten persons
are seated, with four children and a dog. There is an excellent
reproduction of this mussel shell inhabited by men in the fine book on
Hieronymous Bosch, by André Lafon (p. [106]{.scap1}).

This hypertrophy of the dream of inhabiting all the hollow objects in
the world is accompanied by ludicrous scenes peculiar to Bosch's
imagination. In the mussel shell, the travelers are feasting and
carousing, with the result that the dream of tranquility we should like
to pursue when we "withdraw into our shells" is lost because of the
insistence upon frenzied joy that marks the genius of this painter.

But after hypertrophic daydreaming we always have to return to the type
of daydreaming that is designated by its original simplicity. We know
perfectly well that to inhabit a shell we must be alone. By living this
image, one knows that one has accepted solitude.

To live alone; there's a great dream! The most lifeless, the most
physically absurd image, such as that of living in a shell, can serve as
origin of such a dream. For it is a dream that, in life's moments of
great sadness, is shared by everybody, both weak and strong, in revolt
against the injustices of men and of fate. As, for instance,
Salavin,[]{#calibre_link-404}[[12]{.osf}](#calibre_link-179) a weak, sad
creature, who takes comfort in his narrow room precisely because it is
narrow and permits him to say: "What would I do if I hadn't this little
room, this room that is as deep and secret as a shell? Ah! snails don't
realize their good fortune."

At times, the image is very unobtrusive, hardly perceptible, but it is
effective nonetheless. It expresses the isolation of the human being
withdrawn into himself. A poet, at the same time that he dreams of some
childhood house, magnified in his memory to become

*La vieille maison où vont et viennent*

*L'étoile et la rose*

(The old house where star and rose

Come and go)

writes:

*Mon ombre forme un coquillage sonore*

*Et le poète écoute son passé*

*Dans la coquille de l'ombre de son
corps[]{#calibre_link-405}*[[13]{.osf}](#calibre_link-180)[]{.osf}

(My shadow forms a resonant shell

And the poet listens to his past

In the shell of his body's shadow.)

At other times, the image acquires its force through the effect of an
isomorphism of all restful space. Then every hospitable hollow is a
quiet shell. The poet, Gaston Puel,
writes:[]{#calibre_link-406}[[14]{.osf}](#calibre_link-181)[]{.osf}

*Ce matin je dirai le simple bonheur d'un homme*

*allongé au creux d'une barque.*

*L'oblongue coquille d'un canot s'est fermée sur lui.*

*Il dort. C'est une amande. La barque*

*comme un lit épouse le sommeil.*

(This morning I shall tell the simple happiness

of a man stretched out in the hollow of a boat.

The oblong shell of a skiff has closed over him.

He is sleeping. An almond. The boat, like a bed,

espouses sleep.)

A man, an animal, an almond, all find maximum repose in a shell. The
virtues of repose dominate all of these images.

X

Since it is my endeavor to multiply all the dialectical shadings by
which the imagination confers life upon the simplest images, I should
like to note a few references to the offensive capacity of shells. In
the same way that there are ambush-houses, there exist trap-shells which
the imagination makes into fish-nets, perfected with bait and snap.
Pliny gives the following account of how the pea-crab's mussel finds its
sustenance: "The blind shell-fish opens up, thus exposing its body to
all the small fish playing about. When they sense that they can enter
with impunity, they become emboldened and fill the shell. At this
moment, the crab, which is on the alert, warns the mussel by means of a
little bite, upon which the latter closes the shell, crushing everything
that is caught between the valves, then divides the prey with its
partner."[]{#calibre_link-407}[[15]{.osf}](#calibre_link-182)[]{.osf}

In the way of animal stories it would be hard to do better. To avoid
multiplying examples, therefore, I shall repeat this same fable, since
it is borne out by another great name. In Leonardo da Vinci's
*Notebooks,* we read: "An oyster opens wide at full moon. When the crabs
sees this, it throws a pebble or a twig at the oyster to keep it from
closing and thus have it to feed upon." Da Vinci adds the following
suitable moral to this fable: "Like the mouth that, in telling its
secret, places itself at the mercy of an indiscreet listener."

Extensive psychological research would be needed to determine the value
of the moral examples that have always been drawn from animal life. I
only point this out in passing, however, since our encounter with the
problem is quite accidental. But there are names that tell their own
story, such as the name of the *bernard-l'ermite*, or hermit crab. This
mollusk does not build its own shell but, as everyone knows, goes to
live in an empty shell. It changes when it feels too cramped for space.

The image of the hermit crab that goes to live in abandoned shells is
sometimes associated with the habits of the cuckoo, which lays its eggs
in other nests. In both cases, Nature seems to enjoy contradicting
natural morality. The imagination, whetted by exceptions of all kinds,
takes pleasure in adding resources of cunning and ingenuity to the
characteristics of this bird squatter. The cuckoo, we are told, after
making sure that the setting mother-bird has gone, breaks an egg in the
nest in which it plans to lay. If it lays two eggs it breaks two. In
spite of its identifying call, the cuckoo is also past master in the art
of concealment; it loves to play hide and seek. And yet no one has ever
seen it. As often happens in real life, the name is better known than
the bearer. Who, for instance, can distinguish between the russet and
the blond cuckoo? According to Abbé Vincelot (*loc. cit.* p.
[101]{.scap1}) certain observers have maintained that the russet cuckoo
is simply the gray cuckoo when it is young, and that if some "migrate
northward and others southward, with the result that the two species are
not to be found in the same locality, it is because among migrant birds,
old and young rarely visit the same country."

Is it any wonder, then, that this bird, with its instinct for secrecy,
should have been credited with such powers of metamorphosis that, for
centuries, according to Abbé Vincelot (p. [102]{.scap1}), "the ancients
believed that the cuckoo became transformed into a hawk." Musing upon a
legend of this kind, and recalling that the cuckoo is an egg thief, I
suggest that the story of its turning into a hawk might be summarized in
a scarcely altered version of the French proverb: *Qui vole un oeuf,
enlève un boeuf*[[]{#calibre_link-408
.pt}]{.osf}[[16]{.osf}](#calibre_link-183) (He who steals an egg will
carry off an ox).

XI

There are minds for which certain images retain absolute priority.
Bernard Palissy's[]{#calibre_link-409}[[17]{.osf}](#calibre_link-184)
was one of these and, for him, shell images were of enduring interest.
If one had to designate Palissy by the dominating element of his
material imagination, he would fall quite naturally into an "earthly"
group. But since the material imagination is a matter of nuances,
Palissy's imagination would have to be specified as that of an earthly
being in quest of a hard earth that must be further hardened by fire,
but which also has the possibility of attaining natural hardness through
the action of a solidifying, self-containing salt. Shells manifest this
same possibility and, in this respect, the limp, sticky, "slimy"
creatures that inhabit them play a rôle in their hard consistency.
Indeed, the principle of solidification is so powerful, the conquest of
hardness is carried so far, that the shell achieves its enamel-like
beauty as though it had been helped by fire. Beauty of substance is
added to beauty of geometrical form. For a potter or an enamelist, a
shell must indeed be a subject for infinite meditation. But there are
many animals beneath the enameled glaze of this gifted potter's plates
that have made the hardest possible shells of their skins. If we relive
Bernard Palissy's passion, in the cosmic drama of different sorts of
matter, or in the struggle between clay and fire, we can understand why
the humblest snail that secreted its own shell should have provided him
with food for infinite dreaming.

Among all these daydreams, I shall note here only those that furnish the
most curious images of the house. The following, entitled: "About a
fortress city" (*De la ville de forteresse*), is included in Palissy's
*Recepte véritable.*[[]{#calibre_link-410
.pt}]{.osf}[[18]{.osf}](#calibre_link-185) In summarizing it I shall try
to retain the amplitude of the original.

Faced with "the horrible dangers of war," Bernard Palissy contemplated a
design for a "fortress city." He had lost all hope of finding an
existing plan "in the cities built today." Vitruvius himself could be of
no help in the century of the cannon. So he journeyed through "forests,
mountains and valleys to see if he could find some industrious animal
that had built some industrious houses." After inquiring everywhere,
Palissy began to muse about "a young slug that was building its house
and fortress with its own saliva." Indeed, he passed several months
dreaming of a construction *from within,* and most of his leisure time
was spent walking beside the sea, where he saw "such a variety of houses
and fortresses which certain little fishes had made from their own
liquor and saliva that, from now on, I began to think that here was
something that might be applied to my own project." "The battles and
acts of brigandry" that take place in the sea being on a larger scale
than those that take place on land, God "had conferred upon each one the
diligence and skill needed to build a house that had been surveyed and
constructed by means of such geometry and architecture, that Solomon in
all his wisdom could never have made anything like it."

With regard to spiralled shells, he wrote that this shape was not at all
"for mere beauty, there's much more to it than that. You must understand
that there are several fish with such sharply pointed beaks that they
would devour most of the above-mentioned fish if the latter's abodes
were in a straight line: but when they are attacked by their enemies on
the threshold, just as they are about to withdraw inside, they twist and
turn in a spiral line and, in this way, the foe can do them no harm."

Meanwhile, someone brought Palissy two large shells from Guinea: "A
murex and a whelk." The murex being the weaker must be the best
defended, according to Palissy's philosophy. As a matter of fact, the
shell having "a number of rather large points around the edges, I
decided that these horns had been put there for a purpose, which was for
defense of the fortress."

It has seemed necessary to give all these preliminary details, because
they show that Palissy was looking for *natural inspiration.* He sought
nothing better for constructing his fortress city than to "take the
fortress of the above mentioned murex as an example." With this idea in
mind, he started work on his plan. In the very center of the fortress
city, there was to be an open square on which the governor's house would
be located. Starting from this square, a single street would run four
times around the square; first, in two circuits that espoused the shape
of the square; then, in two octagon-shaped circuits. All doors and
windows in this quadruple winding street were to give onto the inside of
the fortress, so that the backs of the houses would constitute one
continuous wall. The last of the house-walls was to back up against the
city wall which, thus, would form a gigantic snail.

Bernard Palissy enlarged at length on the advantages of this *natural*
fortress. Even if part of it fell to the enemy there would always remain
a possibility of retreat. In fact, it was this spiral movement of
retreat that determined the general line of the image. Nor would enemy
cannon be able to follow the retreat and "rake" the streets of the
coiled city. Enemy artillerymen would be as disappointed as the
"pointed-beaked" marauders had been when they tried to attack a coiled
shell.

In this summary, which may seem too long to the reader, it has
nevertheless been impossible to enter into the detail of mixed images
and proof. A psychologist who followed Palissy's text line by line would
find images used as proof, images that are witnesses of a reasoning
imagination. This simple account is psychologically complex. But for us,
in this century, the "reasoning" of such images is no longer convincing.
We no longer have to believe in natural fortresses. And when military
men build "hedgehog" defenses, they know that they are not in the domain
of the image, but in that of simple metaphor. It would be a great
mistake, however, if we were to confuse the genres and take Palissy's
snail-fortress for a simple metaphor. This is an image that has
inhabited a great mind.

As for myself, in a leisurely book of this kind, in which I enjoy all
the images, I was obliged to linger over this monstrous snail.

And in order to show that, through the simple play of the imagination,
any image may be increased in size, I should like to quote the following
poem, in which a snail assumes the dimensions of a
village:[]{#calibre_link-411}[[19]{.osf}](#calibre_link-186)[]{.osf}

*C'est un escargot énorme*

*Qui descend de la montagne*

*Et le ruisseau l'accompagne*

*De sa bave blanche*

*Très vieux, il n'a plus qu'une corne*

*C'est son court clocher carré.*

(It's a giant snail

Descending the mountain

With at its side

The brook's white foam

Very old, only one horn left

Which is its short, square belfry.)

And the poet adds:

*Le château est sa coquille* . . .

(The manor is its shell . . .)

But there are other passages in Bernard Palissy's works which accentuate
this predestined image that we are obliged to recognize in his
shell-house experience. As it happens, this potential constructor of a
shell-fortress was also an architect and landscape gardener, and to
complement his plans for gardens, he added plans for what he called
"chambers." These "chambers" were places of retreat that were as rough
and rocky on the outside as an oyster shell: "The exterior of the
aforementioned chamber," wrote
Palissy,[]{#calibre_link-412}[[20]{.osf}](#calibre_link-187) "will be of
masonry made with large uncut stones, in order that the outside should
not seem to have been man-built." Inside, on the contrary, he would like
it to be as highly polished as the inside of a shell: "When the masonry
is finished, I want to cover it with several layers of enameling, from
the top of the vaulted ceiling down to the floor. This done, I should
like to build a big fire in it . . . until the aforesaid enameling has
melted and coated the aforesaid masonry . . ." In this way, the "inside
of the chamber would seem to be made of one piece . . . and would be so
highly polished that the lizards and earthworms that come in there would
see themselves as in a mirror."

This indoor fire lighted for the purpose of enameling bricks is a far
cry from the "blaze" we light in our time to "dry the plaster." Here,
perhaps, Palissy recaptured visions of his potter's kiln, in which the
fire left brick tears on the walls. In any case, an extraordinary image
demands extraordinary means. Here a man wants to live in a shell. He
wants the walls that protect him to be as smoothly polished and as firm
as if his sensitive flesh had to come in direct contact with them. The
shell confers a daydream of purely physical intimacy. Bernard Palissy's
daydream expresses the function of inhabiting in terms of touch.

Because dominant images tend to combine, his fourth chamber is a
synthesis of house, shell and cave: "The inside masonry will be so
skilfully executed," he wrote (*loc. cit.,* p. [82]{.scap1}), "that it
will appear to be simply a rock that has been hollowed out in order to
cut stone from the interior; and the aforesaid chamber will be twisted
and humped with several skewed humps and concavities having neither
appearance nor form of either the chiseler's art or of work done by
human hands; and the ceiling vaults will be so tortuous that they will
look as though they are about to fall, for the reason that there will be
several pendant humps." Needless to say, the inside of this spiraled
house will also be covered with enamel. It will be a cave in the form of
a coiled shell. Thus, by means of a great sum of human labor, this
cunning architect succeeded in making a *natural* dwelling of it. To
accentuate the natural character of the chamber he had it covered with
earth "so that, having planted several trees in the aforesaid earth, it
would not seem to have been built." In other words, the real home of
this man of the earth was subterranean. He wanted to live in the heart
of a rock, or, shall we say, in the *shell of a rock.* The pendant humps
fill this dwelling with a nightmare dread of being crushed, while the
spiral that penetrates deep into the rock gives an impression of
anguished depth. But a being who *desires* to live underground is able
to dominate commonplace fears. In his daydreams, Bernard Palissy was a
hero of subterranean life. In his imagination he derived pleasure---so
he said---from the fear manifested by a dog barking at the entrance of a
cave; and the same thing was true of the hesitation, on the part of a
visitor, to enter further into the tortuous labyrinth. Here the
shell-cave is also a "fortress city" for a man alone, a man who loves
complete solitude, and who knows how to defend and protect himself with
simple images. There's no need of a gate, no need of an iron-trimmed
door; people are afraid to come in.

In any case, an important phenomenological investigation remains to be
made on the subject of *dark entrance halls.*

XII

With nests, with shells---at the risk of wearying the reader---I have
multiplied the images that seem to me to illustrate the function of
inhabiting in elementary forms which may be too remotely imagined. Here
one senses clearly that this is a mixed problem of imagination and
observation. I have simply wanted to show that whenever life seeks to
shelter, protect, cover or hide itself, the imagination sympathizes with
the being that inhabits the protected space. The imagination experiences
protection in all its nuances of security, from life in the most
material of shells, to more subtle concealment through imitation of
surfaces. As the poet Noël Arnaud expresses it, being seeks
dissimulation in similarity.[[]{#calibre_link-413
.pt}]{.osf}[[21]{.osf}](#calibre_link-188) To be in safety under cover
of a color is carrying the tranquility of inhabiting to the point of
culmination, not to say, imprudence. Shade, too, can be inhabited.

XIII

After this study of shells, we could, of course, tell a number of
stories about the turtle which, as the animal with the house that walks,
would lend itself to much facile commentary. However, this commentary
would only illustrate with new examples themes that have already been
treated. I shall therefore forgo writing a chapter on the turtle's
house.

But since slight contradictions to primal images can occasionally
stimulate the imagination, I should like to comment upon a passage from
the Flemish travel notes of the Italian poet, Giuseppe
Ungaretti.[[]{#calibre_link-414
.pt}]{.osf}[[22]{.osf}](#calibre_link-189) At the home of the poet Franz
Hellens---only poets possess such treasures---Ungaretti saw a woodcut
"depicting the fury of a wolf which, having attacked a turtle that had
withdrawn into its bony carapace, went mad, without having appeased its
hunger."

These three lines keep coming back to my mind, and I tell myself endless
stories around them. I see the wolf arriving from a distant,
famine-stricken land. It is lean and hungry looking, its tongue hanging
out, red and feverish. At that moment, what should come out from under a
bush but a turtle, considered by epicures the world over to be a
particularly delicate morsel. With one leap, the wolf seizes its prey,
but the turtle, which is endowed by nature with unusual alacrity when it
wants to withdraw head, limbs and tail into its house, is quicker than
the wolf. For the famished wolf, it is now nothing but a stone on the
road.

One hardly knows which side to take in this dramatic incident of hunger.
I have tried to be impartial. I don't like wolves. But, for once, the
turtle might have refrained from action. And Ungaretti, who had thought
lengthily about the engraving, said explicitly that the artist had
succeeded in making "the wolf likeable and the turtle odious."

A phenomenologist would have many comments to make on this commentary!
Of course, the psychological interpretation exceeds the facts, since no
drawn line can interpret an "odious" turtle. The animal in its box is
sure of its secrets, it has become a monster of impenetrable
physiognomy. The phenomenologist, therefore, will have to tell himself
the fable of the wolf and the turtle. He will have to elevate the drama
to the cosmic level and, from there, meditate upon world-hunger. To put
it more simply, the phenomenologist would need to have, for one moment,
the entrails of the wolf, faced with a prey that has turned itself into
stone.

If I had reproductions of an engraving of this kind, I should use them
to differentiate and measure people's views and the depth of their
participation in hunger dramas throughout the world. Almost surely, this
participation would manifest a certain ambiguity. Some would give in to
the drowsiness of the story-telling function and leave the play of the
old childish images undisturbed. They would take pleasure in the wicked
animal's resentment and laugh up their sleeves at the turtle that
withdrew into its shell. Others, however, having been alerted by
Ungaretti's interpretation, might reverse the situation. Such a reversal
of a fable that has long lain dormant in its traditions, could have a
rejuvenating effect on the function of story-telling. For here the
imagination makes a fresh start, which could be of advantage to
phenomenologists. Reversals of this kind may seem to have only slight
documentary interest for the all-of-a-piece school of phenomenologists
who take the World as their next-door neighbor. They are immediately
conscious of being of and in the world. But the problem becomes more
complicated for a phenomenologist of the imagination constantly
confronted with the strangeness of the world. And what is more, the
imagination, by virtue of its freshness and its own peculiar activity,
can make what is familiar into what is strange. With a single poetic
detail, the imagination confronts us with a new world. From then on, the
detail takes precedence over the panorama, and a simple image, if it is
new, will open up an entire world. If looked at through the thousand
windows of fancy, the world is in a state of constant change. It
therefore gives fresh stimulus to the problem of phenomenology. By
solving small problems, we teach ourselves to solve large ones. I have
limited myself to proposing exercises conceived for an elementary
phenomenology. I am moreover convinced that the human psyche contains
nothing that is insignificant.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-14 .calibre}
::: basic-text-frame
# [6]{.osf1} {#calibre_link-526 .chaptnum}

# CORNERS {#calibre_link-527 .chapttitle}

*"Fermez l'espace! Fermez la poche du Kangourou! Il y fait chaud."*

[MAURICE
BLANCHARD[]{#calibre_link-415}]{.scap1}[[1]{.osf}](#calibre_link-190)[]{.osf}

(Close space! Close the kangaroo's pouch! It's warm in there.)

I

With nests and shells, I was quite obviously in the presence of
transpositions of the function of inhabiting. My aim was to study
chimerical or crude types of intimacy, whether light and airy, like the
nest in the tree, or symbolic of a life rigidly encrusted in stone, like
the mollusk. Now should I like to turn my attention to impressions of
intimacy which, however short-lived or imaginary, have nevertheless a
more human root, and do not need transposition. They lend themselves to
a direct psychology, even if positive minds take them for so much idle
musing.

The point of departure of my reflections is the following: every corner
in a house, every angle in a room, every inch of secluded space in which
we like to hide, or withdraw into ourselves, is a symbol of solitude for
the imagination; that is to say, it is the germ of a room, or of a
house.

The documents available in literary works are few, for the reason that
this purely physical contraction into oneself already bears the mark of
a certain negativism. Also, in many respects, a corner that is "lived
in" tends to reject and restrain, even to hide, life. The corner becomes
a negation of the Universe. In one's corner one does not talk to
oneself. When we recall the hours we have spent in our corners, we
remember above all silence, the silence of our thoughts. This being the
case, why describe the geometry of such indigent solitude? Psychologists
and, above all, metaphysicians will find these circuits of topo-analysis
quite useless. They know how to observe "uncommunicative" natures
directly. They do not need to have a sullen person in a corner described
to them as "cornered." But it is not easy to efface the factors of
place. And every retreat on the part of the soul possesses, in my
opinion, figures of havens. That most sordid of all havens, the corner,
deserves to be examined. To withdraw into one's corner is undoubtedly a
meager expression. But despite its meagerness, it has numerous images,
some, perhaps, of great antiquity, images that are psychologically
primitive. At times, the simpler the image, the vaster the dream.

To begin with, the corner is a haven that ensures us one of the things
we prize most highly---immobility. It is the sure place, the place next
to my immobility. The corner is a sort of half-box, part walls, part
door. It will serve as an illustration for the dialectics of inside and
outside, which I shall discuss in a later chapter.

Consciousness of being at peace in one's corner produces a sense of
immobility, and this, in turn, radiates immobility. An imaginary room
rises up around our bodies, which think that they are well hidden when
we take refuge in a corner. Already, the shadows are walls, a piece of
furniture constitutes a barrier, hangings are a roof. But all of these
images are over-imagined. So we have to designate the space of our
immobility by making it the space of our being. In *L'état
d'ébauche,[]{#calibre_link-416}*[[2]{.osf}](#calibre_link-191) Noël
Arnaud writes:

*Je suis l'espace où je suis*

(I am the space where I am.)

This is a great line. But nowhere can it be better appreciated than in a
corner.

In *Mein Leben ohne mich* (My Life Without Me), Rilke writes: "Suddenly,
a room with its lamp appeared to me, was almost palpable in me. I was
already a corner in it, but the shutters sensed me and closed." It would
be hard to find a more felicitous way of saying that the corner is the
chamber of being.

II

Let us take now an ambiguous text in which being becomes manifest at the
very moment when it comes forth from its corner.

Jean-Paul Sartre, writing on Baudelaire, quotes a sentence from Richard
Hughes' *A High Wind in
Jamaica[]{#calibre_link-417}*[[3]{.osf}](#calibre_link-192) that
deserves lengthy commentary: "Emily had been playing houses in a nook
right in the bows . . ." It is not this line, however, that Sartre
discusses, but the following: ". . . and tiring of it (she) was walking
rather aimlessly aft . . . when it suddenly flashed into her mind that
she was *she* . . ." Before examining these thoughts from various
angles, I shall point out that in all probability, in the novel, they
correspond to what we are obliged to call *invented childhood,* with
which novels abound. For novelists often return to an invented childhood
which has not been experienced to recount events whose naïveté is also
invented. This unreal past projected through literary means into a time
that precedes the story often conceals the actuality of a daydream which
would assume all its phenomenological value if it were presented in
really actual naïveté. But the verbs *to be* and *to write* are hard to
reconcile.

And yet, as it is, the text quoted by Sartre is a valuable one, because
it designates topoanalytically, that is, in terms of space and
experience of outside and inside, the two directions that psychoanalysts
refer to as introvert and extrovert: before life, before the passions,
in the very pattern of existence, the novelist encounters this duality.
The lightning-like thought that the little girl in the story has found
in herself comes to her as she leaves her "house." Here we have a
*cogito* of emergence without our having been given the *cogito* of a
being withdrawn into itself; the more or less sombre *cogito* of a being
who first plays at making itself a "Dutch stove," like Descartes, a sort
of chimerical home, in a corner of a boat. The child has just discovered
that she is *herself,* in an explosion toward the outside, which is a
reaction, perhaps, to certain concentrations in a corner of her being.
For the recess in the boat is also a corner of being. But when she has
explored the vast universe of the boat in the middle of the ocean, does
she return to her little house? Now that she knows that she is
*herself,* will she resume her game of "playing houses," will she return
home, in other words, withdraw again into herself? One can undoubtedly
become aware of existing by escaping from space. Here, however, the
figure of being is related to a special concept. Therefore, the novelist
should have given us the details of the inversion of a dream that lead
from home to the universe, in quest of being. And since this is invented
childhood, fictionalized metaphysics, the author holds the key to both
domains, he senses their correlation. No doubt he could have illustrated
otherwise this sudden awareness of "being." But since the house preceded
the universe, we should be told her daydreams in it. As it is, the
author has sacrificed---or perhaps suppressed---these "corner" daydreams
and placed them in the category of "children's games," by which he more
or less admits that the real things of life are the exterior ones.

But life in corners, and the universe itself withdrawn into a corner
with the daydreamer, is a subject about which poets will have more to
tell us. They will not hesitate to give this daydream all its reality.

III

In the novel *L'amoureuse initiation,* by the Lithuanian poet, O. V. de
Milosz, there is a passage in which the leading character, a cynically
sincere figure, who has forgotten nothing, is reminiscing (p.
[201]{.scap1}). But these are not childhood memories. On the contrary,
the entire work is set in the experienced present. And we are shown him
in his palace, where he leads a fervent existence, setting aside certain
corners to which he often repairs. As, for instance, "That little dark
corner between the fireplace and the oak chest, where you used to hide,"
when she went away. It should be noted that he did not wait for her in
the vast palace, but in a corner reserved for gloomy waiting, where he
could digest his anger at her faithlessness. "With your bottom resting
on the hard, cold, marble floor, your blank gaze turned toward the
make-believe sky of the ceiling, and in your hands, a book with uncut
pages, you spent many a delightfully sad hour there waiting, like the
poor blockhead that you were." What a refuge for ambivalence! Here is a
dreamer who is happy to be sad, content to be alone, waiting. In his
corner he can meditate upon life and death, as befits the heights of
passion: "To live and die in this sentimental corner, you told yourself;
Yes, indeed, to live and die there; why not, then, Monsieur de
Pinamonte, you who so love dark, dusty little corners?"

And all who live in corners will come to confer life upon this image,
multiplying the shades of being that characterize the corner dweller.
For to great dreamers of corners and holes nothing is ever empty, the
dialectics of full and empty only correspond to two geometrical
non-realities. The function of inhabiting constitutes the link between
full and empty. A living creature fills an empty refuge, images inhabit,
and all corners are haunted, if not inhabited. Milosz's corner dreamer,
M. de Pinamonte, in his, on the whole, spacious "den," between the chest
and the fireplace, resumes his reminiscing: "Here the meditative spider
lives powerful and happy; the past shrivels up and all but disappears,
like a frightened old lady-bug . . . Ironic, cunning lady-bug, here the
past can be recaptured and yet remain hidden from the learned spectacles
of collectors of pretty-pretties." Under the poet's magic wand, one
cannot help becoming a lady-bug, or gathering memories and dreams under
the elytra of this round, this roundest of animals. But how well our
little earth-ball of red life hid its ability to fly! It escapes from
its sphere as from a hole. Perhaps up in the blue sky it, too,
experiences sudden awareness that it is itself, like the little girl in
Richard Hughes' novel. And we find it hard to stop dreaming before the
spectacle of this little shell that suddenly starts to fly.

Exchanges of animal and human life become frequent in Milosz's novel.
His cynical dreamer goes on (p. [242]{.scap1}): here, in this corner,
between the chest and the fireplace, "you find countless remedies for
boredom, and an infinite number of things that deserve to occupy your
mind for all time: the musty odor of the minutes of three centuries ago;
the secret meaning of the hieroglyphics in fly-dung; the triumphal arch
of that mouse-hole; the frayed tapestry against which your round, bony
back is lolling; the gnawing noise of your heels on the marble; the
powdery sound of your sneeze . . . and finally, the soul of all this old
dust from corners forgotten by brooms."

But, except for such "corner readers" as ourselves, who will continue to
read about all this dustiness? Someone like Michel Leiris, perhaps, who
tells of having picked the dust from the cracks in the floor with a
pin.[[]{#calibre_link-418 .pt}]{.osf}[[4]{.osf}](#calibre_link-193) But,
I repeat, not everybody will admit to these things.

Yet in such daydreams as these the past is very old indeed. For they
reach into the great domain of the undated past. By allowing the
imagination to wander through the crypts of memory, without realizing
it, we recapture the bemused life of the tiniest burrows in the house,
in the almost animal shelter of dreams.

But against this distant background, childhood returns. In his
*meditation corner* Milosz's dream questions his conscience. The past
rises to the level of the present. And the dreamer finds himself in
tears: "Because, already as a child, you liked the eaves of chateaux and
corners of dusty old libraries, and you read avidly, without
understanding a word, falsely learned volumes on the privileges of the
Dutch . . . Ah! you rascal, what delightful hours you used to pass in
your rascality in those nostalgia-dredged nooks and corners of the
palazzo Merona! The time you squandered there trying to get at the heart
of things that had had their day! With what joy you changed yourself
into an old shoe, picked out of the gutter, saved from being swept out
with the rubbish."

Just here, we can come to an abrupt halt, break up the daydream, and lay
aside our reading. For who is prepared to go beyond the spider, the
lady-bug and the mouse, to a point of identification with things
forgotten in a corner? But what kind of daydream is this that can be
broken up? And why break it up for reasons of conscience or good taste,
or through disdain for old things? Milosz does not break it up. And
when, guided by his book, we ourselves dream beyond it, we share his
dream of a corner that is the grave of a "wooden doll forgotten last
century, in this corner of the room, by some little girl . . ." No
doubt, one would have to sink into profound daydreaming to be moved by
the vast museum of insignificant things. It is impossible to dream of an
old house that is not the refuge of old things---its own---or that has
been filled with old things as a result of the simple craze of a
collector of knick-knacks. To restore their soul to corners, it is
better to have an old slipper or a doll's head, like those that attract
the meditations of Milosz's dreamer. "The mystery of things," the poet
continues (p. [243]{.scap1}), "little sensations of time, great void of
eternity! All infinity can be contained in this stone corner, between
the fireplace and the oak chest . . . Where are they now, I ask you! all
those marvelous, spidery delights of yours, those profound meditations
on poor, dead little things."

Then, from the depths of his corner, the dreamer remembers all the
objects identified with solitude, objects that are memories of solitude
and which are betrayed by the mere fact of having been forgotten,
abandoned in a corner. "Remember the old, old lamp that greeted you from
far away, through the window of your thoughts, its panes burned by suns
of other years . . ." From the depths of his corner, the dreamer sees an
older house, a house in another land, thus making a synthesis of the
childhood home and the dream home. The old objects question him: "What
will the friendly old lamp think of you, during the lonely winter
nights? What will the other objects think of you, the ones that were so
kind, so fraternally kind to you? Was not their obscure fate closely
united with your own? . . . Motionless, mute things never forget:
melancholy and despised as they are, we confide in them that which is
humblest and least suspected in the depths of ourselves" (p.
[244]{.scap1}). What a call to humility this dreamer heard in his
corner! For the corner denies the palace, dust denies marble, and worn
objects deny splendor and luxury. The dreamer in his corner wrote off
the world in a detailed daydream that destroyed, one by one, all the
objects in the world. Having crossed the countless little thresholds of
the disorder of things that are reduced to dust, these souvenir-objects
set the past in order, associating condensed motionlessness with far
distant voyages into a world that is no more. With Milosz, the dream
penetrates so deeply into the past that it seems to attain to a region
beyond memory: "All these things are far, far away, they no longer
exist, they never did exist, the Past has lost all recollection of
them . . . Look, seek and wonder, tremble . . . Already you yourself no
longer have a past" (p. [245]{.scap1}). Meditating upon certain passages
of this work, one feels oneself carried away into a sort of antecedence
of being, as though into a beyond of dreams.

IV

In quoting this fragment by Milosz, I have sought to present an
unusually complete experience of a gloomy daydream, the daydream of a
human being who sits motionless in his corner, where he finds a world
grown old and worn. Incidentally, I should like to point out the power
that an adjective acquires, as soon as it is applied to life. A gloomy
life, or a gloomy person, marks an entire universe with more than just a
pervading coloration. Even things become crystallizations of sadness,
regret or nostalgia. And when a philosopher looks to poets, to a great
poet like Milosz, for lessons in how to individualize the world, he soon
becomes convinced that the world is not so much a noun as an adjective.

If we were to give the imagination its due in the philosophical systems
of the universe, we should find, at their very source, an adjective.
Indeed, to those who want to find the essence of a world philosophy, one
could give the following advice---look for its adjective.

V

But let us resume contact with shorter daydreams, the kind that are
attracted by detail or by features of reality which, at first, seem
insignificant. People never tire of recalling that Leonardo da Vinci
advised painters who lacked inspiration when faced with nature, to
contemplate with a reflective eye the crack in an old wall! For there is
a map of the universe in the lines that time draws on these old walls.
And each of us has seen a few lines on the ceiling that appeared to
chart a new continent. A poet knows all this. But in order to describe
in his own way a universe of this kind, created by chance on the
confines of sketch and dream, he goes to live in it. He finds a corner
where he can abide in this cracked-ceiling world.

Thus we see a poet take the hollow road of a piece of molding in order
to reach his hut in the corner of a cornice. In his *Poèmes à l'autre
moi* (Poems to My Other Self) Pierre Albert-Birot "espouses," as they
say, "the curve that warms." Soon its mild warmth calls upon us to curl
up under the covers.

To begin with, Albert-Birot slips into the molding:

. . . *Je suis tout droit les moulures*

*qui suivent tout droit le plafond*

(I follow the line of the moldings

which follow that of the ceiling.)

But if we "listen" to the design of things, we encounter an angle, a
trap detains the dreamer:

*Mais il y a des angles d'où l'on ne peut plus sortir.*

(But there are angles from which one cannot escape.)

Yet even in this prison, there is peace. In these angles and corners,
the dreamer would appear to enjoy the repose that divides being and
non-being. He is the being of an unreality. Only an event can cast him
out. And just here the poet adds: "But a klaxon made me come out of the
angle where I was beginning to die of an angel's dream."

It is easy for a rhetorician to criticize a text like this. Indeed, the
critical mind has every reason to reject such images, such idle musings.

First of all, because they are not "reasonable," because we do not live
in "corners of the ceiling" while lolling in a comfortable bed, because
a spider's web is not, as the poet says, drapery---and, to be more
personal, because an exaggerated image is bound to seem ridiculous to a
philosopher who seeks to concentrate being in its center, and finds in a
center of being a sort of unity of time, place and action.

Yes, but even when the criticisms of reason, the scorn of philosophy and
poetic traditions unite to turn us from the poet's labyrinthine dreams,
it remains nonetheless true that the poet has made a trap for dreamers
out of his poem.

As for me, I let myself be caught. I followed the molding.

 • • • 

In an earlier chapter devoted to houses, I said that a house in an
engraving may well incite a desire to live in it. We feel that we should
like to live there, between the very lines of the engraved drawing. At
times, too, the phantasm that impels us to live in corners comes into
being by the grace of a mere drawing. But, then, the grace of a curved
line is not a simple Bergsonian movement with well placed inflexions.
Nor is it merely a time that unreels. It is also habitable space
harmoniously constituted. We are again indebted to Pierre Albert-Birot
for an engraved "corner," a lovely engraving, in terms of
literature:[]{#calibre_link-419}[[5]{.osf}](#calibre_link-194)[]{.osf}

*Et voici que je suis devenu un dessin d'ornement*

*Volutes sentimentales*

*Enroulement des spirales*

*Surface organisée en noir et blanc*

*Et pourtant je viens de m'entendre respirer*

*Est-ce bien un dessin*

*Est-ce bien moi.*

(So now I have become a decorative drawing

Sentimental scrolls

Coiling spirals

An organized surface in black and white

And yet I just heard myself breathe

Is it really a drawing

Is it really I.)

Here it is as though the spiral greeted us with clasped hands. However,
the drawing is more effective for what it encloses than for what it
exfoliates. The poet feels this when he goes to live in the loop of a
scroll to seek warmth and the quiet life in the arms of a curve.

The intellectualist philosopher who wants to hold words to their precise
meaning, and uses them as the countless little tools of clear thinking,
is bound to be surprised by the poet's daring. And yet a syncretism of
sensitivity keeps words from crystallizing into perfect solids.
Unexpected adjectives collect about the focal meaning of the noun. A new
environment allows the word to enter not only into one's thoughts, but
also into one's daydreams. Language dreams.

The critical mind can do nothing about this. For it is a poetic fact
that a dreamer can write of a curve that it is *warm*. But does anyone
think that Bergson did not exceed *meaning* when he attributed grace to
curves and, no doubt, *inflexibility* to straight lines? Why is it worse
for us to say that an angle is cold and a curve warm? That the curve
welcomes us and the oversharp angle rejects us? That the angle is
masculine and the curve feminine? A modicum of quality changes
everything. The grace of a curve is an invitation to remain. We cannot
break away from it without hoping to return. For the beloved curve has
nest-like powers; it incites us to possession, it is a curved "corner,"
inhabited geometry. Here we have attained a minimum of refuge, in the
highly simplified pattern of a daydream of repose. But only the dreamer
who curls up in contemplation of loops understands these simple joys of
delineated repose.

No doubt it is very rash on the part of a writer to accumulate, in the
final pages of a chapter, disconnected ideas, images that only live in a
single detail, and convictions, however sincere, which only last for an
instant. But what else can be done by a phenomenologist who wants to
brave teeming imagination, and for whom, frequently, a single word is
the germ of a dream? When we read the works of a great word dreamer like
Michel Leiris (particularly in his *Biffures*), we find ourselves
experiencing in words, on the inside of words, secret movements of our
own. Like friendship, words sometimes swell, at the dreamer's will, in
the loop of a syllable. While in other words, everything is calm, tight.
Even as sober a man as Joseph
Joubert[]{#calibre_link-420}[[6]{.osf}](#calibre_link-195) recognizes
the intimate repose of words when he speaks of certain ideas rather
curiously as "huts." Words---I often imagine this---are little houses,
each with its cellar and garret. Common-sense lives on the ground floor,
always ready to engage in "foreign commerce," on the same level as the
others, as the passers-by, who are never dreamers. To go upstairs in the
word house is to withdraw, step by step; while to go down to the cellar
is to dream, it is losing oneself in the distant corridors of an obscure
etymology, looking for treasures that cannot be found in words. To mount
and descend in the words themselves---this is a poet's life. To mount
too high or descend too low is allowed in the case of poets, who bring
earth and sky together. Must the philosopher alone be condemned by his
peers always to live on the ground floor?
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-15 .calibre}
::: basic-text-frame
# [7]{.osf1} {#calibre_link-528 .chaptnum}

# MINIATURE {#calibre_link-529 .chapttitle}

I

Psychologists---and more especially philosophers---pay little attention
to the play of miniature frequently introduced into fairy tales. In the
eyes of the psychologist, the writer is merely amusing himself when he
creates houses that can be set on a pea. But this is a basic absurdity
that places the tale on a level with the merest fantasy. And fantasy
precludes the writer from entering, really, into the domain of the
fantastic. Indeed he himself, when he develops his facile inventions,
often quite ponderously, would appear not to believe in a psychological
reality that corresponds to these miniature features. He lacks that
little particle of dream which could be handed on from writer to reader.
To make others believe, we must believe ourselves. Is it worthwhile,
then, for a philosopher to raise a phenomenological problem with regard
to these literary "miniatures," these objects that are so easily made
smaller through literary means? Is it possible for the conscious---of
both writer and reader---to play a sincere rôle in the very origin of
images of this kind?

Yet we are obliged to grant these images a certain objectivity, from the
mere fact that they both attract and interest many dreamers. One might
say that these houses in miniature are false objects that possess a true
psychological objectivity. Here the process of imagination is typical,
and it poses a problem that must be distinguished from the general
problem of geometrical similarities. A geometrician sees *exactly the
same thing* in two similar figures, drawn to different scales. The plan
of a house drawn on a reduced scale implies none of the problems that
are inherent to a philosophy of the imagination. There is even no need
to consider it from the general standpoint of representation, although
it would be important, from this standpoint, to study the phenomenology
of similarity. Our study should be specified as belonging definitely
under the imagination.

Everything will be clear, for instance, if, in order to enter into the
domain where we imagine, we are forced to cross the threshold of
absurdity, as in the case of *Trésor des fèves* (Bean Treasure), Charles
Nodier's[]{#calibre_link-421}[[1]{.osf}](#calibre_link-196) hero, who
gets into a fairy's coach the size of a bean. In fact, he gets into it
with six "litrons"[]{#calibre_link-422}[[2]{.osf}](#calibre_link-197) of
beans on his shoulder. There is thus a contradiction in numbers as well
as in the size of the space involved. Six thousand beans fit into one.
And the same thing is true when Michael---who is oversize---finds
himself, to his great surprise, in the house of the *Fée aux miettes*
(Beggar Fairy), which is hidden under a tuft of grass. But he feels at
home there, and settles down. Happy at being in a small space, he
realizes an experience of topophilia; that is, once inside the miniature
house, he sees its vast number of rooms; from the interior he discovers
*interior* beauty. Here we have an inversion of perspective, which is
either fleeting or captivating, according to the talent of the narrator,
or the reader's capacity for dream. Nodier, who was often too eager to
be "agreeable," and too much amused to give full rein to his
imagination, allows certain badly camouflaged rationalizations to
subsist. In order to explain psychologically this entry into the tiny
house, he recalls the little cardboard houses that children play with.
In other words, the tiny things we imagine simply take us back to
childhood, to familiarity with toys and *the reality of toys*.

But the imagination deserves better than that. In point of fact,
imagination in miniature is natural imagination which appears at all
ages in the daydreams of born dreamers. Indeed, the element of amusement
must be removed, if we are to find its true psychological roots. For
instance, one might devote a *serious* reading to this fragment by
Hermann Hesse, which appeared in
*Fontaine[]{#calibre_link-423}*[[3]{.osf}](#calibre_link-198) (No.
[57]{.scap1}, p. [725]{.scap1}). A prisoner paints a landscape on the
wall of his cell showing a miniature train entering a tunnel. When his
jailers come to get him, he asks them "politely to wait a moment, to
allow me to verify something in the little train in my picture. As
usual, they started to laugh, because they considered me to be
weak-minded. I made myself very tiny, entered into my picture and
climbed into the little train, which started moving, then disappeared
into the darkness of the tunnel. For a few seconds longer, a bit of
flaky smoke could be seen coming out of the round hole. Then this smoke
blew away, and with it the picture, and with the picture, my
person . . ." How many times poet-painters, in their prisons, have
broken through walls, by way of a tunnel! How many times, as they
painted their dreams, they have escaped through a crack in the wall! And
to get out of prison all means are good ones. If need be, mere absurdity
can be a source of freedom.

And so, if we follow the poets of miniature sympathetically, if we take
the imprisoned painter's little train, geometrical contradiction is
redeemed, and Representation is dominated by Imagination. Representation
becomes nothing but a body of expressions with which to communicate our
own images to others. In line with a philosophy that accepts the
imagination as a basic faculty, one could say, in the manner of
Schopenhauer: "The world is my imagination." The cleverer I am at
miniaturizing the world, the better I possess it. But in doing this, it
must be understood that values become condensed and enriched in
miniature. Platonic dialectics of large and small do not suffice for us
to become cognizant of the dynamic virtues of miniature thinking. One
must go beyond logic in order to experience what is large in what is
small.

By analyzing several examples, I shall show that miniature
literature---that is to say, the aggregate of literary images that are
commentaries on inversions in the perspective of size---stimulates
profound values.

II

I shall first take a fragment from Cyrano de Bergerac, which is quoted
in a very fine article by Pierre-Maxime Schuhl, entitled *Le thème de
Gulliver et le postulat de Laplace*. Here the author is led to
accentuate the intellectualist nature of Cyrano de Bergerac's amused
images in order to compare them with this astronomer-mathematician's
ideas.[[]{#calibre_link-424
.pt}]{.osf}[[4]{.osf}](#calibre_link-199)[]{.osf}

The Cyrano text is the following: "This apple is a little universe in
itself, the seed of which, being hotter than the other parts, gives out
the conserving heat of its globe; and this germ, in my opinion, is the
little sun of this little world, that warms and feeds the vegetative
salt of this little mass."

In this text, nothing stands out, but everything is imagined, and the
imaginary miniature is proposed to enclose an imaginary value. At the
center is the seed, which is *hotter* than the entire apple. This
condensed heat, this warm well-being that men love, takes the image out
of the class of images one can see into that of images that are lived.
The imagination feels cheered by this germ which is fed by a vegetable
salt.[[]{#calibre_link-425 .pt}]{.osf}[[5]{.osf}](#calibre_link-200) The
apple itself, the fruit, is no longer the principal thing, but the seed,
which becomes the real dynamic value. Paradoxically, it is the seed that
creates the apple, to which it transmits its aromatic saps and
conserving strength. The seed is not only born in a tender cradle,
protected by the fruit's mass. It is the generator of vital heat.

In such imagination as this, there exists total inversion as regards the
spirit of observation. Here the mind that imagines follows the opposite
path of the mind that observes, the imagination does not want to end in
a diagram that summarizes acquired learning. It seeks a pretext to
multiply images, and as soon as the imagination is interested by an
image, this increases its value. From the moment when Cyrano imagined
the Seed-Sun, he had the conviction that the seed was a source of life
and heat, in short, that it was a value.

Naturally, this is an exaggerated image. The jesting element in Cyrano,
as in many writers, as for instance Nodier, whom we mentioned a few
pages back, is prejudicial to imaginary meditation. The images go too
fast, and too far. But a psychologist who reads slowly and examines
images in slow motion, lingering as long as is needed over each image,
will experience a sort of coalescence of unlimited values. Values become
engulfed in miniature, and miniature causes men to dream.

Pierre-Maxime Schuhl concludes his analysis by underlining in the case
of this particularly felicitous example, the dangers of the imagination,
which is master of error and falsehood. I think as he does, but I dream
differently or, to be more exact, I am willing to react to my reading
the way a dreamer does. Here we have the entire problem of the oneiric
attitude toward oneiric values. Already, when we describe a daydream
*objectively* this diminishes and interrupts it. How many dreams told
objectively have become nothing but oneirism reduced to dust! In the
presence of an image that dreams, it must be taken as an invitation to
continue the daydream that created it.

The psychologist of the imagination who defines the positivity of the
image by the dynamism of daydream must justify the invention of the
image. In the present example, the problem posed: is the seed of an
apple its sun? is an absurd one. If we dream enough---and undoubtedly a
lot is needed---we end by giving this question oneiric value. Cyrano de
Bergerac did not wait for Surrealism to delight in tackling absurd
questions. From the standpoint of the imagination, he was not "wrong";
the imagination is never wrong, since it does not have to confront an
image with an objective reality. But we must go further: Cyrano did not
mean to deceive his readers. He knew quite well that readers would not
mistake it. He had always hoped to find readers worthy of his
imagination. Indeed, there is a sort of innate optimism in all works of
the imagination. Gérard de Nerval wrote, in *Aurélia* (p. [41]{.scap1}):
"I believe that the human imagination never invented anything that was
not true, in this world or any other."

 • • • 

When we have experienced an image like the planetary image of Cyrano's
apple, we understand that it was not prepared by thought. It has nothing
in common with images that illustrate or sustain scientific ideas. On
the other hand, the planetary image of Bohr's atom---in scientific
thinking, if not in a few indigent, harmful evaluations of popular
philosophy---is a pure synthetic construct of mathematical thoughts. In
Bohr's planetary atom, the little central sun *is not hot*.

This brief remark is to underline the essential difference between an
absolute image that is self-accomplishing, and a post-ideated image that
is content to summarize existing thoughts.

III

Our second example of valorized literary miniature will be a botanist's
daydream. Botanists delight in the miniature of being exemplified by a
flower, and they even ingenuously use words that correspond to things of
ordinary size to describe the intimacy of flowers. The following
description of the flower of the German stachys may be read under
*Herbs* in the *Dictionnaire de botanique chrétienne,* which is a large
volume of the *Nouvelle encyclopédie théologique,* published in
[1851]{.scap1}:

"These flowers, which are grown in cotton cradles, are pink and white in
color, and small and delicate. I take off the little chalice by means of
the web of long silk threads that covers it . . . The lower lip of the
flower is straight and a bit folded under; it is a deep pink on the
inside, and on the outside is covered with thick fur. The entire plant
causes smarting when touched. It wears a typically northern costume with
four little stamens that are like little yellow brushes." Thus far, this
account may pass for objective. But it soon becomes psychological, and,
gradually, the description is accompanied by a daydream: "The four
stamens stand erect and on excellent terms with one another in the sort
of little niche formed by the lower lip, where they remain snug and warm
in little padded case-mates. The little pistil remains respectfully at
their feet, but since it is very small, in order to speak to it, they,
in turn, must bend their knees. These little women are very important,
and those that appear to be the humblest often assume great authority in
their homes. The four seeds remain at the bottom of the chalice, where
they are grown, the way, in India, children swing in a hammock. Each
stamen recognizes its own handiwork, and there can be no jealousy."

Here our learned botanist has found wedded life in miniature, in a
flower; he has felt the gentle warmth preserved by fur, he has seen the
hammock that rocks the seed. From the harmony of the forms, he has
deduced the well-being of the home. Need one point out that, as in the
Cyrano text, the gentle warmth of enclosed regions is the first
indication of intimacy? This warm intimacy is the root of all images.
Here---quite obviously---the images no longer correspond to any sort of
reality. Under a magnifying glass we could probably recognize the little
yellow brushes of the stamens. But no *observer* could see the slightest
real feature that would justify the psychological images accumulated by
the narrator in this Dictionary of Christian Botany. We are inclined to
think that the narrator would have been more cautious had he had to
describe an object with ordinary dimensions. But he *entered* into a
miniature world and right away images began to abound, then grow, then
escape. Large issues from small, not through the logical law of a
dialectics of contraries, but thanks to liberation from all obligations
of dimensions, a liberation that is a special characteristic of the
activity of the imagination. Under *Periwinkle,* in this same dictionary
of Christian Botany, we find: "Reader, study the periwinkle in detail,
and you will see how detail increases an object's stature."

In two lines, this man with a magnifying glass expresses an important
psychological law. He situates us at a sensitive point of objectivity,
at the moment when we have to accept unnoticed detail, and dominate it.
The magnifying glass in this experience conditions an entry into the
world. Here the man with the magnifying glass is not an old man still
trying to read his newspaper, in spite of eyes that are weary of
looking. The man with the magnifying glass takes the world as though it
were quite new to him. If he were to tell us of the discoveries he has
made, he would furnish us with documents of pure phenomenology, in which
discovery of the world, or entry into the world, would be more than just
a worn-out word, more than a word that has become tarnished through
over-frequent philosophical use. A philosopher often describes his
"entry into the world," his "being in the world," using a familiar
object as symbol. He will describe his ink-bottle phenomenologically,
and a paltry thing becomes the janitor of the wide world.

The man with the magnifying glass---quite simply---bars the every-day
world. He is a fresh eye before a new object. The botanist's magnifying
glass is youth recaptured. It gives him back the enlarging gaze of a
child. With this glass in his hand, he returns to the garden,

*où les enfants regardent
grand[]{#calibre_link-426}*[[6]{.osf}](#calibre_link-201)[]{.osf}

(where children see enlarged)

Thus the minuscule, a narrow gate, opens up an entire world. The details
of a thing can be the sign of a new world which, like all worlds,
contains the attributes of greatness.

Miniature is one of the refuges of greatness.

IV

Of course, in describing a phenomenology of the man with the magnifying
glass, I was not thinking of the laboratory worker. A scientific worker
has a discipline of objectivity that precludes all daydreams of the
imagination. He has already seen what he observes in the microscope and,
paradoxically, one might say that he never sees anything for the first
time. In any case, in the domain of scientific observation that is
absolutely objective, the "first time" doesn't count. Observation, then,
belongs in the domain of "several times." In scientific work, we have
first to digest our surprise psychologically. What scholars observe is
well defined in a body of thoughts and experiments. It is not, then, on
the level of problems of scientific experiment that I shall make my
comments when we study the imagination. When we have forgotten all our
habits of scientific objectivity, we look for the *images of the first
time*. If we were to consult psychological documents in the history of
science---since the objection may well be raised that, in this history,
there is quite a store of "first times"---we should find that the first
microscopic observations were legends about small objects, and when the
object was endowed with life, legends of life. Indeed, one observer,
still in the domain of naïveté, saw human forms in "'spermatazoic'
animals!"[]{#calibre_link-427}[[7]{.osf}](#calibre_link-202)[]{.osf}

Here I am again, then, obliged to pose the problems of the Imagination
in terms of "first time," which justifies my having chosen examples in
realms of the most exaggerated fantasy. And by way of a surprising
variation on the theme of the man with the magnifying glass, I shall
study a prose poem by André Pieyre de Mandiargues, entitled "*The Egg in
the Landscape*."[[]{#calibre_link-428
.pt}]{.osf}[[8]{.osf}](#calibre_link-203)[]{.osf}

Like countless others, our poet is sitting dreaming at the window. But
he discovers in the glass itself a slight deformation, which spreads
deformation throughout the universe. "Come nearer the window,"
Mandiargues tells his reader, "while you force yourself not to allow
your attention to be too much attracted by the out-of-doors. Until you
have seen one of these kernels that are like cysts in the glass, at
times transparent little knucklebones, but more often, befogged or very
vaguely translucent, and so long in shape that they make you think of
the pupils of a cat's eyes." But what happens to the outside world, when
it is seen through this little glazed lune, this pupil of a cat's eye?
"Does the nature of the world change \[p. [106]{.scap1}\], or is it real
nature that triumphs over appearances? In any event, the experimental
fact is that the introduction of the nucleus into the landscape sufficed
to make it look limp . . . Walls, rocks, tree-trunks, metal
constructions, lost all rigidity in the area surrounding the mobile
nucleus." Here the poet makes images surge up on all sides, he presents
us with an atom universe in the process of multiplication. Under his
guidance, the dreamer can renew his own world, merely by moving his
face. From the miniature of the glass cyst, he can call forth an entire
world and oblige it to make "the most unwonted contortions" (p.
[107]{.scap1}). The dreamer sends waves of unreality over what was
formerly the real world. "The outside world in its entirety is
transformed into a milieu as malleable as could be desired, by the
presence of this single, hard, piercing object, this veritable
philosophical ovum which the slightest twitch of my face sets moving all
through space."

Here the poet did not look far for his dream instrument. And yet with
what art he nucleized the landscape! With what fantasy he conferred
multiple curvature on space! This is really a fantasy on Riemann's
curved space. Because every universe is enclosed in curves, every
universe is concentrated in a nucleus, a spore, a dynamized center. And
this center is powerful, because it is an imagined center. One step
further into the world of images offered us by Pieyre de Mandiargues,
and we see the center that imagines; then we can read the landscape in
the glass nucleus. We no longer look at it while looking through it.
This nucleizing nucleus is a world in itself. The miniature deploys to
the dimensions of a universe. Once more, large is contained in small.

To use a magnifying glass is to pay attention, but isn't paying
attention already having a magnifying glass? Attention by itself is an
enlarging glass.
Elsewhere,[]{#calibre_link-429}[[9]{.osf}](#calibre_link-204) Pieyre de
Mandiargues meditates upon the flower of the euphorbia: "Like the
cross-cut of a flea under the lens of a microscope, the euphorbia had
grown mysteriously under his overattentive scrutiny: it was now a
pentagonal fortress, looming stupendously high above him, in a desert of
white rocks, and the pink spires of the five towers that studded the
castle set in the front line of the flora on the arid countryside
appeared inaccessible."

A reasonable philosopher---and the species is not uncommon---will
object, perhaps, that these documents are exaggerated, and that, with
words, they make the large, even the immense, issue too gratuitously
from the small. For him they are nothing but verbal prestidigitation,
which is a poor thing compared to the feat of the real prestidigitator
who makes an alarm-clock come out of a thimble. I shall nevertheless
defend "literary" prestidigitation. The prestidigitator's action amazes
and amuses us, while that of the poet sets us to dreaming. I cannot live
and relive what is done by the former. But the poet's creation is mine
if only I like to daydream.

This reasonable philosopher would excuse our images if they could be
presented as the effect of a drug, such as mescaline. Then they would
have physiological reality for him; and he could use them to elucidate
his problems of the union of soul and body. I myself consider literary
documents as *realities of the imagination,* pure products of the
imagination. And why should the actions of the imagination not be as
real as those of perception?

Is there any reason, either, why these "extreme" images, which we should
be unable to form ourselves, but which readers can receive sincerely
from poets, should not be virtual "drugs"---if we must keep to this
notion---that procure the seeds of daydreams for us? This virtual drug,
moreover, possesses very pure efficacy. For with an "exaggerated" image
we are sure to be in the direct line of an autonomous imagination.

V

I felt a certain scruple when, a few pages back, I introduced that long
description by the botanist in the *Nouvelle encyclopédie théologique*.
This fragment abandons the seed of daydream too quickly. But because of
its gossipy nature, we accept it when we have time for pleasantry. We
must dismiss it, however, when we are trying to find the living seed of
products of the imagination. If one may say this, it is a miniature made
with big pieces and I shall have to look for a better contact with the
miniaturizing imagination. Unfortunately, being, as I am, a philosopher
who plies his trade at home, I haven't the advantage of actually seeing
the works of the miniaturists of the Middle Ages, which was the great
age of solitary patience. But I can well imagine this patience, which
brings peace to one's fingers. Indeed, we have only to imagine it for
our souls to be bathed in peace. All small things must evolve slowly,
and certainly a long period of leisure, in a quiet room, was needed to
miniaturize the world. Also one must love space to describe it as
minutely as though there were world molecules, to enclose an entire
spectacle in a molecule of drawing. In this feat there is an important
dialectics of the intuition---which always sees big---and work, which is
hostile to flights of fancy. Intuitionists, in fact, take in everything
at one glance, while details reveal themselves and patiently take their
places, one after the other, with the discursive impishness of the
clever miniaturist. It is as though the miniaturist challenged the
intuitionist philosopher's lazy contemplation, as though he said to him:
"You would not have seen that! Take the time needed to see all these
little things that cannot be seen all together." In looking at a
miniature, unflagging attention is required to integrate all the detail.

Naturally, miniature is easier to tell than to do, and it is not hard to
find literary descriptions that put the world in the diminutive. But
because these descriptions tell things in tiny detail, they are
automatically verbose. This is true of the following passage by Victor
Hugo (I have cut it somewhat), in whose name I shall request the
reader's attention for examination of a type of daydream that may seem
insignificant.

Although Hugo is generally thought to have had a magnifying vision of
things, he also knew how to describe them in miniature, as in this
passage from *Le
Rhin:[]{#calibre_link-430}*[[10]{.osf}](#calibre_link-205) "In Freiburg
I forgot for a long time the vast landscape spread out before me, in my
preoccupation with the plot of grass on which I was seated, atop a wild
little knoll on the hill. Here, too, was an entire world. Beetles were
advancing slowly under deep fibres of vegetation; parasol-shaped hemlock
flowers imitated the pines of Italy . . . , a poor, wet bumble-bee, in
black and yellow velvet, was laboriously climbing up a thorny branch,
while thick clouds of gnats kept the daylight from him; a blue-bell
trembled in the wind, and an entire nation of aphids had taken to
shelter under its enormous tent . . . I watched an earthworm that
resembled an antediluvian python come out of the mud and writhe
heavenward, breathing in the air. Who knows, perhaps it, too, in this
microscopic universe, has its Hercules to kill it and its
Cuvier[]{#calibre_link-431}[[11]{.osf}](#calibre_link-206) to describe
it. In short, this universe is as large as the other one." The account
continues, to the poet's evident amusement. Having mentioned Micromégas,
he goes on to pursue a facile theory. But the unhurried reader---I
personally hope for no others---undoubtedly enters into this
miniaturizing daydream. Indeed, this leisurely reader has often indulged
in daydreams of this kind himself, but he would never have dared to
write them down. Now the poet has given them literary dignity. It is my
ambition to give them philosophical dignity. For in fact, the poet is
right, he has just discovered an entire world. "Here, too, was an entire
world." Why should a metaphysician not confront this world? It would
permit him to renew, at little cost, his experiences of "an opening onto
the world," of "entrance into the world." Too often the world designated
by philosophy is merely a non-I, its vastness an accumulation of
negativities. But the philosopher proceeds too quickly to what is
positive, and appropriates for himself the World, a World that is unique
of its kind. Such formulas as: being-in-the-world and world-being are
too majestic for me and I do not succeed in experiencing them. In fact,
I feel more at home in miniature worlds, which, for me, are dominated
worlds. And when I live them I feel waves that generate
world-consciousness emanating from my dreaming self. For me, the
vastness of the world has become merely the jamming of these waves. To
have experienced miniature sincerely detaches me from the surrounding
world, and helps me to resist dissolution of the surrounding atmosphere.

Miniature is an exercise that has metaphysical freshness; it allows us
to be world-conscious at slight risk. And how restful this exercise on a
dominated world can be! For miniature rests us without ever putting us
to sleep. Here the imagination is both vigilant and content.

But in order to devote myself to this miniaturized metaphysics with a
clear conscience, I should need the increased support of additional
texts. Otherwise, by confessing my love of miniature, I should be afraid
of confirming the diagnosis suggested, some twenty-five years ago, by my
old friend Mme. Favez-Boutonier, who told me that my Lilliputian
hallucinations were characteristic of alcoholism.

There exist numerous texts in which a meadow is a forest, and a tuft of
grass a thicket. In one of Thomas Hardy's novels, a handful of moss is a
pine wood; and in *Niels
Lyne,[]{#calibre_link-432}*[[12]{.osf}](#calibre_link-207) J. P.
Jacobsen's novel of subtle passions, the author, describing the Forest
of Happiness, with its autumn leaves and the shadbush "weighted down
with red berries," completes his picture with "vigorous, thick moss that
looked like pine trees, or like palms." Also, "there was in addition, a
thin moss that covered the tree-trunks and reminded one of the
wheat-fields of elves" (p. [255]{.scap1} of the French translation). For
a writer whose task it is to follow a highly intense human drama---as
was the case with Jacobsen---to interrupt his passionate story, in order
to "write this miniature," presents a paradox that would need
elucidating if we wanted to take an exact measure of literary interests.
By following the text closely, it is as though something human gained in
delicacy in this effort to see this delicate forest set in the forest of
big trees. From one forest to the other, from the forest in diastole to
the forest in systole, there is the breathing of a cosmicity. And
paradoxically, it seems that by living in the world of miniature, one
relaxes in a small space.

This is one of the many daydreams that take us out of this world into
another, and the novelist needed it to transport us into the region
beyond the world that is the world of new love. People who are hurried
by the affairs of men will not enter there. Indeed the reader of a book
that follows the undulations of a great love may be surprised at this
interruption through cosmicity. But he only gives the book a linear
reading that follows the thread of the human events. For this reader,
events do not need a picture. And linear reading deprives us of
countless daydreams.

Daydreams of this sort are invitations to verticality, pauses in the
narrative during which the reader is invited to dream. They are very
pure, since they have no use. They must also be distinguished from the
fairy-tale convention in which a dwarf hides behind a head of lettuce to
lay traps for the hero, as in *Le nain jaune* (The Yellow Dwarf) by
Countess d'Aulnoy.[[]{#calibre_link-433
.pt}]{.osf}[[13]{.osf}](#calibre_link-208) Cosmic poetry is independent
of the plots that characterize stories for children. In the examples
given, it demands participation in a really intimate vegetism that has
none of the torpor to which Bergsonian philosophy condemned it. Indeed,
through its attachment to miniaturized forces, the vegetal world is
great in smallness, sharp in gentleness, vividly alive in its greenness.

At times, a poet seizes upon some tiny dramatic incident, as for
instance, Jacques Audiberti, who, in his amazing *Abraxas*, makes us
sense the dramatic moment at which "the climbing nettle raises the gray
scale" in its struggle with a stone wall. What a vegetal Atlas! In
*Abraxas* Audiberti weaves a closely-knit fabric of dream and reality.
He knows the daydreams that put intuition at the *punctum maximum*. One
would like to help the nettle root make one more blister on the old
wall.

But we haven't time, in this world of ours, to love things and see them
at close range, in the plenitude of their smallness. Only once in my
life I saw a young lichen come into being and spread out on a wall. What
youth and vigor to honor the surface!

Of course, we should lose all sense of real values if we interpreted
miniatures from the standpoint of the simple relativism of large and
small. A bit of moss may well be a pine, but a pine will never be a bit
of moss. The imagination does not function with the same conviction in
both directions.

Poets learn to know the primal germ of flowers in the gardens of
tininess. And I should like to be able to say with André Breton:

*J'ai des mains pour te cueillir,*

*thym minuscule de mes rêves,*

*romarin de mon extrême pâleur.*[[]{#calibre_link-434
.pt}]{.osf}[[14]{.osf}](#calibre_link-209)[]{.osf}

(I have hands to pluck you,

wee thyme of my dreams,

rosemary of my excessive pallor.)

VI

A fairy tale is a reasoning image. It tends to associate extraordinary
images as though they could be coherent images, imparting the conviction
of a primal image to an entire ensemble of derivative images. But the
tie is so facile, and the reasoning so fluid that soon we no longer know
where the germ of the tale lies.

In the case of a story told in miniature such as *Petit Poucet* (Tom
Thumb), we seem to have no difficulty in finding the principle of the
primal image: mere tininess paves the way for everything that happens.
But when we examine it more closely, the phenomenological situation of
this narrated miniature is precarious. And the fact is that it is
subject to the dialectics of wonder and jest. A single overdrawn feature
suffices sometimes to interrupt participation in wonderment. In a
drawing, we might continue to admire it, but the commentary exceeds the
limits: in one version, quoted by Gaston
Paris,[]{#calibre_link-435}[[15]{.osf}](#calibre_link-210) Poucet is so
small "that he splits a grain of dust with his head, and passes through
it with his entire body." In another, he is killed by a kick from an
ant. But in this last, there is no oneiric value. Our animalized
oneirism, which is so powerful as regards large animals, has not
recorded the doings and gestures of tiny animals. In fact, in the domain
of tininess, animalized oneirism is less developed than vegetal
oneirism.[[]{#calibre_link-436
.pt}]{.osf}[[16]{.osf}](#calibre_link-211)[]{.osf}

Gaston Paris notes that this direction, in which Poucet is killed by a
kick from an ant, leads inevitably to the epigram, and a sort of insult
through the image that expresses contempt for lowly creatures. Here we
are faced with counter participation. "These witty games may be found
among the Romans," he writes, "who, at the period of the decadence,
addressed a dwarf with the following epigram: 'A flea's skin would be
too big for you.'" "Today still," adds Gaston Paris, "the same jokes are
to be found in the song about *Le petit
mari*"[]{#calibre_link-437}[[17]{.osf}](#calibre_link-212) (The Little
Husband). Gaston Paris describes this song, moreover, as a "children's
song," which will no doubt astonish our psychoanalysts. Fortunately, in
the last seventy-five years, we have acquired new means of psychological
explanation.

In any case, Gaston Paris clearly designated the weak point of the
legend (*loc. cit.,* p. [23]{.scap1}): the passages that jeer at
tininess deform the original story, the pure miniature. In the original
tale, which the phenomenologist must always reinstate, "smallness is not
ridiculous, but wonderful. In fact, the most interesting features of the
story are the extraordinary things that Poucet accomplishes, thanks to
his smallness; he is witty and clever on all occasions, and always
extricates himself triumphantly from the awkward situations in which he
happens to be."

But then, in order to participate in the story really, this subtlety of
wit should be accompanied by material subtlety. The tale invites us to
"slip" between the difficulties. In other words, in addition to the
design, we must seize the dynamism of the miniature, this being a
supplementary phenomenological instance. And what a thrill we get from
the story if we trace the source of this smallness, the nascent movement
of this tiny creature, exerting influence upon the large one. As an
example, the dynamism of miniature is often evidenced by the stories in
which, seated in the horse's ear, Poucet is master of the forces that
pull the plough. "This, in my opinion," writes Paris (p. [23]{.scap1}),
"is the original basis of his story; for this is a feature that is found
among the legends of all peoples, whereas the other stories that are
attributed to him, and which are creations of the imagination, once it
has been stirred by this amusing little creature, usually differ among
different peoples."

Naturally, when he is in the horse's ear, Poucet orders it to turn right
or left. He is the *center of decision,* that the daydreams of our will
advise us to set up in any small space. I said earlier that tininess is
the habitat of greatness. But if we sympathize dynamically with this
lively little Poucet, tininess soon appears to be the habitat of
primitive strength. A Cartesian philosopher---if a Cartesian could
indulge in pleasantry---would say that, in this story, Petit Poucet is
the pineal gland of the plough. In any case, the infinitesimal is master
of energies, small commands large. When Poucet has spoken, horse,
ploughshare and man have only to follow. The better these three
subordinates obey, the greater the certainty that the furrow will be
straight.

Petit Poucet is at home in the space of an ear, at the entrance of the
natural sound cavity. He is an ear within an ear. Thus the tale figured
by visual representations is duplicated by what, in the next paragraph,
I shall call a miniature of sound. As a matter of fact, as we follow the
tale, we are invited to go beyond the auditory threshold, to hear with
our imagination. Poucet climbed into the horse's ear in order to speak
softly, that is to say, to command loudly, with a voice that none could
hear except he who should "listen." Here the word "listen" takes on the
double meaning of to hear and to obey. It is moreover in the minimum of
sound, in a sound miniature like the one that illustrates this legend,
that the play of this double meaning is most delicate.

This Poucet, who guides the farmer's team with his intelligence and
will, seems rather remote from the Poucet of my youth. And yet it is in
line with the fables that will lead us to primitive legend, in the
footsteps of Gaston Paris, who was the great dispenser of primitivity.

For Paris, the key to the legend of Petit Poucet---as in so many
legends!---is in the sky; in other words, it is Poucet who drives the
constellation of the Grand Chariot.[[]{#calibre_link-438
.pt}]{.osf}[[18]{.osf}](#calibre_link-213) And as a matter of fact, in
many lands, according to this author, a little star just above the
chariot is designated by the name of Poucet.

We need not follow all the convergent proofs that the reader can find in
this work by Gaston Paris. However, I should like to insist upon a Swiss
legend which will give us our full of an ear that knows how to dream. In
this legend, also recounted by Paris (p. [11]{.scap1}), the chariot
turns over at midnight with a frightful noise. Such a legend teaches us
to listen to the night. The time of night? The time of the starry sky? I
once read somewhere that a hermit who was watching his hour-glass
without praying heard noises that split his eardrums. He suddenly heard
the catastrophe of time, in the hour-glass. The tick tock of our watches
is so mechanically jerky that we no longer have ears subtle enough to
hear the passage of time.

VII

The tale of Petit Poucet, transposed into the sky, shows that images
move easily from small to large and from large to small. The Gulliver
type of daydream is natural, and a great dreamer sees his images doubly,
on earth and in the sky. But in this poetic life of images there is more
than a mere game of dimensions. Daydream is not geometrical. The dreamer
commits himself absolutely. In an *appendix* to C. A. Hackett's thesis
on *Le lyrisme de Rimbaud,* under the title *Rimbaud et Gulliver,* there
is an excellent passage in which Rimbaud is represented as small beside
his mother, and great in the dominated world. Whereas in the presence of
his mother he is nothing but "a little man in Brobdingnag's country," at
school, little "Arthur imagines that he is Gulliver among the
Lilliputians." And C. A. Hackett quotes Victor Hugo, who, in *Les
contemplations (Souvenirs paternels),* shows children who laugh

*De voir d'affreux géants très bêtes*

*Vaincus par des nains d'esprit.*

(When they see frightful, very stupid giants

Overpowered by witty dwarfs.)

Here Hackett has given an indication of all the elements of a
psychoanalysis of Rimbaud. But although psychoanalysis, as I have often
observed, can furnish us valuable information with regard to the deeper
nature of a writer, occasionally it can divert us from the study of the
direct virtue of an image. There are images that are so immense, their
power of communication lures us so far from life, from our own life,
that psychoanalytical commentary can only develop on the margin of
values. There is immense daydreaming in these two lines by Rimbaud:

*Petit Poucet rêveur, j'égrenais dans ma course*

*Des rimes. Mon auberge était à la Grande Ourse.*

(Dreamy Petit Poucet, on my way, as though in prayer,

I said rhymes, my inn was under the sign of the Great Bear.)

It is of course possible to admit that, for Rimbaud, the Great Bear was
an "image of Mme. Rimbaud" (Hackett, p. [69]{.scap1}). But additional
psychological insight does not give us the dynamism of this outburst of
image that led the poet to recapture the legend of the Walloon Poucet.
In fact I shall have to leave aside my psychoanalytical knowledge if I
want to be touched by the phenomenological grace of the dreamer's image,
of the image of this fifteen-year-old prophet. If the Great Bear Inn is
merely the harsh home of an ill-handled adolescent, it awakens no
positive memory in me, no active daydream. Here I can only dream in
Rimbaud's sky. The particular origin that psychoanalysis finds in the
writer's life, even though it may be psychologically correct, has little
chance of recapturing an influence over anyone. And yet I receive the
message of this extraordinary image, and for a brief instant, by
detaching me from my life, it transforms me into an imagining being. It
is in such moments of reading as this that, little by little, I have
come to doubt not only the psychoanalytical origin of the image, but all
psychological causality of the poetic image as well. Poetry, in its
paradoxes, may be counter-causal, which is yet another way of being of
the world, of being engaged in the dialectics of the passions. But when
poetry attains its autonomy, we can say that it is a-causal. In order to
receive *directly* the virtue of an isolated image---and an image in
isolation has all its virtue---phenomenology now seems to me to be more
favorable than psychoanalysis, for the precise reason that phenomenology
requires us to assume this image ourselves, uncritically and with
enthusiasm.

Consequently, in its *direct revery* aspect, "The Great Bear Inn" is not
a maternal prison any more than it is a village sign. It is a "house in
the sky." If we dream intensely at the sight of a square, we sense its
stability, we know that it is a very safe refuge. Between the four stars
of the Great Bear, a great dreamer can go and live. Perhaps he is
fleeing the earth, and a psychoanalyst can enumerate the reasons for his
flight. But the dreamer is sure to find a resting place proportionate to
his dreams. And this house in the sky keeps turning round and round! The
other stars, lost in the heavenly tides, turn ineptly. But the Grand
Chariot does not lose its way. To watch it turning so smoothly is
already to be master of the voyage. And, while dreaming, the poet
undoubtedly experiences a coalescence of legends, all of which are given
new life through the image. They are not an ancient wisdom. The poet
does not repeat old-wives' tales. He has no past, but lives in a world
that is new. As regards the past and the affairs of this world, he has
realized absolute sublimation. The phenomenologist must follow the poet.
The psychoanalyst is only interested in the negativity of sublimation.

VIII

On the theme of Petit Poucet, in folklore as well as among poets, we
have just seen transpositions of size that give a double life to poetic
space. Two lines suffice sometimes for this transposition, as, for
instance, these lines by Noël
Bureau:[]{#calibre_link-439}[[19]{.osf}](#calibre_link-214)

*Il se couchait derrière le brin d'herbe*

*Pour agrandir le ciei.*

(He lay down behind the blade of grass

To enlarge the sky.)

But sometimes the transactions between small and large multiply, have
repercussions. Then, when a familiar image grows to the dimensions of
the sky, one is suddenly struck by the impression that, correlatively,
familiar objects become the miniatures of a world. Macrocosm and
microcosm are correlated.

This correlation, which can become operative in both directions, has
served as basis for certain poems by Jules Supervielle, especially those
collected under the revealing title *Gravitations.* Here every poetic
center of interest, whether in the sky or on the earth, is a center of
active gravity. For the poet, this center of gravity is soon, if one can
say this, both in heaven and on earth. For instance, with what freedom
of movement in the images, the family table becomes an aerial table,
with the sun for its lamp.[[]{#calibre_link-440
.pt}]{.osf}[[20]{.osf}](#calibre_link-215)[]{.osf}

*L'homme, la femme, les enfants*

*A la table aérienne*

*Appuyée sur un miracle*

*Qui cherche à se dèfinir.*

(The man, the woman, the children

At the aerial table

Resting on a miracle

That seeks its definition.)

Then, after this "explosion of unreality," the poet comes down to earth
again:

*Je me retrouve à ma table habituelle*

*Sur la terre cultivée*

*Celle qui donne le maïs et les troupeaux*

*Je retrouvais les visages autour de moi*

*Avec les pleins et les creux de la vèrité.*

(I am back again at my usual table

On the cultivated earth

The one that yields corn and flocks

I recognized the faces about me

With their lights and shades of truth.)

The image that serves as pivot for this transforming daydream, which is
by turns earthly and aerial, familiar and cosmic, is the image of the
lamp-sun or the sun-lamp. One could find innumerable literary documents
on the subject of this very ancient image. But Jules Supervielle
contributes an important variation by making it active in both
directions. Thus he restores its entire suppleness to the imagination, a
suppleness so miraculous that the image can be said to represent the sum
of the direction that enlarges and the direction that concentrates. The
poet keeps the image from becoming motionless.

If we are alive to Supervielle's cosmic allusions, under this title
*Gravitations,* which is filled with scientific significance for the
modern mind, may be found ideas that have a distinguished past. When the
history of science is not over-modernized, and Copernicus, for instance,
is taken as he was, with all his dreams and ideas, it becomes evident
that the stars gravitate about light, and that the sun is, primarily,
the great Light of the World. Later, mathematicians decided that it was
a magnetic mass. Upper light, being the principle of centrality, is a
very important value in the hierarchy of images. For the imagination,
therefore, the world gravitates about a *value*.

The evening lamp on the family table is also the center of a world. In
fact, the lamp-lighted table is a little world in itself, and a
dreamer-philosopher may well fear lest our indirect lighting cause us to
lose the center of the evening room. If this happens, will memory retain
the faces of other days,

*With their lights and shades of truth?*

When we have followed Supervielle's entire poem, both in its astral
ascensions and its return to the world of human beings, we perceive that
the familiar world assumes the new relief of a dazzling cosmic
miniature. We did not know that the familiar world was so large. The
poet has shown us that large is not incompatible with small. And we are
reminded of Baudelaire's comments on certain Goya lithographs, which he
called "vast pictures in
miniature."[]{#calibre_link-441}[[21]{.osf}](#calibre_link-216) He also
said of Marc Baud,[]{#calibre_link-442}[[22]{.osf}](#calibre_link-217)
an enamelist, "he knows how to create large in small."

In reality, as we shall see later, especially when we examine images of
immenseness, tiny and immense are compatible. A poet is always ready to
see large and small. For instance, thanks to the image, a man like Paul
Claudel, in his cosmogony was quick to assimilate the vocabulary---if
not the thinking---of contemporary science. The following lines are from
his *Cinq grandes odes* (p.[180]{.scap1}): "Just as we see little
spiders or certain insect larvae hidden like precious stones in their
cotton and satin pouches,

"In the same way, I was shown an entire nestful of still embarrassed
suns in the cold folds of the nebula."

If a poet looks through a microscope or a telescope, he always sees the
same thing.

IX

Distance, too, creates miniatures at all points on the horizon, and the
dreamer, faced with these spectacles of distant nature, picks out these
miniatures as so many nests of solitude in which he dreams of living.

In this connection, Joë
Bousquet[]{#calibre_link-443}[[23]{.osf}](#calibre_link-218) writes: "I
plunge into the tiny dimensions that distance confers, for I am anxious
to measure the immobility in which I am confined with this reduction." A
permanent invalid, this great dreamer bestrode the intervening space in
order to "plunge" into tininess. The isolated villages on the horizon
become homelands for the eyes. Distance disperses nothing but, on the
contrary, composes a miniature of a country in which we should like to
live. In distant miniatures, disparate things become reconciled. They
then offer themselves for our "possession," while denying the distance
that created them. We possess from afar, and how peacefully!

These miniature pictures on the horizon may be compared with the sights
that characterize belfry daydreams, and which are so numerous that they
are considered commonplace. Writers note them in passing but vary them
hardly at all. And yet what a lesson in solitude! From the solitude of a
belfry-tower, a man watches other men "running about" on the distant
square bleached white by the summer sun. The men look "the size of
flies," and move about irrationally "like ants." These comparisons,
which are so hackneyed that one no longer dares to use them, appear as
though inadvertently in numerous passages that recount a belfry
daydream. It remains true, nevertheless, that a phenomenologist of
images must take note of the extreme simplicity of these reflections
which so successfully separate the daydreamer from the restless world,
and give him an impression of domination at little cost. But once its
commonplace nature has been pointed out, we realize that this is
specifically the dream of high solitude. Enclosed solitude would think
other thoughts. It would deny the world otherwise, and would not have a
concrete image with which to dominate it. From the top of his tower, a
philosopher of domination sees the universe in miniature. Everything is
small because he is so high. And since he is high, he is great, the
height of his station is proof of his own greatness.

Many a theorem of topoanalysis would have to be elucidated to determine
the action of space upon us. For images cannot be measured. And even
when they speak of space, they change in size. The slightest value
extends, heightens, or multiplies them. Either the dreamer becomes the
being of his image, absorbing all its space, or he confines himself in a
miniature version of his images. What metaphysicians call our
being-in-the-world (*être-là*) should be determined as regards each
image, lest, occasionally, we find nothing but a miniature of being. I
shall return to these aspects of this problem in a later chapter.

X

Since I have centered all my considerations on the problems of
experienced space, miniature, for me, is solely a visual image. But the
*causality of smallness* stirs all our senses, and an interesting study
could be undertaken of the "miniatures" that appeal to each sense. For
the sense of taste or smell, the problem might be even more interesting
than for the sense of vision, since sight curtails the dramas it
witnesses. But a whiff of perfume, or even the slightest odor, can
create an entire environment in the world of the imagination.

Naturally, the problems of causality of smallness have been analyzed by
sensory psychology. In a perfectly positive way, the psychologist
carefully determines the different *thresholds* at which the various
sense organs go into action. These thresholds may differ with different
persons, but there is no contesting their reality. In fact, the idea of
threshold is one of the most clearly objective ideas in modern
psychology.

In this paragraph I should like to see if the imagination does not
attract us to an area beyond these thresholds; if a poet who is
hyper-alert to the inner word, by making form and color speak, doesn't
hear in a region beyond perception. There exist too many paradoxical
metaphors in this connection, for us not to examine them systematically,
since they must conceal a certain reality, a certain truth of the
imagination. I shall give some examples of what, for the sake of
brevity, I shall call sound miniatures.

First of all, we must dismiss the usual references to problems of
hallucination. For they refer to objective phenomena detectable in
actual behavior that can be recorded thanks to photographs of faces in
anguish at hearing imaginary voices. They would therefore not allow us
to really enter into the domains of pure imagination. Nor do I believe
that we can apprehend the autonomous activity of the creative
imagination through a mixture of true sensations and hallucinations that
may be either true or false. The problem for me, I repeat, is not to
examine men, but images. And the only images that can be examined
phenomenologically are transmissible ones; they are those we receive in
a successful transmission. And even if the creator of an image were the
victim of an hallucination, the image can very well fulfill our desire
to imagine as readers, who are not hallucinated.

It must be recognized that a veritable ontological change took place
when what psychiatrists designate as auditory hallucinations were given
literary dignity by a great writer like Edgar Allan Poe. In such a case,
psychological or psychoanalytical explanations concerning the author of
the work of art can lead to a situation where problems of the creative
imagination would be posed wrongly, or not at all. In general, too,
*facts* do not explain *values*. And in works of the poetic imagination,
values bear the mark of such novelty that everything related to the past
is lifeless beside them. All memory has to be reimagined. For we have in
our memories micro-films that can only be read if they are lighted by
the bright light of the imagination.

Naturally, it can still be affirmed that Poe wrote "The Fall of the
House of Usher" because he *suffered* from auditory hallucinations. But
"suffer" runs counter to "create," and we may be sure that it was not
while he was "suffering" that he wrote this tale, in which the images
are brilliantly associated and the shades and silences have very
delicately corresponding features. "Terrestrial objects were glowing" in
the darkness, words were "murmurs." A sensitive ear knows that this is a
poet writing in prose, and that, at a certain point, poetry dominates
meaning. In short, in the auditory category, we have here an immense
sound miniature, the miniature of an entire cosmos that speaks softly.

Faced with such a miniature of world sounds as this, a phenomenologist
must systematically point out all that goes beyond perception,
organically as well as objectively. This is not a matter of ears burning
or of wall lizards growing bigger. There's a dead woman in a vault, who
doesn't want to die. On a shelf in the library are very old books that
tell of another past than the one the dreamer has known. Dreams,
thoughts and memories weave a single fabric. The soul dreams and thinks,
then it imagines. The poet has brought us to an extreme situation beyond
which we are afraid to venture, a situation that lies between mental
disorder and reason, between the living and a woman who is dead. The
slightest sound prepares a catastrophe, while mad winds prepare general
chaos. Murmur and clangor go hand in hand. We are taught the ontology of
presentiment. In this tense state of fore-hearing, we are asked to
become aware of the slightest indications, and in this cosmos of
extremes, things are indications before they are phenomena; the weaker
the indication, the greater the significance, since it indicates an
origin. Taken as origins, it seems as though all these indications occur
and reoccur without the tale coming to an end. Here genius teaches us
some quite simple things. The tale ends by taking root in our
consciousness and, for this reason, becomes the possession of the
phenomenologist.

Meanwhile, consciousness increases; not, however, in relations between
human beings, upon which psychoanalysis generally bases its
observations. For it is not possible to concentrate on human problems in
the face of a cosmos in danger. Everything lives in a sort of pre-quake,
in a house about to collapse beneath the weight of walls which, when
they too collapse, will have achieved definitive burial for a dead
woman.

But this cosmos is not real. As Poe himself said, it is a *sulphurous*
ideality, created by the dreamer with each new wave of his images. Man
and the World, man and *his* world, are at their closest, it being in
the power of the poet to designate them to us in their moments of
greatest proximity. Man and the world are in a community of dangers.
They are dangerous for each other. All this can be heard and pre-heard
in the sub-rumbling murmur of the poem.

But my demonstration of the reality of poetic sound miniatures will be
simpler, no doubt, if I take miniatures that are less composed. I shall
therefore choose examples that may be contained in a few lines.

Poets often introduce us into a world of *impossible* sounds, so
impossible, in fact, that their authors may be charged with creating
fantasy that has no interest. One smiles and goes one's way. And yet,
most often, the poet did not take his poem lightly, and a certain
tenderness presided over these images.

René-Guy Cadou, who lived in the Village of Happy Homes, was moved to
write:[]{#calibre_link-444}[[24]{.osf}](#calibre_link-219)[]{.osf}

*On entend gazouiller les fleurs du paravent*

(You can hear the prattle of the flowers on the screen.)

Because all flowers speak and sing, even those we draw, and it is
impossible to remain unsociable when we draw a flower or a bird.

Another poet writes:

*Son secret c'était*

*D'écouter la fleur*

*User sa couleur.*[[]{#calibre_link-445
.pt}]{.osf}[[25]{.osf}](#calibre_link-220)[]{.osf}

(Her secret was

Listening to flowers

Wear out their color.)

Like so many poets, Claude Vigée hears the grass
grow:[]{#calibre_link-446}[[26]{.osf}](#calibre_link-221)[]{.osf}

*J'ecoute*

*Un jeune noisetier*

*Verdir.*

(I hear

A young nut-tree

grow green.)

Such images as these must be taken, at the least, in their existence as
a *reality of expression*. For they owe their entire being to poetic
expression, and this being would be diminished if we tried to refer them
to a reality, even to a psychological reality. Indeed, they dominate
psychology and correspond to no psychological impulse, save the simple
need for self-expression, in one of those leisurely moments when we
listen to everything in nature that is unable to speak.

It would be quite superfluous for such images to be true. They exist.
They possess the absoluteness of the image, and they have passed beyond
the limit that separates conditioned from absolute sublimation.

But even when they start from psychology, the turning away from
psychological impressions to poetic expression is sometimes so subtle
that one is tempted to attribute a basis of psychological reality to
what is pure expression. The Touraine writer, J. Moreau, could "not
resist the pleasure of quoting Théophile Gautier, when he gives poetic
form to the impressions he had while smoking
hashish."[]{#calibre_link-447}[[27]{.osf}](#calibre_link-222) "My
hearing," Gautier wrote, "became enormously keen; I heard the noises of
colors; green, red, blue, yellow sounds came to me in perfectly distinct
waves." But Moreau was not taken in, and he notes that he quoted the
poet's words "in spite of the poetic exaggeration that marks them, and
which it is useless to point out." But then, for whom is this document
intended? For the psychologist, or for the philosopher, who is
interested in the poetic human being? In other words, is it the hashish
or the poet that exaggerates? Alone, the hashish would not have
succeeded in exaggerating so well. And we quiet readers, whose knowledge
of hashish impressions has been acquired through literary proxy, would
not hear colors shudder if a poet had not known how to make us listen,
not to say, super-listen.

Then how shall we see without hearing? There exist complicated forms
which, even when they are at rest, make a noise. Twisted things continue
to make creaking contortions. And Rimbaud knew this when

*Il ecoutait grouiller les galeux espaliers*

(*Les poètes de sept ans*)

(He listened to mangy trellises crawling.)

The form of the mandrake maintains its legend. Indeed, this root in
human form must cry out when it is pulled up from the ground. And for
ears that dream, what a noise of syllables there is in its
name\![]{#calibre_link-448}[[28]{.osf}](#calibre_link-223) Words are
clamor-filled shells. There's many a story in the miniature of a single
word!

There are also great waves of silence that vibrate in poems, as in the
little selection of poems by Pericle Patocchi, prefaced by Marcel
Raymond. Here we have the silence of the distant world concentrated in
one line:

*Au loin j'entendais prier les sources de la terre*

(*Vingt poèmes*)

(Far off I heard the springs of earth praying.)

Some poems move toward silence the way we descend in memory. As, for
instance, in this great poem by Milosz:

*Tandis que le grand vent glapit des noms de mortes*

*Ou bruit de vieille pluie aigre sur quelque route*

*Ecoute---plus rien---seul le grand silence---écoute*.

(O[. ]{.scap1}W[. ]{.scap1}D[e ]{.scap1}L[.
]{.scap1}M[ilosz]{.scap1})[]{#calibre_link-449}[[29]{.osf}](#calibre_link-224)[]{.osf}

(While the high wind yelps the names of women long dead

Or the sound of bitter old rain on a road

Listen---now there's nothing---but complete silence---listen.)

Here there is nothing that would require the kind of poetic imitation to
be found in Victor Hugo's great play, *Les Djinns*. It is the silence,
rather, that obliges the poet to listen, and gives the dream greater
intimacy. We hardly know where to situate this silence, whether in the
vast world or in the immense past. But we do know that it comes from
beyond a wind that dies down or a rain that grows gentle. In another
poem (*loc. cit.,* p. [372]{.scap1}) we find this unforgettable line by
Milosz:

*L'odeur du silence est si vieille*

(The odor of silence is so old . . .)

As life grows older, we are besieged by many a silence!

XI

How hard it is to situate the values of being and non-being! And where
is the root of silence? Is it a distinction of non-being, or a
domination of being? It is "deep." But where is the root of its depth?
In the universe where sources about to be born are praying, or in the
heart of a man who has suffered? And at what height of being should
listening ears become aware?

Being myself a philosopher of adjectives, I am caught up in the
perplexing dialectics of deep and large; of the infinitely diminished
that deepens, or the large that extends beyond all limits. In Claudel's
*L'annonce faite à Marie,* the dialogue between Violaine and Mara
reaches down to unplumbed depths, establishing in a few words the
ontological link between invisible and inaudible.

[VIOLAINE]{.scap1} (*who is blind*)---I hear . . .

[MARA]{.scap1}---What do you hear?

[VIOLAINE]{.scap1}---Things existing with me.

Here the touch goes so deep that one would have to meditate at length
upon a world that exists in depth by virtue of its sonority, a world the
entire existence of which would be the existence of voices. This frail,
ephemeral thing, a voice, can bear witness to the most forceful
realities. In Claudel's dialogues---abundant proof of this would be easy
to find---the voice assumes the certainties of a reality that unites man
and the world. But before speaking, one must listen. Claudel was a great
listener.

XII

We have just seen united in grandeur of being, the transcendency of what
is seen and what is heard. The following bit of daring, however, will
serve as a simpler indication of this dual
transcendency:[]{#calibre_link-450}[[30]{.osf}](#calibre_link-225)[]{.osf}

*Je m'entendais fermer les yeux, les rouvrir*.

(I heard myself close my eyes, then open them.)

All solitary dreamers know that they hear differently when they close
their eyes. And when we want to think hard, to listen to the inner
voice, or compose the tightly constructed key sentence that will express
the very core of our thinking, is there one of us who hasn't his thumb
and forefinger pressed firmly against his lids? The ear knows then that
the eyes are closed, it knows that it is responsible for the being who
is thinking and writing. Relaxation will come when the eyes are
reopened.

But who will tell us the daydreams of closed, half-closed, or even
wide-open eyes? How much of the world must one retain in order to be
accessible to transcendency? On page [247]{.scap1} of the
above-mentioned book written over a century ago, by J. J. Moreau, we
read: "With certain patients, merely to lower their eye-lids, while
still awake, suffices to produce visual hallucinations." Moreau quotes
Baillarger, adding: "Lowering the eyelids does not produce visual
hallucinations only, but auditory hallucinations as well."

By associating the observations of these doctors of the old school, with
a gentle poet like Loys Masson, I provide myself with countless
daydreams. What a fine ear this poet has! And what mastery in directing
the play of the dream devices known to us as seeing and hearing,
ultra-seeing and ultra-hearing, hearing oneself seeing.

Another poet teaches us, if one may say this, to hear ourselves listen:

*Ecoute bien pourtant. Non pas*

*mes paroles, mais le tumulte qui*

*s'élève en ton corps lorsque tu t'écoutes*.[[]{#calibre_link-451
.pt}]{.osf}[[31]{.osf}](#calibre_link-226)[]{.osf}

(Yet listen well. Not to my words,

but to the tumult that rages in

your body when you listen to yourself.)

Here René Daumal has seized upon a point of departure for a
phenomenology of the verb "to listen."

The fact that I have made use of all the documents of fantasy and
daydreams that like to play with words and the most ephemeral sort of
impressions is another admission on my part of my intention of remaining
in the domain of the superficial. I have only explored the thin layer of
nascent images. No doubt, the frailest, most inconsistent image can
reveal profound vibrations. But to determine the metaphysics of all that
transcends our perceptive life would require a different type of
research. Particularly, if we were to describe how silence affects not
only man's time and speech, but also his very being, it would fill a
large volume. Fortunately, this volume exists. I recommend Max Picard's
*The World of Silence*.[[]{#calibre_link-452
.pt}]{.osf}[[32]{.osf}](#calibre_link-227)[]{.osf}
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-16 .calibre}
::: basic-text-frame
# [8]{.osf1} {#calibre_link-530 .chaptnum}

# INTIMATE IMMENSITY {#calibre_link-531 .chapttitle}

*Le monde est grand, mais en nous*

*il est profond comme la mer.*

[R. M. RILKE]{.scap1}

(The world is large, but in us it is deep as the sea.)

*L'espace m'a toujours rendu silencieux*

[JULES VALL]{.scap1}[È]{.scap1}[S, ]{.scap1}*L'enfant*[, ]{.scap1}p.
[238]{.scap1}[]{.scap1}

(Space has always reduced me to silence.)

I

One might say that immensity is a philosophical category of daydream.
Daydream undoubtedly feeds on all kinds of sights, but through a sort of
natural inclination, it contemplates grandeur. And this contemplation
produces an attitude that is so special, an inner state that is so
unlike any other, that the daydream transports the dreamer outside the
immediate world to a world that bears the mark of infinity.

Far from the immensities of sea and land, merely through memory, we can
recapture, by means of meditation, the resonances of this contemplation
of grandeur. But is this really memory? Isn't imagination alone able to
enlarge indefinitely the images of immensity? In point of fact,
daydreaming, from the very first second, is an entirely constituted
state. We do not see it start, and yet it always starts the same way,
that is, it flees the object nearby and right away it is far off,
elsewhere, in the space of *elsewhere*.[[]{#calibre_link-453
.pt}]{.osf}[[1]{.osf}](#calibre_link-228)[]{.osf}

When this *elsewhere* is in *natural* surroundings, that is, when it is
not lodged in the houses of the past, it is immense. And one might say
that daydream is *original contemplation*.

If we could analyze impressions and images of immensity, or what
immensity contributes to an image, we should soon enter into a region of
the purest sort of phenomenology---a phenomenology without phenomena;
or, stated less paradoxically, one that, in order to know the productive
flow of images, need not wait for the phenomena of the imagination to
take form and become stabilized in completed images. In other words,
since immense is not an object, a phenomenology of immense would refer
us directly to our imagining consciousness. In analyzing images of
immensity, we should realize within ourselves the pure being of pure
imagination. It then becomes clear that works of art are the
*by-products* of this existentialism of the imagining being. In this
direction of daydreams of immensity, the real *product* is consciousness
of enlargement. We feel that we have been promoted to the dignity of the
admiring being.

This being the case, in this meditation, we are not "cast into the
world," since we open the world, as it were, by transcending the world
seen as it is, or as it was, before we started dreaming. And even if we
are aware of our own paltry selves---through the effects of harsh
dialectics---we become aware of grandeur. We then return to the natural
activity of our magnifying being.

Immensity is within ourselves. It is attached to a sort of expansion of
being that life curbs and caution arrests, but which starts again when
we are alone. As soon as we become motionless, we are elsewhere; we are
dreaming in a world that is immense. Indeed, immensity is the movement
of motionless man. It is one of the dynamic characteristics of quiet
daydreaming.

And since we are learning philosophy from poets, here is a lesson in
three lines, by Pierre
Albert-Bireau:[]{#calibre_link-454}[[2]{.osf}](#calibre_link-229)[]{.osf}

*Et je me crée d'un trait de plume*

*Maître du Monde*

*Homme illimité*.

(And with a stroke of the pen I name myself

Master of the World

Unlimited man.)

II

However paradoxical this may seem, it is often this *inner immensity*
that gives their real meaning to certain expressions concerning the
visible world. To take a precise example, we might make a detailed
examination of what is meant by the *immensity of the forest*. For this
"immensity" originates in a body of impressions which, in reality, have
little connection with geographical information. We do not have to be
long in the woods to experience the always rather anxious impression of
"going deeper and deeper" into a limitless world. Soon, if we do not
know where we are going, we no longer know where we are. It would be
easy to furnish literary documents that would be so many variations on
the theme of this limitless world, which is a primary attribute of the
forest. But the following passage, marked with rare psychological depth,
from Marcault and Thérèse Brosse's excellent
work,[]{#calibre_link-455}[[3]{.osf}](#calibre_link-230) will help us to
determine the main theme: "Forests, especially, with the mystery of
their space prolonged indefinitely beyond the veil of tree-trunks and
leaves, space that is veiled for our eyes, but transparent to action,
are veritable psychological
transcendents."[]{#calibre_link-456}[[4]{.osf}](#calibre_link-231) I
myself should have hesitated to use the term "psychological
transcendents." But at least it is a good indicator for directing
phenomenological research toward the transcendencies of present-day
psychology. It would be difficult to express better that here the
functions of description---psychological as well as objective---are
ineffective. One feels that there is *something else* to be expressed
besides what is offered for objective expression. What should be
expressed is hidden grandeur, depth. And so far from indulging in
prolixity of expression, or losing oneself in the detail of light and
shade, one feels that one is in the presence of an "essential"
impression seeking expression; in short, in line with what our authors
call a "psychological transcendent." If one wants to "experience the
forest," this is an excellent way of saying that one is in the presence
of *immediate immensity*, of the immediate immensity of its depth. Poets
feel this immediate immensity of old
forests:[]{#calibre_link-457}[[5]{.osf}](#calibre_link-232)[]{.osf}

*Forêt pieuse, forêt brisée où l'on n'enlève pas les morts*

*Infiniment fermée, serrée de vieilles tiges droites roses*

*Infiniment resserrée en plus vieux et gris fardés*

*Sur la couche de mousse énorme et profonde en cri de velours*

(Pious forest, shattered forest, where the dead are left lying

Infinitely closed, dense with pinkish straight old stems

Infinitely serried, older and grayed

On the vast, deep, mossy bed, a velvet cry.)

Here the poet does not describe. He knows that his is a greater task.
The pious forest is shattered, closed, serried. It accumulates its
infinity within its own boundaries. Farther on in the poem he will speak
of the symphony of an "eternal" wind that lives in the movement of the
tree-tops.

Thus, Pierre-Jean Jouve's "forest" is *immediately sacred*, sacred by
virtue of the tradition of its nature, far from all history of men.
Before the gods existed, the woods were sacred, and the gods came to
dwell in these sacred woods. All they did was to add human, all too
human, characteristics to the great law of forest revery.

But even when a poet gives a geographical dimension, he knows
instinctively that this dimension can be determined on the spot, for the
reason that it is rooted in a particular oneiric value. Thus, when
Pierre Guéguen speaks of "the deep forest" (the forest of
Broceliande),[]{#calibre_link-458}[[6]{.osf}](#calibre_link-233) he adds
a dimension; but it is not the dimension that gives the image its
intensity. And when he says that the deep forest is also called "the
quiet earth, because of its immense silence curdled in thirty leagues of
green," Guéguen bids us participate in transcendent quiet and silence.
Because the forest rustles, the "curdled" quiet trembles and shudders,
it comes to life with countless lives. But these sounds and these
movements do not disturb the silence and quietude of the forest. When we
read this passage of Guéguen's book we sense that this poet has calmed
all anxiety. Forest peace for him is inner peace. It is an inner state.

Poets know this, and some reveal it in one line as, for instance, Jules
Supervielle, who knows that in our peaceful moments we are

*Habitants délicats des forêts de nous-mêmes*.

(Sensitive inhabitants of the forests of ourselves.)

Others, who are more logical, such as René Ménard, present us with a
beautiful album devoted to trees, in which each tree is associated with
a poet. Here is Ménard's own *intimate forest:* "Now I am traversed by
bridle paths, under the seal of sun and shade . . . I live in great
density . . . Shelter lures me. I slump down into the thick
foliage . . . In the forest, I am my entire self. Everything is possible
in my heart just as it is in the hiding places in ravines. Thickly
wooded distance separates me from moral codes and
cities."[]{#calibre_link-459}[[7]{.osf}](#calibre_link-234) But one
should read this whole prose poem which, as the poet says, is actuated
by "reverent apprehension of the Imagination of Creation."

In the domains of poetic phenomenology under consideration, there is one
adjective of which a metaphysician of the imagination must beware, and
that is, the adjective *ancestral*. For there is a corresponding
valorization to this adjective which is too rapid, often entirely
verbal, and never well supervised, with the result that the direct
nature of depth imagination and of depth psychology, generally, is
lacking. Here the "ancestral" forest becomes a "psychological
transcendent" at small cost, it is an image suited to children's books.
And if there exists a phenomenological problem with regard to this
image, it is to find out for what *actual* reason, by virtue of what
active value of the imagination, such an image charms and speaks to us.
The hypothesis, according to which it is due to remote permeation from
infinite ages, is a psychologically gratuitous one. Indeed, if it were
to be taken into consideration by a phenomenologist, such a hypothesis
would be an invitation to lazy thinking. And, for myself, I feel obliged
to establish the actuality of archetypes. In any event, the word
"ancestral," as a value of the imagination, is one that needs
explaining; it is not a word that explains.

But who knows the temporal dimensions of the forest? History is not
enough. We should have to know how the forest experiences its great age;
why, in the reign of the imagination, there are no young forests. I
myself can only meditate upon things in my own country, having learned
the dialectics of fields and woods from my unforgettable friend, Gaston
Roupnel.[[]{#calibre_link-460 .pt}]{.osf}[[8]{.osf}](#calibre_link-235)
In the vast world of the non-I, the non-I of fields is not the same as
the non-I of forests. The forest is a before-me, before-us, whereas for
fields and meadows, my dreams and recollections accompany all the
different phases of tilling and harvesting. When the dialectics of the I
and the non-I grow more flexible, I feel that fields and meadows are
with me, in the with-me, with-us. But forests reign in the past. I know,
for instance, that my grandfather got lost in a certain wood. I was told
this, and I have not forgotten it. It happened in a past before I was
born. My oldest memories, therefore, are a hundred years old, or perhaps
a bit more.

This, then, is my ancestral forest. And all the rest is fiction.

III

When such daydreams as these take hold of meditating man, details grow
dim and all picturesqueness fades. The very hours pass unnoticed and
space stretches out interminably. Indeed, daydreams of this kind may
well be called daydreams of infinity. With these images of the "deep"
forest, I have just outlined the power of immensity that is revealed in
a value. But one can follow the opposite course. In the presence of such
obvious immensity as the immensity of night, a poet can point the way to
intimate depth. A passage in Milosz's *L'amoureuse initiation* (p.
[64]{.scap1}) will serve as a center where we can sense the concordance
of world immensity with intimate depth of being.

"As I stood in contemplation of the garden of the wonders of space,"
Milosz writes, "I had the feeling that I was looking into the ultimate
depths, the most secret regions of my own being; and I smiled, because
it had never occurred to me that I could be so pure, so great, so fair!
My heart burst into singing with the song of grace of the universe. All
these constellations are yours, they exist in you; outside your love
they have no reality! How terrible the world seems to those who do not
know themselves! When you felt so alone and abandoned in the presence of
the sea, imagine what solitude the waters must have felt in the night,
or the night's own solitude in a universe without end!" And the poet
continues this love duet between dreamer and world, making man and the
world into two wedded creatures that are paradoxically united in the
dialogue of their solitude.

Elsewhere in this same work (p. [151]{.scap1}), in a sort of
meditation-exaltation which unites the two movements that concentrate
and dilate, Milosz writes: "Oh, space, you who separate the waters; my
joyful friend, with what love I sense you! Here I am like the flowering
nettle in the gentle sunlight of ruins, like the pebble on the spring's
edge, or the serpent in the warm grass! Is this instant really eternity?
Is eternity really this instant?" And the passage goes on, linking
infinitesimal with immense, the white nettle with the blue sky. All
these sharp contradictions, the thin edge of the pebble and the clear
spring, are now assimilated and destroyed, the dreaming being having
transcended the contradiction of small and large. This exaltation of
space goes beyond all frontiers (p. [155]{.scap1}). "Away with
boundaries, those enemies of horizons! Let genuine distance appear!" And
further (p. [168]{.scap1}): "Everything was bathed in light, gentleness
and wisdom; in the unreal air, distance beckoned to distance. My love
enveloped the universe."

Of course, if it were my aim to study images of immensity objectively, I
should have to start a voluminous file, for immensity is an
inexhaustible poetic theme. I touched on this in an earlier
work,[]{#calibre_link-461}[[9]{.osf}](#calibre_link-236) in which I
insisted upon the desire for confrontation that exists in man meditating
upon an infinite universe. I also spoke of a spectacle complex in which
pride of seeing is the core of the consciousness of a being in
contemplation. But the problem under consideration in this present work
is that of a more relaxed participation in images of immensity, a more
intimate relationship between small and large. I should like to
liquidate, as it were, the spectacle complex, which could harden certain
values of poetic contemplation.

IV

When a relaxed spirit meditates and dreams, immensity seems to expect
images of immensity. The mind sees and continues to see objects, while
the spirit finds the nest of immensity in an object. We shall have
various proofs of this if we follow the daydreams that the single word
*vast* inspired in Baudelaire. Indeed, "vast" is one of the most
Baudelairian of words, the word that marks most naturally, for this
poet, infinity of intimate space.

No doubt, pages could be found in his work in which the word "vast" has
merely its ordinary geometrically objective meaning: "Around a vast oval
table . . ." is from a description in *Curiosités esthétiques* (p.
[390]{.scap1}). But when one has become hypersensitive to this word, one
sees that it denotes attraction for felicitous amplitude. Moreover, if
we were to count the different usages of the word "vast" in Baudelaire's
writings, we should be struck by the fact that examples of its positive,
objective use are rare compared with the instances when the word has
more intimate resonances.[[]{#calibre_link-462
.pt}]{.osf}[[10]{.osf}](#calibre_link-237)[]{.osf}

Despite the fact that Baudelaire consciously avoided words used by force
of habit, and took particular pains not to let his adjectives be
dictated by his nouns, he did not keep a close eye on his use of the
word *vast*. Whenever a thing, a thought or a daydream was touched by
grandeur, this word became indispensable to him. I should like to give a
few examples of the astonishing variety of uses to which he put it.

The opium-eater must have "a vast amount of
leisure"[]{#calibre_link-463}[[11]{.osf}](#calibre_link-238) to derive
benefit from his soothing daydreams. Daydreaming is encouraged by "the
vast silence of the
country."[]{#calibre_link-464}[[12]{.osf}](#calibre_link-239) The "moral
world opens up vast perspectives filled with new
clarities."[]{#calibre_link-465}[[13]{.osf}](#calibre_link-240) Certain
dreams are laid "on the vast canvas of memory." And elsewhere,
Baudelaire speaks of a man who was "the prey of great projects,
oppressed by vast thoughts."

Describing a nation, he wrote, "Nations . . . (are) vast animals whose
organization is adequate to their environment"; and returning later to
the same subject,[]{#calibre_link-466}[[14]{.osf}](#calibre_link-241)
"Nations (are) vast collective creatures." Here there is no doubt that
the word *vast* increases the tonality of the metaphor; in fact, without
this word, to which he attached importance, he would have perhaps
hesitated because of the indigence of the image. But the word *vast*
saves everything and Baudelaire adds that readers will understand this
comparison if they are at all familiar with "these vast subjects of
contemplation."

It is no exaggeration to say that, for Baudelaire, the word "vast" is a
metaphysical argument by means of which the vast world and vast thoughts
are united. But actually this grandeur is most active in the realm of
intimate space. For this grandeur does not come from the spectacle
witnessed, but from the unfathomable depths of vast thoughts. In his
*Journaux intimes* (*loc. cit.,* p. [29]{.scap1}) Baudelaire writes: "In
certain almost supernatural inner states, the depth of life is entirely
revealed in the spectacle, however ordinary, that we have before our
eyes, and which becomes the symbol of it." Here we have a passage that
designates the phenomenological direction I myself pursue. The exterior
spectacle helps intimate grandeur unfold.

The word "vast," for Baudelaire, is also the word that expresses the
highest degree of synthesis. In order to learn the difference between
the discursive ventures of the mind and the powers of the spirit, we
must meditate upon the following
thought:[]{#calibre_link-467}[[15]{.osf}](#calibre_link-242) "the
lyrical spirit takes strides that are as vast as synthesis while the
novelist's mind delights in analysis."

Thus, under the banner of the word *vast*, the spirit finds its
synthetic being. The word *vast* reconciles contraries.

"As vast as night and light." In a poem about
hashish,[]{#calibre_link-468}[[16]{.osf}](#calibre_link-243) we find
some elements of this famous line that haunts the memory of all
Baudelaire's admirers: "The moral world opens up vast perspectives,
filled with new clarities." And so it is the "moral" nature, the "moral"
temple that conveys grandeur in its pristine state. Throughout this
poet's work, one can follow the action of a "vast unity" that is always
ready to unite dislocated riches. The philosophical mind goes in for
endless discussion on the relation of the one to the many, while
Baudelaire's meditations, which are very typically poetic, find a deep,
somber unity in the very power of the synthesis through which the
different impressions of the senses enter into correspondence. Often
these "correspondences" have been examined too empirically as being the
effects of sensibility. However, the range of sensibility from one
dreamer to the other rarely coincides. Except for the delight that it
affords every reader's ear, myrrh is not given to all of us. But from
the very first chords of the sonnet "*Correspondances*," the
synthesizing action of the lyrical spirit is at work. Even though poetic
sensibility enjoys countless variations on the theme of
"correspondences," we must acknowledge that the theme itself is also
eminently enjoyable. And Baudelaire says, in fact, that at such moments
"the sense of existence is immensely
increased."[]{#calibre_link-469}[[17]{.osf}](#calibre_link-244) Here we
discover that immensity in the intimate domain is intensity, an
intensity of being, the intensity of a being evolving in a vast
perspective of intimate immensity. It is the principle of
"correspondences" to receive the immensity of the world, which they
transform into intensity of our intimate being. They institute
transactions between two kinds of grandeur. We cannot forget that
Baudelaire experienced these transactions.

Movement itself has, so to speak, a favorable volume, and because of its
harmony, Baudelaire included it in the esthetic category of vastness.
Writing about the movement of a ship, he said, "The poetic idea that
emanates from this operation of movement inside the lines is the
hypothesis of a vast, immense creature, complicated but eurhythmic, an
animal endowed with genius, suffering and sighing every sigh and every
human ambition." Thus, the ship, beautiful volume resting on the waters,
contains the infinite of the word *vast,* which is a word that does not
describe, but gives primal being to everything that must be described.
For Baudelaire, the word *vast* contains a complex of images that deepen
one another because they grow on a vast being.

At the risk of my demonstration becoming diffuse, I have tried to
indicate the places in Baudelaire's work where this strange adjective
appears; strange because it confers grandeur upon impressions that have
nothing in common.

But in order to give my demonstration greater unity, I shall follow a
line of images, or values, which will show that, for Baudelaire,
immensity is an intimate dimension.

A rarely felicitous expression of the intimate nature of the notion of
immensity may be found in the pages Baudelaire devoted to Richard
Wagner,[]{#calibre_link-470}[[18]{.osf}](#calibre_link-245) and in which
he lists, so to speak, three states of this impression of immensity. He
begins by quoting the program of the concert at which the Prelude to
*Lohengrin* was played (*loc. cit*., p. [212]{.scap1}). "From the very
first measures, the spirit of the pious recluse who awaits the sacred
cup is *plunged into infinite space*. Little by little, he sees a
strange apparition assuming form. As this apparition becomes clearer,
the *marvelous band of angels,* bearing in their midst the sacred
goblet, passes. The holy procession approaches, little by little the
heart of God's elect is uplifted; it swells and expands, stirred by
ineffable aspirations; *it yields to increasing bliss,* and as it comes
nearer the *luminous apparition,* when at last the Holy Grail itself
appears in the midst of the procession, *it sinks into ecstatic
adoration as though the whole world had suddenly disappeared."* All the
underlinings in this passage were made by Baudelaire himself. They make
us sense clearly the progressive expansion of the daydream up to the
ultimate point when immensity that is born intimately, in a feeling of
ecstasy, dissolves and absorbs, as it were, the perceptible world.

The second state of what we might call an increase of being is furnished
by a few lines by Liszt. These lines permit us to participate in mystic
space (*loc. cit*., p. [213]{.scap1}) born of musical meditation.
"Vaporous ether . . . overspreads a broad dormant sheet of melody." In
the rest of this text by Liszt, metaphors of light help us to grasp this
extension of a transparent musical world.

But these texts only prepare Baudelaire's own note on the subject, in
which the "correspondences" appear to be intensification of the senses,
each enlargement of an image enlarging the grandeur of another image, as
immensity develops. Here Baudelaire, who is now entirely immersed in the
oneirism of the music, has, as he says, "one of those impressions of
happiness that nearly all imaginative men have experienced in their
sleeping dreams. I felt freed from *the powers of gravity,* and, through
memory, succeeded in recapturing the extraordinary *voluptuousness* that
pervades *high places*. Involuntarily I pictured to myself the
delightful state of a man in the grip of a long daydream, in absolute
solitude, but a solitude with an *immense horizon* and widely diffused
light; in other words, immensity with no other setting than itself."

In the text that follows, any number of factors may be found that could
be used for a phenomenology of extension, expansion and ecstasy. But
after having been lengthily prepared by Baudelaire, we have now come
upon the formula that must be put in the center of our phenomenological
observations: "immensity with no other setting than itself." Concerning
this immensity, Baudelaire has just told us in detail, that it is a
conquest of intimacy. Grandeur progresses in the world in proportion to
the deepening of intimacy. Baudelaire's daydream does not take shape in
contemplation of a universe. He pursues it---as he tells us---with
closed eyes. He does not live on memories, and his poetic ecstasy has
become, little by little, an eventless life. The angels whose wings had
once shown blue in the sky have blended into a universal blue. Slowly,
immensity becomes a primal value, a primal, intimate value. When the
dreamer really experiences the word "immense," he sees himself liberated
from his cares and thoughts, even from his dreams. He is no longer shut
up in his weight, the prisoner of his own being.

If we were to study these fragments by Baudelaire according to the
normal methods of psychology, we might conclude that when the poet left
behind him the settings of the world, to experience the single "setting"
of immensity, he could only have knowledge of an "abstraction come
true." Intimate space elaborated in this way by a poet would be merely
the pendant of the outside space of geometricians, who seek infinite
space with no other sign than infinity itself. But such a conclusion
would fail to recognize the concrete ventures of long daydreaming. Here
every time daydream abandons a too picturesque feature, it gains further
extension of intimate being. Without even having the privilege of
hearing *Tannhäuser,* the reader who reflects on these pages by
Baudelaire, while recalling the successive states of the poet's
daydream, cannot fail to realize that in rejecting metaphors that are
too facile he is marked for an ontology of human depth.

For Baudelaire, man's poetic fate is to be the mirror of immensity; or
even more exactly, immensity becomes conscious of itself, through man.
Man for Baudelaire is a vast being.

 • • • 

Thus, I believe that I have proved in many ways that in Baudelaire's
poetics, the word *vast* does not really belong to the objective world.
I should like to add one more phenomenological nuance, however, which
belongs to the phenomenology of the word.

In my opinion, for Baudelaire, the word *vast* is a vocal value. It is a
word that is *pronounced,* never only read, never only seen in the
objects to which it is attached. It is one of those words that a writer
always speaks softly while he is writing it. Whether in verse or in
prose, it has a poetic effect, which is also an effect of vocal poetry.
This word immediately stands out from the words that surround it, from
the images, and perhaps, even, from the thought. It is a "power of the
word."[]{#calibre_link-471}[[19]{.osf}](#calibre_link-246) Indeed,
whenever we read this word in the measure of one of Baudelaire's verses,
or in the periods of his prose poems, we have the impression that he
forces us to pronounce it. The word *vast,* then, is a vocable of
breath. It is placed on our breathing, which must be slow and
calm.[[]{#calibre_link-472 .pt}]{.osf}[[20]{.osf}](#calibre_link-247)
And the fact is that always, in Baudelaire's poetics, the word *vast*
evokes calm, peace and serenity. It expresses a vital, intimate
conviction. It transmits to our ears the echo of the secret recesses of
our being. For this word bears the mark of gravity, it is the enemy of
turmoil, opposed to the vocal exaggerations of declamation. In diction
enslaved to strict measure, it would be shattered. The word *vast* must
reign over the peaceful silence of being.

If I were a psychiatrist, I should advise my patients who suffer from
"anguish" to read this poem of Baudelaire's whenever an attack seems
imminent. Very gently, they should pronounce Baudelaire's key word,
*vast*. For it is a word that brings calm and unity; it opens up
unlimited space. It also teaches us to breathe with the air that rests
on the horizon, far from the walls of the chimerical prisons that are
the cause of our anguish. It has a vocal excellence that is effective on
the very threshold of our vocal powers. The French baritone, Charles
Panzera, who is sensitive to poetry, once told me that, according to
certain experimental psychologists, it is impossible to think the vowel
sound *ah* without a tautening of the vocal chords. In other words, we
read *ah* and the voice is ready to sing. The letter *a,* which is the
main body of the word *vast,* stands aloof in its delicacy, an
anacoluthon of spoken sensibility.

The numerous commentaries that have been made on Baudelaire's
"correspondences" seem to have forgotten this sixth sense that seeks to
model and modulate the voice. This delicate little Aeolian harp that
nature has set at the entrance to our breathing is really a sixth sense,
which followed and surpassed the others. It quivers at the merest
movement of metaphor; it permits human thought to sing. And when I let
my nonconformist philosopher's daydreams go unchecked, I begin to think
that the vowel *a* is the vowel of immensity. It is a sound area that
starts with a sigh and extends beyond all limits.

In the word *vast,* the vowel *a* retains all the virtues of an
enlarging vocal agent. Considered vocally, therefore, this word is no
longer merely dimensional. Like some soft substance, it receives the
balsamic powers of infinite calm. With it, we take infinity into our
lungs, and through it, we breathe cosmically, far from human anguish.
Some may find these minor considerations. But no factor, however slight,
should be neglected in the estimation of poetic values. And indeed,
everything that contributes to giving poetry its decisive psychic action
should be included in a philosophy of the dynamic imagination.
Sometimes, the most varied, most delicate perceptive values relay one
another, in order to dynamize and expand a poem. Long research devoted
to Baudelaire's correspondences should elucidate the correspondence of
each sense with the spoken word.

At times the sound of a vocable, or the force of a letter, reveals and
defines the real thought attached to a word. In this connection, it is
interesting to recall what Max Picard wrote on the subject, in his
excellent work, *Der Mensch und das Wort: "Das W in Welle bewegt die
Welle im Wort mit, das H in Hauch lässt den Hauch aufsteigen, das t in
fest und hart, macht fest und
hart."[]{#calibre_link-473}*[[21]{.osf}](#calibre_link-248) With these
remarks, the philosopher of the *Welt des Schweigens* brings us to the
points of extreme sensibility at which, language having achieved
complete nobility, phonetic phenomena and phenomena of the logos
harmonize. But we should have to learn how to meditate very slowly, to
experience the inner poetry of the word, the inner immensity of a word.
All important words, all the words marked for grandeur by a poet, are
keys to the universe, to the dual universe of the Cosmos and the depths
of the human spirit.

V

Thus, it seems to me to have been proven that in the work of a great
poet like Baudelaire an intimate call of immensity may be heard, even
more than an echo from the outside world. In the language of philosophy,
we could say, then, that immensity is a "category" of the poetic
imagination, and not merely a generality formulated during contemplation
of grandiose spectacles. By way of contrast, and in order to give an
example of "empirical" immensity, I should like to consider a passage
from Taine's *Voyage aux Pyrénèes* (p.
[96]{.scap1}).[[]{#calibre_link-474
.pt}]{.osf}[[22]{.osf}](#calibre_link-249) Here we shall see bad
literature and not poetry in action, the kind of bad literature that
aims at pictorial expression at all cost, even at the expense of the
fundamental images.

"The first time I saw the sea," writes Taine, "I was most disagreeably
disillusioned . . . I seemed to see one of those long stretches of beet
fields that one sees in the country near Paris, intersected by patches
of green cabbage, and strips of russet barley. The distant sails looked
like homing pigeons and even the outlook seemed narrow to me; painters
had represented the sea as being much larger. It was three days before I
recaptured the feeling of immensity."

Beets, barley, cabbages and pigeons in a perfectly artificial
association! To bring them together in one "image" could only be a slip
in the conversation of someone who is trying to be "original." For it is
hard to believe that in the presence of the sea, anyone could be so
obsessed by beet fields.

A phenomenologist would be interested to know how, after three days of
privation, this philosopher recaptured his "feeling of immensity," and
how, on his return to the sea that had been looked at so naïvely, he
finally saw its grandeur.

After this interlude, let us come back to our poets.

VI

Poets will help us to discover within ourselves such joy in looking that
sometimes, in the presence of a perfectly familiar object, we experience
an extension of our intimate space. Let us listen to Rilke, for
instance, give its existence of immensity to a tree he is looking
at.[[]{#calibre_link-475
.pt}]{.osf}[[23]{.osf}](#calibre_link-250)[]{.osf}

*L'espace, hors de nous, gagne et traduit les choses:*

*Si tu veux réussir l'existence d'un arbre,*

*Investis-le d'espace interne, cet espace*

*Qui a son être en toi. Cerne-le de contraintes.*

*Il est sans borne, et ne devient vraiment un arbre*

*Que s'il s'ordonne au sein de ton renoncement.*

(Space, outside ourselves, invades and ravishes things:

If you want to achieve the existence of a tree,

Invest it with inner space, this space

That has its being in you. Surround it with compulsions,

It knows no bounds, and only really becomes a tree

If it takes its place in the heart of your renunciation.)

In the two last lines, a Mallarmé-like obscurity forces the reader to
stop and reflect. The poet has set him a nice problem for the
imagination. The advice to "surround the tree with compulsions" would
first be an obligation to draw it, to invest it with limitations in
*outside* space. In this case, we should obey the simple rules of
perception, we should be "objective," cease imagining. But the tree,
like every genuine living thing, is taken in its being that "knows no
bounds." Its limits are mere accidents. Against the accident of limits,
the tree needs you to give it your superabundant images, nurtured in
your intimate space, in "this space that has its being in you." Then,
together, the tree and its dreamer take their places, grow tall. Never,
in the dream world, does a tree appear as a completed being. According
to a poem by Jules Supervielle, it seeks its
soul:[]{#calibre_link-476}[[24]{.osf}](#calibre_link-251)[]{.osf}

*Azur vivace d'un espace*

*Où chaque arbre se hausse au dénouement des palmes*

*A la recherche de son âme*.

(Vivid blue of a space

In which each tree rises to foliation of palms

In search of its soul.)

But when a poet knows that a living thing in the world is in search of
its soul, this means that he is in search of his own. "A tall shuddering
tree always moves the
soul."[]{#calibre_link-477}[[25]{.osf}](#calibre_link-252)[]{.osf}

Restored to the powers of the imagination, and invested with our inner
space, trees accompany us in an emulation of grandeur. In another poem
dated August [1914]{.scap1} (*loc. cit*., p. [11]{.scap1}) Rilke wrote:

. . . *A travers nous s'envolent*

*Les oiseaux en silence. O, moi qui veux grandir*

*Je regarde au dehors, et l'arbre en moi grandit.*

(. . . Silently the birds

Fly through us. O, I, who long to grow,

I look outside myself, and the tree inside me grows.)

Thus a tree is always destined for grandeur, and, in fact, it propagates
this destiny by magnifying everything that surrounds it. In a letter
reproduced in Claire Goll's very human little book, *Rilke et les
femmes* (p. [63]{.scap1}), Rilke wrote: "These trees are magnificent,
but even more magnificent is the sublime and moving space between them,
as though with their growth it too increased."

The two kinds of space, intimate space and exterior space, keep
encouraging each other, as it were, in their growth. To designate space
that has been experienced as affective space, which psychologists do
very rightly, does not, however, go to the root of space dreams. The
poet goes deeper when he uncovers a poetic space that does not enclose
us in affectivity. Indeed, whatever the affectivity that colors a given
space, whether sad or ponderous, once it is poetically expressed, the
sadness is diminished, the ponderousness lightened. Poetic space,
because it is expressed, assumes values of expansion. It belongs to the
phenomenology of those words that begin with "ex." At least, this is the
thesis that I shall insist upon, and to which I plan to return in a
future volume. Just in passing, here is a proof: When a poet tells me
that he "knows a type of sadness that smells of
pineapple,"[]{#calibre_link-478}[[26]{.osf}](#calibre_link-253) I myself
feel less sad, I feel gently sad.

In this activity of poetic spatiality that goes from deep intimacy to
infinite extent, united in an identical expansion, one feels grandeur
welling up. As Rilke said: "Through every human being, unique space,
intimate space, opens up to the world . . ."

Here space seems to the poet to be the subject of the verbs "to open
up," or "to grow." And whenever space is a value---there is no greater
value than intimacy---it has magnifying properties. Valorized space is a
verb, and never, either inside or outside us, is grandeur an "object."

To give an object poetic space is to give it more space than it has
objectivity; or, better still, it is following the expansion of its
intimate space. For the sake of homogeneity, I shall recall how Joë
Bousquet expressed the intimate space of a
tree:[]{#calibre_link-479}[[27]{.osf}](#calibre_link-254) "Space is
nowhere. Space is inside it like honey in a hive." In the realm of
images, honey in a hive does not conform to the elementary dialectics of
contained and container. Metaphorical honey will not be shut up, and
here, in the intimate space of a tree, honey is anything but a form of
marrow. It is the "honey of the tree" that will give perfume to the
flower. It is also the inner sun of the tree. And the dreamer who dreams
of honey knows that it is a force that concentrates and radiates, by
turns. If the interior space of a tree is a form of honey, it gives the
tree "expansion of infinite things."

Of course, we can read this line of Joë Bousquet's without tarrying over
the image. But if one likes to go to the ultimate depths of an image,
what dreams it can set astir! Even a philosopher of space starts to
dream. And if we like words of composed metaphysics, one might say that
here Joë Bousquet has shown us a space-substance, honey-space or
space-honey. May all matter be given its individual place, all
sub-stances their ex-stance. And may all matter achieve conquest of its
space, its power of expansion over and beyond the surfaces by means of
which a geometrician would like to define it.

It would seem, then, that it is through their "immensity" that these two
kinds of space---the space of intimacy and world space---blend. When
human solitude deepens, then the two immensities touch and become
identical. In one of Rilke's letters, we see him straining toward "the
unlimited solitude that makes a lifetime of each day, toward communion
with the universe, in a word, space, the invisible space that man can
live in nevertheless, and which surrounds him with countless presences."

This coexistence of things in a space to which we add consciousness of
our own existence is a very concrete thing. Leibnitz's theme of space as
a place inhabited by coexistants has found its poet in Rilke. In this
coexistentialism every object invested with intimate space becomes the
center of all space. For each object, distance is the present, the
horizon exists as much as the center.

VII

In the realm of images, there can be no contradiction, and two spirits
that are identically sensitive can sensitize the dialectics of center
and horizon in different ways. In this connection a sort of *plains
test* could be used that would bring out different types of reactions to
infinity.

At one end of the test, we should set what Rilke said briefly and
superbly: "The plain is the sentiment that exalts us." This theorem of
esthetic anthropology is so clearly stated that it suggests a
correlative theorem which could be expressed in the following terms: any
sentiment that exalts us makes our situation in the world smoother.

Then, at the other end of the "plains" test, we could set this passage
from Henri Bosco's *Hyacinthe* (p. [18]{.scap1}). "On the plains I am
always elsewhere, in an elsewhere that is floating, fluid. Being for a
long time absent from myself, and nowhere present, I am too inclined to
attribute the inconsistency of my daydreams to the wide open spaces that
induce them."

Many a nuance could be found between these two poles of domination and
dispersion if the dreamer's mood, the seasons and the wind were taken
into consideration. There would always be nuances, too, between dreamers
who are calmed by plain country and those who are made uneasy by it,
nuances that are all the more interesting to study since the plains are
often thought of as representing a simplified world. One of the charms
of the phenomenology of the poetic imagination is to be able to
experience a fresh nuance in the presence of a spectacle that calls for
uniformity, and can be summarized in a single idea. If the nuance is
sincerely experienced by the poet, the phenomenologist is sure to obtain
an image at its inception.

In a more elaborate inquiry than ours, one would have to show how all
these nuances are integrated in the grandeur of the plain or the
plateau, and tell, for instance, why a plateau daydream is never a
daydream of the plains. This analysis is difficult because sometimes, a
writer wants to describe, sometimes he knows already, in square miles,
the extent of his solitude. In this case, we dream over a map, like a
geographer. There is the example of Loti writing in the shade of a tree
in Dakar, which was his home port: "Our eyes turned toward the interior
of the country, we questioned the immense horizon of
sand."[]{#calibre_link-480}[[28]{.osf}](#calibre_link-255) But this
immense horizon of sand is a schoolboy's desert, the Sahara to be found
in every school atlas.

The images of the desert in Philippe Diolé's excellent book, *Le plus
beau désert du
monde*\![]{#calibre_link-481}[[29]{.osf}](#calibre_link-256) are much
more valuable to a phenomenologist. For here the immensity of a desert
that has been experienced is expressed through inner intensity. As
Philippe Diolé says---and he is a dream-haunted traveler---the desert
must be lived "the way it is reflected in the wanderer." And Diolé
invites us to a type of meditation in which, through a synthesis of
opposites, we can experience *concentration of wandering*. For this
writer, "these mountains in shreds, these dunes and dead rivers, these
stones and this merciless sun," all the universe that bears the mark of
the desert is "annexed to inner space." And through this annexation, the
diversity of the images is unified in the depths of "inner
space."[]{#calibre_link-482}[[30]{.osf}](#calibre_link-257) This is a
conclusive formula for the demonstration I want to make on the
correspondence between the immensity of world space and the depth of
"inner space."

In Diolé's work, however, this interiorization of the desert does not
correspond to a sense of inner emptiness. On the contrary, Diolé makes
us experience a drama of images, the fundamental drama of the material
images of water and drought. In fact, his "inner space" is an adherence
to an inner substance. As it happens, he has had long, delightful
experience of deep-sea diving and, for him, the ocean has become a form
of "space." At a little over [125]{.scap1} feet under the surface of the
water, he discovered "absolute depth," depth that is beyond measuring,
and would give no greater powers of dream and thought if it were doubled
or even tripled. By means, then, of his diving experiences Diolé *really
entered into the volume of the water*. And when we have read his earlier
books and shared with him this conquest of the intimacy of water, we
come to a point where we recognize in this space-substance, a
one-dimensional space. One substance, one dimension. And we are so
remote from the earth and life on earth, that this dimension of water
bears the mark of limitlessness. To try and find high, low, right or
left in a world that is so well unified by its substance is thinking,
not living---thinking as formerly we did in life on earth; but it is not
living in the new world conquered by diving. As for myself, before I
read Diolé's books, I did not imagine that limitlessness could be
attained so easily. It suffices to dream of pure depth, which needs no
measuring, to exist.

But then, we ask, why did Diolé, who is a psychologist as well as an
ontologist of under-seas human life, go into the desert? As a result of
what cruel dialectics did he decide to leave limitless water for
infinite sand? Diolé answers these questions as a poet would. He knows
that each new contact with the cosmos renews our inner being, and that
every new cosmos is open to us when we have freed ourselves from the
ties of a former sensitivity. At the beginning of his book (*loc. cit.,*
p. [12]{.scap1}), Diolé tells us that he had wanted to "terminate in the
desert the magical operation that, in deep water, allows the diver to
loosen the ordinary ties of time and space and make life resemble an
obscure, inner poem."

At the end of his book, Diolé concludes (p. [178]{.scap1}) that "to go
down into the water, or to wander in the desert, is to change space,"
and by changing space, by leaving the space of one's usual
sensibilities, one enters into communication with a space that is
psychically innovating. "Neither in the desert nor on the bottom of the
sea does one's spirit remain sealed and indivisible." This change of
*concrete* space can no longer be a mere mental operation that could be
compared with consciousness of geometrical relativity. For we do not
change place, we change our nature.

But since these problems of the fusion of being in highly qualitative,
concrete space are interesting for a phenomenology of the
imagination---for one has to imagine very actively to experience new
space---let us examine the hold that fundamental images have on this
author. While in the desert, Diolé does not detach himself from the
ocean and, in fact, desert space, far from contradicting deep-sea space,
is expressed in Diolé's dreams in terms of water. Here we have a
veritable drama of the material imagination born of the conflict of two
such hostile elements as arid desert sand and water assured of its mass,
without any compromise with pastiness or mud. Indeed, this passage of
Diolé's shows such sincerity of imagination that I have left it uncut
(*loc. cit.,* p. [118]{.scap1}).

"I once wrote that a man who was familiar with the deep sea could never
be like other men again. Such moments as this (in the midst of the
desert) prove my statement. Because I realize that, as I walked along,
my mind filled the desert landscape with water! In my imagination I
flooded the space around me while walking through it. I lived in a sort
of invented immersion in which I moved about in the heart of fluid,
luminous, beneficent, dense matter, which was sea water, or rather the
memory of sea water. This artifice sufficed to humanize for me a world
that was dishearteningly dry, reconciling me with its rocks, its
silence, its solitude, its sheet of sun gold hanging from the sky. Even
my weariness was lessened by it. I dreamed that my bodily weight reposed
on this imaginary water.

"I realize that this is not the first time that unconsciously, I have
had recourse to this psychological defense. The silence and the slow
progress I made in the Sahara awakened my memories of diving. My inner
images were bathed then in a sort of gentleness, and in the passage thus
reflected by dream, water appeared quite naturally. As I walked along, I
bore within me gleaming reflections, and a translucent density, which
were none other than memories of the deep sea."

Here Philippe Diolé gives us a psychological technique which permits us
to be elsewhere, in an absolute elsewhere that bars the way to the
forces that hold us imprisoned in the "here." This is not merely an
escape into a space that is open to adventure on every side. With none
of the machinery of screens and mirrors installed in the box that
carried Cyrano to the Sun Empires, Diolé transports us to the elsewhere
of another world. He does this, one might say, merely by means of a
psychological machinery that brings into play the surest, the most
powerful psychological laws. In fact, his only resources are the great,
lasting realities that correspond to fundamental, material images; those
that are at the basis of all imagination. Nothing, in other words, that
is either chimerical or illusory.

Here both time and space are under the domination of the image.
Elsewhere and formerly are stronger than the *hic et nunc*. The
*being-here* is maintained by a being from elsewhere. Space, vast space,
is the friend of being.

How much philosophers would learn, if they would consent to read the
poets!

VIII

Since I have just taken two heroic images for discussion, the diving
image and the image of the desert, both of which I can only experience
in imagination, without ever being able to enrich them with any concrete
experience, I shall close this chapter with an image that is nearer to
me, one that I shall provide with all my memories of the plain. We shall
see how a very special image can command and impose its law on space.

Faced with a quiet world, on a soothing plain, mankind can enjoy peace
and repose. But in an imagined world, the sights of the plain often
produce only the most commonplace effects. To restore their action to
these sights, it is therefore necessary to supply a new image. An
unexpected literary image can so move the spirit that it will follow the
induction of tranquility. In fact, the literary image can make the
spirit sufficiently sensitive to receive unbelievably fine impressions.
Thus, in a remarkable passage,
d'Annunzio[]{#calibre_link-483}[[31]{.osf}](#calibre_link-258) makes us
see the look in the eyes of a trembling hare which, in one torment-free
instant, projects peace over the entire autumnal world. He writes: "Did
you ever see a hare in the morning, leave the freshly ploughed furrows,
run a few seconds over the silvery frost, then stop in the silence, sit
down on its hind legs, prick up its ears and look at the horizon? Its
gaze seems to confer peace upon the entire universe. And it would be
hard to think of a surer sign of deep peace than this motionless hare
which, having declared a truce with its eternal disquiet, sits observing
the steaming countryside. At this moment, it is a sacred animal, one
that should be worshipped." The source of the calm that is going to
cover the plain is clearly indicated: "Its gaze seems to confer peace
upon the entire universe." The dreamer who lets his musings follow this
line of vision will experience immensity of outspread fields in a higher
key.

Such a passage in itself is a good test of rhetorical sensitivity. It
faces the critical slaughter of apoetic minds with lamb-like calm. It is
also very typical of d'Annunzio, and can be used as an example of this
writer's cumbersome metaphors. It would be so simple, positivist minds
object, to describe pastoral peace *directly!* Why choose a
contemplative hare as go-between? But a poet disregards this reasoning.
He wants to give all the degrees of growing contemplation, all the
instants of the image, and to begin with, the instant when animal peace
becomes identified with world peace. Here we are made aware of the
function of a seeing eye that, having nothing to do, has ceased to look
at anything in particular, and is looking *at the world*. We should not
have been so radically thrown back into primitiveness if the poet had
told us something of his own contemplation. This, however, would be
merely repetition of a philosophical theme. But d'Annunzio's animal is
freed from its reflexes for an instant: its eye is no longer on the
look-out, no longer a rivet of the animal machine; its eye does not
command flight. Yes, this look, in an animal that is all fear, is the
sacred instant of contemplation.

A few lines earlier, pursuing an inversion that expresses the dualism of
observer---observed, this poet had seen in the hare's fine, large,
tranquil eyes the aquatic nature of the gaze of a vegetarian animal:
"These large, moist eyes . . . are as beautiful as ponds on summer
evenings, with their rushes bathing in water that mirrors and
transfigures the entire sky." In my book entitled *L'eau et les rêves*,
I collected many other literary images in which the pond is the very eye
of the landscape, the reflection in water the first view that the
universe has of itself, and the heightened beauty of a reflected
landscape presented as the very root of cosmic narcissism. In *Walden*,
Thoreau followed this enlargement of images quite naturally. "A lake is
the landscape's most beautiful and expressive feature. It is earth's
eye; looking into which the beholder measures the depth of his own
nature."[]{#calibre_link-484}[[32]{.osf}](#calibre_link-259)[]{.osf}

And, once more, the dialectics of immensity and depth is revived. It is
hard to say where the two hyperboles begin; the one of the too sharp
eye, and the other of the landscape that sees itself confusedly under
the heavy lids of its stagnant water. But any doctrine of the imaginary
is necessarily a philosophy of excess, and all images are destined to be
enlarged.

A contemporary poet uses more restraint, but he says quite as much as in
this line by Jean Lescure:

*J'habite la tranquillité des feuilles, l'été grandit*

(I live in the tranquility of leaves, summer is growing.)

Tranquil foliage that really is lived in, a tranquil gaze discovered in
the humblest of eyes, are the artisans of immensity. These images make
the world grow, and the summer too. At certain hours poetry gives out
waves of calm. From being imagined, calm becomes an emergence of being.
It is like a value that dominates, in spite of minor states of being, in
spite of a disturbed world. Immensity has been magnified through
contemplation. And the contemplative attitude is such a great human
value that it confers immensity upon an impression that a psychologist
would have every reason to declare ephemeral and special. But poems are
human realities; it is not enough to resort to "impressions" in order to
explain them. They must be lived in their poetic immensity.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-17 .calibre}
::: basic-text-frame
# [9]{.osf1} {#calibre_link-532 .chaptnum}

# THE DIALECTICS OF OUTSIDE AND INSIDE {#calibre_link-533 .chapttitle}

*Les geographies solennelles des limites humaines . . .*

[PAUL ELUARD, ]{.scap1}*Les yeux fertiles*[, ]{.scap1}p[.
]{.scap1}[42]{.scap1}[]{.scap1}

(The solemn geographies of human limits)

*Car nous sommes où nous ne sommes pas.*

[PIERRE-JEAN JOUVE, ]{.scap1} *Lyrique*[, ]{.scap1}p.
[59]{.scap1}[]{.scap1}

(For we are where we are not.)

*Une des maximes d'éducation pratique qui ont régi mon enfance: "Ne
mange pas la bouche ouverte."*

[COLETTE, ]{.scap1}*Prisons et paradis*[, ]{.scap1}p.
[79]{.scap1}[]{.scap1}

(One of the maxims of practical education that governed my childhood:
"Don't eat with your mouth open.")

I

Outside and inside form a dialectic of division, the obvious geometry of
which blinds us as soon as we bring it into play in metaphorical
domains. It has the sharpness of the dialectics of *yes* and *no*, which
decides everything. Unless one is careful, it is made into a basis of
images that govern all thoughts of positive and negative. Logicians draw
circles that overlap or exclude each other, and all their rules
immediately become clear. Philosophers, when confronted with outside and
inside, think in terms of being and non-being. Thus profound metaphysics
is rooted in an implicit geometry which---whether we will or
no---confers spatiality upon thought; if a metaphysician could not draw,
what would he think? Open and closed, for him, are thoughts. They are
metaphors that he attaches to everything, even to his systems. In a
lecture given by Jean Hyppolite on the subtle structure of denegation
(which is quite different from the simple structure of negation)
Hyppolite spoke[]{#calibre_link-485}[[1]{.osf}](#calibre_link-260) of "a
first myth of outside and inside." And he added: "You feel the full
significance of this myth of outside and inside in alienation, which is
founded on these two terms. Beyond what is expressed in their formal
opposition lie alienation and hostility between the two." And so, simple
geometrical opposition becomes tinged with aggressivity. Formal
opposition is incapable of remaining calm. It is obsessed by the myth.
But this action of the myth throughout the immense domain of imagination
and expression should not be studied by attributing to it the false
light of geometrical intuitions.[[]{#calibre_link-486
.pt}]{.osf}[[2]{.osf}](#calibre_link-261)[]{.osf}

"This side" and "beyond" are faint repetitions of the dialectics of
inside and outside: everything takes form, even infinity. We seek to
determine being and, in so doing, transcend all situations, to give a
situation of all situations. Man's being is confronted with the world's
being, as though primitivity could be easily arrived at. The dialectics
of *here* and *there* has been promoted to the rank of an absolutism
according to which these unfortunate adverbs of place are endowed with
unsupervised powers of ontological determination. Many metaphysical
systems would need mapping. But in philosophy, all short-cuts are
costly, and philosophical knowledge cannot advance from schematized
experiments.

II

I should like to examine a little more closely this geometrical
cancerization of the linguistic tissue of contemporary philosophy.

For it does indeed seem as though an artificial syntax welded adverbs
and verbs together in such a way as to form excrescences. By multiplying
hyphens, this syntax obtains words that are sentences in themselves, in
which the outside features blend with the inside. Philosophical language
is becoming a language of agglutination.

Sometimes, on the contrary, instead of becoming welded together, words
loosen their intimate ties. Prefixes and suffixes---especially
prefixes---become unwelded: they want to think for themselves. Because
of this, words are occasionally thrown out of balance. Where is the main
stress, for instance, in *being-there* (*être-là*): on *being,* or on
*there?* In *there*---which it would be better to call *here*---shall I
first look for my being? Or am I going to find, in my being, above all,
certainty of my fixation in a *there?* In any case, one of these terms
always weakens the other. Often the *there* is spoken so forcefully that
the ontological aspects of the problems under consideration are sharply
summarized in a geometrical fixation. The result is dogmatization of
philosophemes as soon as they are expressed. In the tonal quality of the
French language, the *là* (there) is so forceful, that to designate
being (*l'être*) by *être-là* is to point an energetic forefinger that
might easily relegate intimate being to an exteriorized place.

But why be in such a hurry to make these first designations? One has the
impression that metaphysicians have stopped taking time to think. To
make a study of being, in my opinion, it is preferable to follow all the
ontological deviations of the various experiences of being. For, in
reality, the experiences of being that might justify "geometrical"
expression are among the most indigent . . . In French, one should think
twice before speaking of *l'être-là*. Entrapped in being, we shall
always have to come out of it. And when we are hardly outside of being,
we always have to go back into it. Thus, in being, everything is
circuitous, roundabout, recurrent, so much talk; a chaplet of
sojournings, a refrain with endless verses.

But what a spiral man's being
represents\![]{#calibre_link-487}[[3]{.osf}](#calibre_link-262) And what
a number of invertible dynamisms there are in this spiral! One no longer
knows *right away* whether one is running toward the center or escaping.
Poets are well acquainted with the existence of this hesitation of
being, as exemplified in this poem by Jean Tardieu:

*Pour avancer je tourne sur moi-même*

*Cyclone par l'immobile habité.*

[JEAN TARDIEU]{.scap1},

*Les témoins invisibles, p. 36*

(In order to advance, I walk the treadmill of myself

Cyclone inhabited by immobility.)

*Mais au-dedans, plus de frontières!*

(But within, no more boundaries!)

Thus, the spiraled being who, from outside, appears to be a
well-invested center, will never reach his center. The being of man is
an unsettled being which all expression unsettles. In the reign of the
imagination, an expression is hardly *proposed,* before being needs
another expression, before it must be the being of another expression.

In my opinion, verbal conglomerates should be avoided. There is no
advantage to metaphysics for its thinking to be cast in the molds of
linguistic fossils. On the contrary, it should benefit by the extreme
mobility of modern languages and, at the same time, remain in the
homogeneity of a mother tongue; which is what real poets have always
done.

To benefit by all the lessons of modern psychology and all that has been
learned about man's being through psychoanalysis, metaphysics should
therefore be resolutely discursive. It should beware of the privileges
of evidence that are the property of geometrical intuition. Sight says
too many things at one time. Being does not see itself. Perhaps it
listens to itself. It does not stand out, it is not *bordered* by
nothingness: one is never sure of finding it, or of finding it solid,
when one approaches a center of being. And if we want to determine man's
being, we are never sure of being closer to ourselves if we "withdraw"
into ourselves, if we move toward the center of the spiral; for often it
is in the heart of being that being is errancy. Sometimes, it is in
being outside itself that being tests consistencies. Sometimes, too, it
is closed in, as it were, on the outside. Later, I shall give a poetic
text in which the prison is on the outside.

If we multiplied images, taking them in the domains of lights and
sounds, of heat and cold, we should prepare a slower ontology, but
doubtless one that is more certain than the ontology that reposes upon
geometrical images.

I have wanted to make these general remarks because, from the point of
view of geometrical expressions, the dialectics of outside and inside is
supported by a reinforced geometrism, in which limits are barriers. We
must be free as regards all *definitive* intuitions---and geometrism
records definitive intuitions---if we are to follow the daring of poets
(as we shall do later) who invite us to the finesses of experience of
intimacy, to "escapades" of imagination.

First of all, it must be noted that the two terms "outside" and "inside"
pose problems of metaphysical anthropology that are not symmetrical. To
make inside concrete and outside vast is the first task, the first
problem, it would seem, of an anthropology of the imagination. But
between concrete and vast, the opposition is not a true one. At the
slightest touch, asymmetry appears. And it is always like that: inside
and outside do not receive in the same way the qualifying epithets that
are the measure of our adherence. Nor can one *live* the qualifying
epithets attached to inside and outside in the same way. Everything,
even size, is a human value, and we have already shown, in a preceding
chapter, that miniature can accumulate size. It is *vast* in its way.

In any case, inside and outside, as experienced by the imagination, can
no longer be taken in their simple reciprocity; consequently, by
omitting geometrical references when we speak of the first expressions
of being, by choosing more concrete, more phenomenologically exact
inceptions, we shall come to realize that the dialectics of inside and
outside multiply with countless diversified nuances.

Pursuing my usual method, I should like to discuss my thesis on the
basis of an example of concrete poetics, for which I shall ask a poet to
provide an image that is sufficiently new in its *nuance of being* to
furnish a lesson in ontological amplification. Through the newness of
the image and through its amplification, we shall be sure to reverberate
above, or on the margin of reasonable certainties.

III

In a prose poem entitled *L'espace aux ombres* Henri Michaux
writes:[]{#calibre_link-488}[[4]{.osf}](#calibre_link-263)[]{.osf}

*L'espace, mais vous ne pouvez concevoir, cet horrible en dedansen
dehors qu'est le vrai espace*.

*Certaines (ombres) surtout se bandant une dernière fois, font un effort
désespéré pour "être dans leur seule unité." Mal leur en prend. J'en
rencontrai une*.

*Détruite par châtiment, elle n'était plus qu'un bruit, mais énorme*.

*Un monde immense l'entendait encore, mais elle n'était plus, devenue
seulement et uniquement un bruit, qui allait rouler encore des siècles
mais destiné à s'éteindre complètement, comme si elle n'avait jamais
été.*

S[HADE-]{.scap1}H[AUNTED ]{.scap1}S[PACE]{.scap1}

(Space, but you cannot even conceive the horrible inside-outside that
real space is.

Certain (shades) especially, girding their loins one last time, make a
desperate effort to "exist as a single unity." But they rue the day. I
met one of them.

Destroyed by punishment, it was reduced to a noise, a thunderous noise.

An immense world still heard it, but it no longer existed, having become
simply and solely a noise, which was to rumble on for centuries longer,
but was fated to die out *completely,* as though it had never existed.)

If we examine closely the lesson in philosophy the poet gives us, we
shall find in this passage a spirit that has lost its "being-there"
(*être-là*), one that has so declined as to fall from *the being of its
shade* and mingle with the rumors of being, in the form of meaningless
noise, of a confused hum that *cannot be located*. It once was. But
wasn't it merely the noise that it has become? Isn't its punishment the
fact of having become the mere echo of the meaningless, useless noise it
once was? Wasn't it formerly what it is now: a sonorous echo from the
vaults of hell? It is condemned to repeat the word of its evil
intention, a word which, being imprinted in being, has overthrown
being.[[]{#calibre_link-489 .pt}]{.osf}[[5]{.osf}](#calibre_link-264)
And we are in hell, and a part of us is always in hell, walled-up, as we
are, in the world of evil intentions. Through what naïve intuition do we
locate evil, which is boundless, in a hell? This spirit, this shade,
this noise of a shade which, the poet tells us, desires its unity, may
be heard on the outside without it being possible to be sure that it is
inside. In this "horrible inside-outside" of unuttered words and
unfulfilled intentions, within itself, being is slowly digesting its
nothingness. The process of its reduction to nothing will last "for
centuries." The hum of the being of rumors continues both in time and in
space. In vain the spirit gathers its remaining strength. It has become
the backwash of expiring being. Being is alternately condensation that
disperses with a burst, and dispersion that flows back to a center.
Outside and inside are both intimate---they are always ready to be
reversed, to exchange their hostility. If there exists a border-line
surface between such an inside and outside, this surface is painful on
both sides. When we experience this passage by Henri Michaux, we absorb
a mixture of being and nothingness. The center of "being-there" wavers
and trembles. Intimate space loses its clarity, while exterior space
loses its void, void being the raw material of possibility of being. We
are banished from the realm of possibility.

In this drama of intimate geometry, where should one live? The
philosopher's advice to withdraw into oneself in order to take one's
place in existence loses its value, and even its significance, when the
supplest image of "being-there" has just been experienced through the
ontological nightmare of this poet. Let us observe, however, that this
nightmare is not visually frightening. The fear does not come from the
outside. Nor is it composed of old memories. It has no past, no
physiology. Nothing in common, either, with having one's breath taken
away. Here fear is being itself. Where can one flee, where find refuge?
In what shelter can one take refuge? Space is nothing but a "horrible
outside-inside."

And the nightmare is simple, because it is radical. It would be
intellectualizing the experience if we were to say that the nightmare is
the result of a sudden doubt as to the certainty of inside and the
distinctness of outside. What Michaux gives us as an *a priori* of being
is the entire space-time of ambiguous being. In this ambiguous space,
the mind has lost its geometrical homeland and the spirit is drifting.

Undoubtedly, we do not have to pass through the narrow gate of such a
poem. The philosophies of anguish want principles that are less
simplified. They do not turn their attention to the activity of an
ephemeral imagination, for the reason that they inscribed anguish in the
heart of being long before images had given it reality. Philosophers
treat themselves to anguish, and all they see in the images are
manifestations of its causality. They are not at all concerned with
living the being of the image. Phenomenology of the imagination must
assume the task of seizing this ephemeral being. In fact, phenomenology
can learn from the very brevity of the image. What strikes us here is
that the metaphysical aspect originates on the very level of the image,
on the level of an image which disturbs the notions of a spatiality
commonly considered to be able to reduce these disturbances and restore
the mind to a statute of indifference to space that does not have to
localize dramatic events.

Personally, I welcome this poet's image as a little piece of
experimental folly, like a virtual grain of hashish without which it is
impossible to enter into the reign of the imagination. And how should
one receive an exaggerated image, if not by exaggerating it a little
more, by personalizing the exaggeration? The phenomenological gain
appears right away: in prolonging *exaggeration,* we may have the good
fortune to avoid the habits of *reduction*. With space images, we are in
a region where reduction is easy, commonplace. There will always be
someone who will do away with all complications and oblige us to leave
as soon as there is mention of space---whether figurative or not---or of
the opposition of outside and inside. But if reduction is easy,
exaggeration is all the more interesting, from the standpoint of
phenomenology. This problem is very favorable, it seems to me, for
marking the opposition between reflexive reduction and pure imagination.
However, the direction of psychoanalytical interpretation---which is
more liberal than classical literary criticism---follows the diagram of
reduction. Only phenomenology makes it a principle to examine and test
the psychological being of an image, before any reduction is undertaken.
The dialectics of the dynamisms of reduction and exaggeration can throw
light on the dialectics of psychoanalysis and phenomenology. It is, of
course, phenomenology which gives us the psychic positivity of the
image. Let us therefore transform our amazement into admiration. We can
even begin by admiring. Then, later, we shall see whether or not it will
be necessary to organize our disappointment through criticism and
reduction. To benefit from this active, immediate admiration, one has
only to follow the positive impulse of exaggeration. Here I read
Michaux's poem over and over, and I accept it as a phobia of inner
space, as though hostile remoteness had already become oppressive in the
tiny cell represented by inner space. With this poem, Henri Michaux has
juxtaposed in us claustrophobia and agoraphobia; he has aggravated the
line of demarcation between outside and inside. But in doing so, from
the psychological standpoint, he has demolished the lazy certainties of
the geometrical intuitions by means of which psychologists sought to
govern the space of intimacy. Even figuratively, nothing that concerns
intimacy can be shut in, nor is it possible to fit into one another, for
purposes of designating depth, impressions that continue to *surge up*.
A fine example of phenomenological notation may be seen in the following
simple line by a symbolist poet: "The pansy took on new life when it
became a
corolla . . ."[]{#calibre_link-490}[[6]{.osf}](#calibre_link-265)[]{.osf}

A philosopher of the imagination, therefore, should follow the poet to
the ultimate extremity of his images, without ever reducing this
extremism, which is the specific phenomenon of the poetic impulse. In a
letter to Clara Rilke, Rilke wrote: "Works of art always spring from
those who have faced the danger, gone to the very end of an experience,
to the point beyond which no human being can go. The further one dares
to go, the more decent, the more personal, the more unique a life
becomes."[]{#calibre_link-491}[[7]{.osf}](#calibre_link-266) But is it
necessary to go and look for "danger" other than the danger of writing,
of expressing oneself? Doesn't the poet put language in danger? Doesn't
he utter words that are dangerous? Hasn't the fact that, for so long,
poetry has been the echo of heartache, given it a pure dramatic
tonality? When we really live a poetic image, we learn to know, in one
of its tiny fibers, a becoming of being that is an awareness of the
*being's inner disturbance*. Here being is so sensitive that it is upset
by a word. In the same letter, Rilke adds: "This sort of derangement,
which is peculiar to us, must go into our work."

Exaggeration of images is in fact so *natural* that however original a
poet may be, one often finds the same impulse in another poet. Certain
images used by Jules Supervielle, for instance, may be compared with the
Michaux image we have just been studying. Supervielle also juxtaposes
claustrophobia and agoraphobia when he writes: "*Trop d'espace nous
etouffe beaucoup plus que s'il n'y en avait pas
assez.*"[]{#calibre_link-492}[[8]{.osf}](#calibre_link-267) (Too much
space smothers us much more than if there were not enough.)

Supervielle is also familiar with "exterior dizziness" (*loc. cit.,* p.
[21]{.scap1}). And elsewhere he speaks of "interior immensity." Thus the
two spaces of inside and outside exchange their dizziness.

In another text by Supervielle, which Christian Sénéchal points out in
his book on Supervielle, *the prison is outside*. After endless rides on
the South American pampas, Supervielle wrote: "Precisely because of too
much riding and too much freedom, and of the unchanging horizon, in
spite of our desperate gallopings, the pampa assumed the aspect of a
prison for me, a prison that was bigger than the others."

IV

If, through poetry, we restore to the activity of language its free
field of expression, we are obliged to supervise the use of fossilized
metaphors. For instance, when open and closed are to play a metaphorical
rôle, shall we harden or soften the metaphor? Shall we repeat with the
logicians that a door must be open or closed? And shall we find in this
maxim an instrument that is really effective for analyzing human
passions? In any case, such tools for analysis should be sharpened each
time they are used. Each metaphor must be restored to its surface
nature; it must be brought up out of habit of expression to actuality of
expression. For it is dangerous, in expressing oneself, to be "all
roots."

The phenomenology of the poetic imagination allows us to explore the
being of man considered as the being of a *surface,* of the surface that
separates the region of the same from the region of the other. It should
not be forgotten that in this zone of sensitized surface, before being,
one must speak, if not to others, at least to oneself. And advance
always. In this orientation, the universe of speech governs all the
phenomena of being, that is, the new phenomena. By means of poetic
language, waves of newness flow over the surface of being. And language
bears within itself the dialectics of open and closed. Through *meaning*
it encloses, while through poetic expression, it opens up.

It would be contrary to the nature of my inquiries to summarize them by
means of radical formulas, by defining the being of man, for instance,
as the being of an ambiguity. I only know how to work with a philosophy
of detail. Then, on the surface of being, in that region where being
*wants* to be both visible and hidden, the movements of opening and
closing are so numerous, so frequently inverted, and so charged with
hesitation, that we could conclude on the following formula: man is
half-open being.

V

But how many daydreams we should have to analyze under the simple
heading of Doors! For the door is an entire cosmos of the Half-open. In
fact, it is one of its primal images, the very origin of a daydream that
accumulates desires and temptations: the temptation to open up the
ultimate depths of being, and the desire to conquer all reticent beings.
The door schematizes two strong possibilities, which sharply classify
two types of daydream. At times, it is closed, bolted, padlocked. At
others, it is open, that is to say, wide open.

But then come the hours of greater imagining sensibility. On May nights,
when so many doors are closed, there is one that is just barely ajar. We
have only to give it a very slight push! The hinges have been well
oiled. And our fate becomes visible.

And how many doors were doors of hesitation! In *La romance du retour,*
by Jean Pellerin, this tender, delicate poet
wrote:[]{#calibre_link-493}[[9]{.osf}](#calibre_link-268)[]{.osf}

*La porte me flaire, elle hésite.*

(The door scents me, it hesitates.)

In this verse, so much psychism is transferred to the object that a
reader who attaches importance to objectivity will see in it mere
brain-play. If such a document had its source in some remote mythology,
we should find it more readily acceptable. But why not take the poet's
verse as a small element of spontaneous mythology? Why not sense that,
incarnated in the door, there is a little threshold god? And there is no
need to return to a distant past, a past that is no longer our own, to
find sacred properties attributed to the threshold. In the third
century, Porphyrus wrote: "A threshold is a sacred
thing."[]{#calibre_link-494}[[10]{.osf}](#calibre_link-269) But even if
erudition did not permit us to refer to such a sacralization, why should
we not react to sacralization through poetry, through a poem of our own
time, tinged with fantasy, perhaps, but which is in harmony with primal
values.

Another poet, with no thought of Zeus, discovered the majesty of the
threshold within himself and wrote the following:

*Je me surprends à définir le seuil*

*Comme étant le lieu géométrique*

*Des arrivées et des départs*

*Dans la Maison du Père.*[[]{#calibre_link-495
.pt}]{.osf}[[11]{.osf}](#calibre_link-270)[]{.osf}

(I find myself defining threshold

As being the geometrical place

Of the comings and goings

In my Father's House.)

And what of all the doors of mere curiosity, that have tempted being for
nothing, for emptiness, for an unknown that is not even imagined?

Is there one of us who hasn't in his memories a Bluebeard chamber that
should not have been opened, even half-way? Or---which is the same thing
for a philosophy that believes in the primacy of the imagination---that
should not even have been imagined open, or capable of opening half-way?

How concrete everything becomes in the world of the spirit when an
object, a mere door, can give images of hesitation, temptation, desire,
security, welcome and respect. If one were to give an account of all the
doors one has closed and opened, of all the doors one would like to
re-open, one would have to tell the story of one's entire life.

But is he who opens a door and he who closes it the same being? The
gestures that make us conscious of security or freedom are rooted in a
profound depth of being. Indeed, it is because of this "depth" that they
become so normally symbolical. Thus René Char takes as the theme of one
of his poems this sentence by Albert the Great: "In Germany there once
lived twins, one of whom opened doors by touching them with his right
arm, and the other who closed them by touching them with his left arm."
A legend like this, treated by a poet, is naturally not a mere
reference. It helps the poet sensitize the world at hand, and refine the
symbols of everyday life. The old legend becomes quite new when the poet
makes it his own. He knows that there are two "beings" in a door, that a
door awakens in us a two-way dream, that it is doubly symbolical.

And then, onto what, toward what, do doors open? Do they open for the
world of men, or for the world of solitude? Ramon Gomez de la Serna
wrote: "Doors that open on the countryside seem to confer freedom behind
the world's
back."[]{#calibre_link-496}[[12]{.osf}](#calibre_link-271)[]{.osf}

VI

As soon as the word *in* appears in an expression, people are inclined
not to take literally the *reality of the expression*, and they
translate what they believe to be figurative language into reasonable
language. It is not easy for me, indeed it seems futile, to follow, for
instance, the poet---I shall furnish documentation on the subject---who
says that the house of the past is alive in his own head. I immediately
interpret: the poet simply wants to say that an old memory has been
preserved *in* his mind. The exaggerated nature of the image that seeks
to upset the relationship of contained to container makes us shrink in
the presence of what can appear to be mental derangement of images. We
should be more indulgent if we were reading a fever chart. By following
the labyrinth of fever that runs through the body, by exploring the
"seats of fever," or the pains that inhabit a hollow tooth, we should
learn that the imagination localizes suffering and creates and recreates
imaginary anatomies. But I shall not use in this work the numerous
documents that psychiatry provides. I prefer to underline my break with
causalism by rejecting all organic causality. For my problem is to
discuss the images of a pure, free imagination, a liberating imagination
that has no connection with organic incitements.

These documents of absolute poetics exist. The poet does not shrink
before reversals of dovetailings. Without even thinking that he is
scandalizing reasonable men, contrary to the most ordinary common sense,
he actually experiences reversal of dimensions or inversion of the
perspective of inside and outside.

The abnormal nature of the image does not mean that it is artificially
produced, for the imagination is the most natural of faculties. No doubt
the images I plan to examine could not figure in a psychology of
projects, even of *imaginary projects*. For every project is a
contexture of images and thoughts that supposes a grasp of reality. We
need not consider it, consequently, in a doctrine of pure imagination.
It is even useless to *continue* an image, or to *maintain* it. All we
want is for it to exist.

Let us study then, in all phenomenological simplicity, the documents
furnished by poets.

In his book: *Où boivent les loups*, Tristan Tzara writes (p.
[24]{.scap1}):

*Une lente humilité pénètre dans la chambre*

*Qui habite en moi dans la paume du repos*

(A slow humility penetrates the room

That dwells in me in the palm of repose.)

In order to derive benefit from the oneirism of such an image, one must
no doubt first place oneself "in the palm of repose," that is, withdraw
into oneself, and condense oneself in the being of a repose, which is
the asset one has most easily "at hand." Then the great stream of simple
humility that is in the silent room flows into ourselves. The intimacy
of the room becomes our intimacy. And correlatively, intimate space has
become so quiet, so simple, that all the quietude of the room is
localized and centralized in it. The room is very deeply our room, it is
in us. We no longer *see* it. It no longer *limits* us, because we are
in the very ultimate depth of its repose, in the repose that it has
conferred upon us. And all our former rooms come and fit into this one.
How simple everything is!

In another passage, which is even more enigmatic for the reasonable
mind, but quite as clear for anyone who senses the topoanalytical
inversions of images, Tzara writes:

*Le marché du soleil est entré dans la chambre*

*Et la chambre dans la tête bourdonnante*.

(The market of the sun has come into my room

And the room into my buzzing head.)

In order to accept and hear this image, one must experience the strange
whir of the sun as it comes into a room in which one is alone, for it is
a fact that the first ray *strikes* the wall. These sounds will be heard
also---over and beyond the fact---by those who know that every one of
the sun's rays carries with it bees. Then everything starts buzzing and
one's head is a hive, the hive of the sounds of the sun.

To begin with, Tzara's image was overcharged with surrealism. But if we
overcharge it still more, if we increase the charge of image, if we go
beyond the barriers set up by criticism, then we really enter into the
surrealistic action of a pure image. And the exaggerated nature of the
image is thus proved to be active and communicable, this means that it
started well: the sunny room is buzzing *in* the head of the dreamer.

A psychologist will say that all my analysis does is to relate daring,
too daring, "associations." And a psychoanalyst will agree perhaps to
"analyze" this daring; he is accustomed to doing this. Both of them, if
they take the image as symptomatic, will try to find reasons and causes
for it. A phenomenologist has a different approach. He takes the image
just as it is, just as the poet created it, and tries to make it his
own, to feed on this rare fruit. He brings the image to the very limit
of what he is able to imagine. However far from being a poet he himself
may be, he tries to repeat its creation for himself and, if possible,
continue its exaggeration. Here association ceases to be fortuitous, but
is sought after, willed. It is a poetic, specifically poetic,
constitution. It is sublimation that is entirely rid of the organic or
psychic weights from which one wanted to be free. In other words, it
corresponds to pure sublimation.

Of course, such an image is not received in the same way every day.
Psychically speaking, it is never objective. Other commentaries could
renew it. Also, to receive it properly, one should be in the felicitous
mood of super-imagination.

 • • • 

Once we have been touched by the grace of super-imagination, we feel it
in the presence of the simpler images through which the exterior world
deposits virtual elements of highly-colored space in the heart of our
being. The image with which Pierre-Jean Jouve *constitutes* his secret
being is one of these. He places it in his most intimate cell:

*La cellule de moi-même emplit d'étonnement*

*La muraille peinte à la chaux de mon secret.*

(*Les noces,* p. 50)

(The cell of myself fills with wonder

The white-washed wall of my secret.)

The room in which the poet pursues such a dream as this is probably not
"white-washed." But this room in which he is writing is so quiet, that
it really deserves its name, which is, the "solitary" room! It is
inhabited thanks to the image, just as one inhabits an image which is
"in the imagination." Here the poet inhabits the cellular image. This
image does not transpose a reality. It would be ridiculous, in fact, to
ask the dreamer its dimensions. It does not lend itself to geometrical
intuition, but is a solid framework for secret being. And secret being
feels that it is guarded more by the whiteness of the lime-wash than by
the strong walls. The cell of the secret is white. A single value
suffices to coordinate any number of dreams. And it is always like that,
the poetic image is under the domination of a heightened quality. The
whiteness of the walls, alone, protects the dreamer's *cell*. It is
stronger than all geometry. It is a part of the cell of intimacy.

Such images lack stability. As soon as we depart from expression as it
is, as the author gives it, in all spontaneity, we risk relapsing into
literal meaning. We also risk being bored by writing that is incapable
of condensing the intimacy of the image. And we have to withdraw deep
into ourselves, for instance, to read this fragment by Maurice Blanchot
in the tonality of being in which it was written: "About this room,
which was plunged in utter darkness, I knew everything, I had entered
into it, I bore it within me, I made it live, with a life that is not
life, but which is stronger than life, and which no force in the world
can vanquish."[]{#calibre_link-497}[[13]{.osf}](#calibre_link-272) One
feels in these repetitions, or to be more exact, in this constant
strengthening of an image into which one has entered (and not of a room
into which one has entered, a room which the author bears within
himself, and which he has made live with a life that does not exist in
life), one feels, as I said, that it is not the writer's intention
merely to describe his *familiar* abode. Memory would *encumber* this
image by stocking it with *composite memories* from several periods of
time. Here everything is simpler, more radically simple. Blanchot's room
is an abode of intimate space, it is his inner room. We share the
writer's image, thanks to what we are obliged to call a *general image,*
that is, an image which participation keeps us from confusing with a
*generality*. We individualize this general image right away. We live in
it, we enter into it the way Blanchot enters into his. Neither word nor
idea suffices, the writer must help us to reverse space, and shun
description, in order to have a more valid experience of the hierarchy
of repose.

Often it is from the very fact of concentration in the most restricted
intimate space that the dialectics of inside and outside draws its
strength. One feels this elasticity in the following passage by
Rilke:[]{#calibre_link-498}[[14]{.osf}](#calibre_link-273) "And there is
almost no space here; and you feel almost calm at the thought that it is
impossible for anything very large to hold in this narrowness." There is
consolation in knowing that one is in an atmosphere of calm, in a narrow
space. Rilke achieved this narrowness intimately, in inner space where
everything is commensurate with inner being. Then, in the next sentence,
the text continues dialectically: "But outside, everything is
immeasurable. And when the level rises outside, it also rises in you,
not in the vessels that are partially controlled by you, or in the
phlegm of your most unimpressionable organs: but it grows in the
capillary veins, drawn upward into the furthermost branches of your
infinitely ramified existence. This is where it rises, where it
overflows from you, higher than your respiration, and, as a final
resort, you take refuge, as though on the tip of your breath. Ah! where,
where next? Your heart banishes you from yourself, your heart pursues
you, and you are already almost beside yourself, and you can't stand it
any longer. Like a beetle that has been stepped on, you flow from
yourself, and your lack of hardness or elasticity means nothing any
more.

"Oh night without objects. Oh window muffled on the outside, oh, doors
carefully closed; customs that have come down from times long past,
transmitted, verified, never entirely understood. Oh silence in the
stair-well, silence in the adjoining rooms, silence up there, on the
ceiling. Oh mother, oh one and only you, who faced all this silence,
when I was a child."

I have given this long passage without cuts for the reason that it has
dynamic continuity. Inside and outside are not abandoned to their
geometrical opposition. From what overflow of a ramified interior does
the substance of being run, does the outside call? Isn't the exterior an
old intimacy lost in the shadow of memory? In what silence does the
stair-well resound? In this silence there are soft foot-steps: the
mother comes back to watch over her child, as she once did. She restores
to all these confused, unreal sounds their concrete, familiar meaning.
Limitless night ceases to be empty space. This passage by Rilke, which
is assailed by such frights, finds its peace. But by what a long,
circuitous route! In order to experience it in the reality of the
images, one would have to remain the contemporary of an osmosis between
intimate and undetermined space.

 • • • 

I have presented texts that were as varied as possible, in order to show
that there exists a play of values, which makes everything in the
category of simple determinations fall into second place. The opposition
of outside and inside ceases to have as coefficient its geometrical
evidence.

To conclude this chapter, I shall consider a fragment in which Balzac
defines determined opposition in the face of affronted space. This text
is all the more interesting in that Balzac felt obliged to correct it.

In an early version of *Louis Lambert*, we read: "When he used his
entire strength, he grew unaware, as it were, of his physical life, and
only existed through the all-powerful play of his interior organs, the
range of which he constantly maintained and, according to his own
admirable expression, he made *space withdraw before his
advance*."[]{#calibre_link-499}[[15]{.osf}](#calibre_link-274)[]{.osf}

In the final version, we read simply: "He left space, as he said, behind
him."

What a difference between these two movements of expression! What
decline of power of being faced with space, between the first and second
forms! In fact, one is puzzled that Balzac should have made such a
correction. He returned, in other words, to "indifferent space." In a
meditation on the subject of being, one usually puts space between
parentheses, in other words, one leaves space "behind one." As a sign of
the lost "tonalization" of being, it should be noted that "admiration"
subsided. The second mode of expression is no longer, according to the
author's own admission, *admirable*. Because it really was admirable,
this power to make *space withdraw*, to put space, all space, outside,
in order that meditating being might be free to think.
:::
::::

:::: {#calibre_link-18 .calibre}
::: basic-text-frame
# [10]{.osf1} {#calibre_link-534 .chaptnum}

# THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF ROUNDNESS {#calibre_link-535 .chapttitle}

I

When metaphysicians speak briefly, they can reach immediate truth, a
truth that, in due course, would yield to proof. Metaphysicians, then,
may be compared and associated with poets who, in a single verse, can
lay bare a truth concerning inner man. The following concise statement
is taken from Karl Jaspers' thick volume entitled *Von der Wahrheit* (p.
[50]{.scap1}): "Jedes Dasein scheint in sich rund." (Every being seems
in itself round.) In support of this unsubstantiated metaphysician's
truth, I should like to present several texts formulated in schools of
thought that are all oriented differently from metaphysical thought.

Thus, without commentary, Van Gogh wrote: "Life is probably *round*."

And Joë Bousquet, with no knowledge of Van Gogh's sentence, wrote: "He
had been told that life was beautiful. No! Life is
round."[]{#calibre_link-500}[[1]{.osf}](#calibre_link-275)[]{.osf}

Lastly, I should like to know where La Fontaine said: "A walnut makes me
quite round."

With these four texts of such different origin, it seems to me that here
we have the phenomenological problem very clearly posed. It should be
solved by enriching it with further examples to which we should add
other data, taking care to conserve their nature of intimate data,
independent of all knowledge of the outside world. Such data as these
can receive nothing from the outside world but *illustrations*. We must
even be careful lest the too vivid colors of the illustration make the
*being of the image* lose its original light. Here the average
psychologist can do nothing but abstain from action, since the
perspective of psychological research must be reversed. Such images
cannot be justified by perception. Nor can they be taken for metaphors
as, for instance, when we say of a man who is simple and frank, that he
is: "*tout rond*."[]{#calibre_link-501}[[2]{.osf}](#calibre_link-276)
This roundness of a being, or of being, that Jaspers speaks of cannot
appear in its direct truth otherwise than in the purest sort of
phenomenological meditation.

Nor can such images as these be transported into just any consciousness.
No doubt there are those who will want to "understand," whereas the
image must first be taken at its inception. Others will declare
ostentatiously that they do not understand, and will object that life
itself is certainly not spherical. They will express surprise that this
being we seek to characterize in its intimate truth should be so
ingenuously handed over to geometricians, whose thinking is exterior
thinking. From every side, objections accumulate to put a quick end to
the discussion. And yet the expressions I have just noted are there.
They are there, in relief, in everyday language, implying meanings of
their own. They do not come from immoderateness of language, any more
than they do from linguistic clumsiness. They are not born of a desire
to astonish others. In fact, despite their extraordinary nature, they
bear the mark of primitivity. They suddenly appear and, in a twinkling,
they are completed. This is why, from my standpoint, these expressions
are marvels of phenomenology. In order to judge them, and to like and
make them our own, they oblige us to take a phenomenological attitude.

These images blot out the world, and they have no past. They do not stem
from any earlier experience. We can be quite sure that they are
metapsychological. They give us a lesson in solitude. For a brief
instant we must take them for ourselves alone. If we take them in their
suddenness, we realize that we think of nothing else, that we are
entirely in the being of this expression. If we submit to the hypnotic
power of such expressions, suddenly we find ourselves entirely in the
roundness of this being, we live in the roundness of life, like a walnut
that becomes round in its shell. A philosopher, a painter, a poet and an
inventor of fables have given us documents of pure phenomenology. It is
up to us now to use them in order to learn how to gather being together
in its center. It is our task, too, to sensitize the document by
multiplying its variations.

II

Before giving additional examples, I believe that it would be advisable
to reduce Jaspers' formula by one word, in order to make it
phenomenologically purer. I should say, therefore: *das Dasein ist
rund*, being is round. Because to add that it *seems round* is to keep a
doublet of being and appearance, when we mean the entire being in its
roundness. In fact, it is not a question of observing, but of
experiencing being in its immediacy. Full contemplation would divide
into the observing being and being observed. In the limited domain in
which we are working, phenomenology must do away with all
intermediaries, all additional functions. Consequently, in order to
obtain maximum phenomenological purity, we must divest Jaspers' formula
of everything that could conceal its ontological value. This condition
is necessary if the formula "being is round" is to become an instrument
that will allow us to recognize the primitivity of certain images of
being. I repeat, images of *full roundness* help us to collect
ourselves, permit us to confer an initial constitution on ourselves, and
to confirm our being intimately, inside. For when it is experienced from
the inside, devoid of all exterior features, being cannot be otherwise
than round.

Is this the moment to recall pre-Socratic philosophy, to refer to
Parmenidian being and the "sphere" of Parmenides? Or, to speak more
generally, can philosophical culture be the propaedeutics to
phenomenology? It does not seem so. Philosophy introduces us to ideas
that are too well coordinated for us to examine and re-examine them,
detail after detail, as the phenomenologist must from the beginning. If
a phenomenology of the logical sequence of ideas is possible, it must be
acknowledged that this could not be an elementary phenomenology. In a
phenomenology of the imagination, however, we receive a benefit of
elementariness. An image that is worked over loses its initial virtues.
Parmenides' "sphere" has played too important a rôle for his image to
have retained its primitivity. Consequently, it could not be the tool
required for our research on the subject of the primitivity of images of
being. It would be hard to resist the temptation to enrich the image of
Parmenidian being by means of the perfections of the geometrical being
of the sphere.

But why speak of enriching an image, when we crystallize it in
geometrical perfection? Examples could be furnished in which the value
of perfection attributed to the sphere is entirely verbal. Here is one
that we can use as a counter-example, in which, quite evidently, the
author has failed to recognize all the values of images. One of Alfred
de Vigny's characters, a young lawyer, is educating himself by reading
Descartes'
*Méditations*:[]{#calibre_link-502}[[3]{.osf}](#calibre_link-277)
"Sometimes," writes Vigny, "he would take up a sphere set near him, and
after turning it between his fingers for a long time, would sink into
the most profound daydreams of science." One would love to know which
ones. The author doesn't say. Does he imagine that the reading of
Descartes' *Méditations* is helped if the reader begins to roll a marble
between his fingers? Scientific thought develops on another horizon and
Descartes' philosophy cannot be learned from an object, even a sphere.
Used by Alfred de Vigny, the word *profound*, as is often the case, is a
negation of profundity.

Moreover, it is evident that when a geometrician speaks of volumes, he
is only dealing with the surfaces that limit them. The geometrician's
sphere is an empty one, essentially empty. Therefore it cannot be a good
symbol for our phenomenological study of roundness.

III

There is no doubt that these preliminary remarks are heavy with implicit
philosophy. I have nevertheless felt obliged to give them brief mention
because they have served me personally, and because, too, a
phenomenologist must tell everything. They have helped me to
"dephilosophize," to shun the allures of culture and to place myself on
the margin of convictions acquired through long philosophical inquiry on
the subject of scientific thinking. Philosophy makes us ripen quickly,
and crystallizes us in a state of maturity. How, then, without
"dephilosophizing" ourselves, may we hope to experience the shocks that
being receives from new images, shocks which are always the phenomena of
youthful being? When we are at an age to imagine, we cannot say how or
why we imagine. Then, when we could say how we imagine, we cease to
imagine. We should therefore dematurize ourselves.

But since I seem to have been seized---quite accidentally---with a
neological fit, let me say again, by way of introduction to the
phenomenological examination of images of solid roundness, that I have
sensed the necessity here, as on many other occasions, of
"de-psychoanalyzing" ourselves.

In fact, some five or ten years
ago,[]{#calibre_link-503}[[4]{.osf}](#calibre_link-278) in any
psychological examination of images of roundness, but especially of
solid roundness, we should have laid stress on psychoanalytical
explanations, for which we could have collected an enormous amount of
documentation, since everything round invites a caress. Such
psychoanalytical explanations are, no doubt, largely sound. But they do
not tell everything, and above all, they cannot be put in the direct
line of ontological determinations. When a metaphysician tells us that
being is round, he displaces all psychological determinations at one
time. He rids us of a past of dreams and thoughts, at the same time that
he invites us to actuality of being. It is not likely that a
psychoanalyst would become attached to this actuality enclosed in the
very being of an expression. From his standpoint such an expression is
humanly insignificant because of the very fact of its rarity. But it is
this rarity that attracts the attention of the phenomenologist and
encourages him to look with fresh eyes, with the perspective of being
that is suggested by metaphysicians and poets.

IV

I should like to give an example of an image that is outside all
realistic meaning, either psychological or psychoanalytical.

Without preparing us, precisely as regards the absolute nature of the
image, Michelet says that "a bird is almost completely spherical." If we
drop the "almost," which moderates the formula uselessly, and is a
concession to a viewpoint that would judge from the form, we have an
obvious participation in Jaspers' principle of "round being." A bird,
for Michelet, is solid roundness, it is round life, and in a few lines,
his commentary gives it its meaning of *model of
being*.[[]{#calibre_link-504 .pt}]{.osf}[[5]{.osf}](#calibre_link-279)
"The bird, which is almost completely spherical, is certainly the
sublime and divine summit of living concentration. One can neither see,
nor even imagine, a higher degree of unity. Excess of concentration,
which constitutes the great personal force of the bird, but which
implies its extreme individuality, its isolation, its social weakness."

In the book, these lines also appear totally isolated from the rest. One
feels that the author, too, followed an image of "concentration" and
acceded to a plane of meditation on which he has taken cognizance of the
"sources" of life. Of course, he is above being concerned with
description. Once again, a geometrician may wonder, all the more so
since here the bird is considered on the wing, in its out-of-doors
aspect, consequently, the arrow figures could accord here with an
imagined dynamics. But Michelet seized the bird's being in its cosmic
situation, as a centralization of life guarded on every side, enclosed
in a live ball, and consequently, at the maximum of its *unity*. All the
other images, whether of form, color or movement, are stricken with
relativism in the face of what we shall have to call the absolute bird,
the being of round life.

The image of being---because it is an image of being---that appears in
this fragment by Michelet is extraordinary for the very reason that it
was considered of no significance. Literary criticism has attached no
more importance to it than has psychoanalysis. And yet, it was written,
and it exists in an important book. It would take on both interest and
meaning if a philosophy of the cosmic imagination could be instituted,
that would look for centers of cosmicity.

Seized in its center and brevity, the mere designation of this roundness
is astonishingly complete. The poets who mention it, unaware that others
have done the same, reply to one another. Thus Rilke, who undoubtedly
did not recall what Michelet had written on the subject,
wrote:[]{#calibre_link-505}[[6]{.osf}](#calibre_link-280)[]{.osf}

*. . . Ce rond cri d'oiseau*

*Repose dans I'instant qui I'engendre*

*Grand comme un ciel sur la forêt fanée*

*Tout vient docilement se ranger dans ce cri*

*Tout le paysage y semble reposer.*

(. . . This round bird-call

Rests in the instant that engenders it

Huge as the sky above the withered forest

Docilely things take their place in this call

In it the entire landscape seems to rest.)

To anyone who is receptive to the cosmicity of images, the essentially
central image of the bird is the same in Rilke's poem as in the fragment
by Michelet, only expressed in another register. The round cry of round
being makes the sky round like a cupola. And in this rounded landscape,
everything seems to be in repose. The round being propagates its
roundness, together with the calm of all roundness.

 • • • 

And for a dreamer of words, what calm there is in the word "round." How
peacefully it makes one's mouth, lips and the being of breath become
round. Because this too should be spoken by a philosopher who believes
in the poetic substance of speech. And for the professor who has broken
with every kind of "being-there" (*être-là*), it is a joy to the ear to
begin his course in metaphysics with the declaration: *Das Dasein ist
rund*. Being is round. Then wait for the rumblings of this dogmatic
thunder to die down, while his disciples beam with ecstasy.

But let us come back to a simpler, more tangible kind of roundness.

V

Sometimes we find ourselves in the presence of a form that guides and
encloses our earliest dreams. For a painter, a tree is composed in its
roundness. But a poet continues the dream from higher up. He knows that
when a thing becomes isolated, it becomes round, assumes a figure of
being that is concentrated upon itself. In Rilke's *Poèmes français*,
this is how the walnut tree lives and commands attention. Here, again
around a lone tree, which is the center of a world, the dome of the sky
becomes round, in accordance with the rule of cosmic poetry. On p.
[169]{.scap1} of this collection we read:

*Arbre toujours au milieu*

*De tout ce qui l'entoure*

*Arbre qui savoure*

*La voûte des cieux*

(Tree always in the center

Of all that surrounds it

Tree feasting upon

Heaven's great dome.)

Needless to say, all the poet really sees is a tree in a meadow; he is
not thinking of a legendary Yggdrasil that would concentrate the entire
cosmos, uniting heaven and earth, within itself. But the imagination of
round being follows its own law: since, as the poet says, the walnut
tree is "proudly rounded," it can feast upon "Heaven's great dome." The
world is round around the round being.

And from verse to verse, the poem grows, increases its being. The tree
is alive, reflective, straining toward God.

*Dieu lui va apparaître*

*Or, pour qu'il soit sûr*

*Il développe en rond son être*

*Et lui tend des bras mûrs*.

*Arbre qui peut-être*

*Pense au-dedans*.

*Arbre qui se domine*

*Se donnant lentement*

*La forme qui élimine*

*Les hasards du vent!*

(One day it will see God

And so, to be sure,

It develops its being in roundness

And holds out ripe arms to Him.

Tree that perhaps

Thinks innerly

Tree that dominates self

Slowly giving itself

The form that eliminates

Hazards of wind!)

I shall never find a better document for a phenomenology of a being
which is at once established in its roundness and developing in it.
Rilke's tree propagates in green spheres a roundness that is a victory
over accidents of form and the capricious events of mobility. Here
becoming has countless forms, countless leaves, but being is subject to
no dispersion: if I could ever succeed in grouping together all the
images of being, all the multiple, changing images that, in spite of
everything, illustrate permanence of being, Rilke's tree would open an
important chapter in my album of concrete metaphysics.
:::
::::

:::::::::::::::::::: {#calibre_link-19 .calibre}
::: basic-text-frame
# [Notes]{.pt} {#calibre_link-536 .bmhead}

INTRODUCTION

[
[]{#calibre_link-56}]{.note-number}[[1]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-281)[.
]{.note-number}C. f. Eugène Minkowski, *Vers une cosmologie,* ch. IX.

(*Editor's note:* Eugène Minkowski, a prominent phenomenologist whose
studies extend both in the fields of psychology and philosophy, followed
Bergson in accepting the notion of "*élan vital*" as the dynamic origin
of human life. Without the vital impulse, as conceived by Bergson, the
human being is static and therefore moribund. Referring to Anna Teresa
Tymieniecka's book *Phenomenology and Science,* we can say that for
Minkowski, the essence of life is not "a feeling of being, of
existence," but a feeling of participation in a flowing onward,
necessarily expressed in terms of time, and secondarily expressed in
terms of space.

In view of this, Minkowski's choice of what he calls an auditive
metaphor, *retentir,* is very apt, for in sound both time and space are
epitomized. To understand Bachelard's reference, the following excerpt
from Minkowski's *Vers une cosmologie* might be helpful:

"If, having fixed the original form in our mind's eye, we ask ourselves
how that form comes alive and fills with life, we discover a new dynamic
and vital category, a new property of the universe: reverberation
\[*retentir*\]. It is as though a well-spring existed in a sealed vase
and its waves, repeatedly echoing against the sides of this vase, filled
it with their sonority. Or again, it is as though the sound of a hunting
horn, reverberating everywhere through its echo, made the tiniest leaf,
the tiniest wisp of moss shudder in a common movement and transformed
the whole forest, filling it to its limits, into a vibrating, sonorous
world . . . What is secondary in these images, or, in other terms, what
makes these images only images for us, are the sonorous well-spring, the
hunting horn, the sealed vase, the echo, the reflection of sonorous
waves against the sides---in a word, all that belongs to the material
and palpable world.

"Suppose these elements were missing: would really nothing living
subsist? For my part, I believe that this is precisely where we should
see the world come alive and, independent of any instrument, of any
physical properties, fill up with penetrating deep waves which, although
not sonorous in the sensory meaning of the word, are not, for this
reason, less harmonious, resonant, melodic and capable of determining
the whole tonality of life. And this life itself will reverberate to the
most profound depths of its being, through contact with these waves,
which are at once sonorous and silent . . . Here to 'fill up' and
'plenitude' will have a completely different sense. It is not a material
object which fills another by espousing the form that the other imposes.
No, it is the dynamism of the sonorous life itself which by engulfing
and appropriating everything it finds in its path, fills the slice of
space, or better, the slice of the world that it assigns itself by its
movement, making it reverberate, breathing into it its own life. The
word 'slice' must not be taken in its geometrical sense. It is not a
matter of decomposing the world virtually or actually into sonorous
balls, nor of tracing the limits of the sphere determined by the waves
emanating from a sonorous source. In fact, our examples, the sealed
vase, the forest, because of the very fact that they fill up with
sounds, form a sort of self-enclosed whole, a microcosm . . .")

[
[]{#calibre_link-57}]{.note-number}[[2]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-282)[.
]{.note-number}Charles Nodier, *Dictionnaire raisonné des onomatopées
françaises* (Paris, [1828]{.scap1}), p. [46]{.scap1}. "The different
names for the soul, among nearly all peoples, are just so many breath
variations, and onomatopoeic expressions of breathing."

[
[]{#calibre_link-58}]{.note-number}[[3]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-283)[.
]{.note-number}Pierre-Jean Jouve, *En miroir* (Mercure de France), p.
[11]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-59}]{.note-number}[[4]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-284)[.
]{.note-number}Jean-Paul Richter, *Le Titan,* French trans. by
Philarète-Chasles ([1878]{.scap1}), vol. I, p. [22]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-60}]{.note-number}[[5]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-285)[.
]{.note-number}Henri Bergson, *L'energie spirituelle,* p. [23]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-61}]{.note-number}[[6]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-286)[.
]{.note-number}J. B. Pontalis, "Michel Leiris ou la psychanalyse
interminable," in *Les temps modernes,* Dec. [1955]{.scap1}, p.
[931]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-62}]{.note-number}[[7]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-287)[.
]{.note-number}J. H. Van den Berg, *The Phenomenological Approach in
Psychology* (Springfield, Ill.: Charles C. Thomas, [1955]{.scap1}), p.
[61]{.scap1}. An introduction to recent phenomenological
psycho-pathology.

[
[]{#calibre_link-63}]{.note-number}[[8]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-288)[.
]{.note-number}Pierre-Jean Jouve, loc. cit., p. [109]{.scap1}. Andrée
Chédid has also written: "A poem remains free. We shall never enclose
its fate in our own." The poet knows well that "his breath will carry
him farther than his desire." (*Terre et poésie,* G.L.M. § §
[14]{.scap1} and [25]{.scap1}).

[
[]{#calibre_link-64}]{.note-number}[[9]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-289)[.
]{.note-number}Pierre-Jean Jouve, *loc. cit.,* p. [9]{.scap1}: "La
poésie est rare."

[
[]{#calibre_link-65}]{.note-number}[[10]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-290)[.
]{.note-number}C. G. Jung, "On the Relation of Analytical Psychology to
the Poetic Art," in *Contributions to Analytical Psychology,* trans. by
H. G. & Cary F. Baynes (New York: Harcourt, Brace, [1928]{.scap1}).
(Bollingen Series, vol. XV.)

[
[]{#calibre_link-66}]{.note-number}[[11]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-291)[.
]{.note-number}Jean Lescure, *Lapicque* (Paris: Galanis), p.
[78]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-67}]{.note-number}[[12]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-292)[.
]{.note-number}Marcel Proust, *Remembrance of Things Past,* vol. V:
*Sodom and Gomorrah.*

*[]{#calibre_link-68}*[[13]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-293)[.
]{.note-number}Jean-Paul Richter, *Poétique ou introduction à
l'esthétique,* trans. ([1862]{.scap1}), vol. [1]{.scap1}, p.
[145]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-69}]{.note-number}[[14]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-294)[.
]{.note-number}C. G. Jung, *loc. cit.*, pp. [118]{.scap1}-[19]{.scap1}.
This passage is taken from the essay entitled "Mind and the Earth."

[
[]{#calibre_link-70}]{.note-number}[[15]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-295)[.
]{.note-number}Cf. *La terre et les rêveries de la volonté* (Paris: José
Corti), p. [378]{.scap1} ff.

[1]{.scap1}: THE HOUSE. FROM CELLAR TO GARRET. THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE
HUT

[
[]{#calibre_link-71}]{.note-number}[[1]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-296)[.
]{.note-number}We should grant "fixation" its virtues, independently of
psychoanalytical literature, which, because of its therapeutic function,
is obliged to record, principally, processes of defixation.

[
[]{#calibre_link-72}]{.note-number}[[2]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-297)[.
]{.note-number}Rainer Maria Rilke, trans. into French by Claude Vigée,
in *Les lettres,* [4]{.scap1}th year, nos. [14]{.scap1}--[16]{.scap1},
p. [11]{.scap1}. (*Editor's note:* In this work, all of the Rilke
references will be to the French translations that inspired Bachelard's
comments.)

[
[]{#calibre_link-73}]{.note-number}[[3]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-298)[.
]{.note-number}I plan to study these differences in a future work.

[
[]{#calibre_link-74}]{.note-number}[[4]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-299)[.
]{.note-number}After giving a description of the Canaen estate
(*Volupté,* p. [30]{.scap1}), Sainte-Beuve adds: "It is not so much for
you, my friend, who never saw this place, and had you visited it, could
not now feel the impressions and colors I feel, that I have gone over it
in such detail, for which I must excuse myself. Nor should you try to
see it as a result of what I have said; let the image float inside you;
pass lightly; the slightest idea of it will suffice for you."

[
[]{#calibre_link-75}]{.note-number}[[5]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-300)[.
]{.note-number}*La terre et les rêveries du repos,* p. [98]{.scap1}
(Paris: José Corti).

[
[]{#calibre_link-76}]{.note-number}[[6]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-301)[.
]{.note-number}For this second part, see page [50]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-77}]{.note-number}[[7]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-302)[.
]{.note-number}New York: Harcourt, Brace and World.

[
[]{#calibre_link-78}]{.note-number}[[8]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-303)[.
]{.note-number}Edgar Allan Poe, "The Black Cat."

[
[]{#calibre_link-79}]{.note-number}[[9]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-304)[.
]{.note-number}Henri Bosco, *L'antiquaire* *(1954),* p. [154]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-80}]{.note-number}[[10]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-305)[.
]{.note-number}In my study of the material imagination, *L'eau et les
rêves,* there was mention of thick, consistent water, heavy water. This
was imagined by a great poet, Edgar Allan Poe; cf. ch. II.

[
[]{#calibre_link-81}]{.note-number}[[11]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-306)[.
]{.note-number}*La terre et les rêveries du repos,* pp.
[105]{.scap1}--[6]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-82}]{.note-number}[[12]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-307)[.
]{.note-number}Joë Bousquet, *La neige d'un autre âge,* p.
[100]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-83}]{.note-number}[[13]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-308)[.
]{.note-number}Paul Claudel, *Oiseau noir dans le soleil levant,* p.
[144]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-84}]{.note-number}[[14]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-309)[.
]{.note-number}Max Picard, *La fuite devant Dieu,* trans., p.
[121]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-85}]{.note-number}[[15]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-310)[.
]{.note-number}I had written this page when I read in Balzac's *Petites
misères de la vie conjugale* (edited by "Formes et Reflets,"
[1952]{.scap1}, vol. [12]{.scap1}, p. [1302]{.scap1}): "When your house
trembles in its beams and turns on its keel, you think you are a sailor,
rocked by the breeze."

[
[]{#calibre_link-86}]{.note-number}[[16]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-311)[.
]{.note-number}Francesca-Yvonne Caroutch, *Les* *veilleurs endormis*
(Paris: Debresse), p. [30]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-87}]{.note-number}[[17]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-312)[.
]{.note-number}Pierre Courthion, *Courbet racconté par lui-même et par
ses amis.* (Cailler, [1948]{.scap1}), vol. I, p. [278]{.scap1}. General
Valentine did not allow Courbet to paint his city-ocean on the grounds
that he "was not in prison for the purpose of amusing himself."

[
[]{#calibre_link-88}]{.note-number}[[18]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-313)[.
]{.note-number}Henri Bachelin, *Le serviteur,* [6]{.scap1}th ed.
(Mercure de France), with an excellent preface by René Dumesnil, who
relates the life and work of this forgotten writer.

[
[]{#calibre_link-89}]{.note-number}[[19]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-314)[.
]{.note-number}Rimbaud, *Oeuvres complètes* (Lausanne: Le Grand-Chêne),
p. [321]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-90}]{.note-number}[[20]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-315)[.
]{.note-number}Christiane Barucoa, *Antée* (Paris: Cahiers de
Rochefort), p. [5]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-91}]{.note-number}[[21]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-316)[.
]{.note-number}Hélène Morange, *Asphodèles et Pervenches* (Paris:
Séghers), p. [29]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-92}]{.note-number}[[22]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-317)[.
]{.note-number}G.-E. Clancier, *Une voix* (Gallimard), p. [172]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-93}]{.note-number}[[23]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-318)[.
]{.note-number}Erich Neumann, *Eranos-Jahrbuch,* [1955]{.scap1}, pp.
[40]{.scap1}--[41]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-94}]{.note-number}[[24]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-319)[.
]{.note-number}Rainer Maria Rilke, *Choix de lettres* (Stock,
[1934]{.scap1}), p. [15]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-95}]{.note-number}[[25]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-320)[.
]{.note-number}Richard von Schaukal, *Anthologie de la poésie allemande*
(Stock), II, p. [125]{.scap1}.

[2]{.scap1}: HOUSE AND UNIVERSE

[
[]{#calibre_link-96}]{.note-number}[[1]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-321)[.
]{.note-number}Paul Eluard, *Dignes de vivre* (Paris: Julliard), p.
[115]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-97}]{.note-number}[[2]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-322)[.
]{.note-number}Henri Bosco has given an excellent description of this
type of revery in the following short phrase: "When the shelter is sure,
the storm is good."

[
[]{#calibre_link-98}]{.note-number}[[3]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-323)[.
]{.note-number}Henri Bachelin, *Le serviteur,* p. [102]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-99}]{.note-number}[[4]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-324)[.
]{.note-number}Rilke, *Lettres à une musicienne,* in French trans., p.
[112]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-100}]{.note-number}[[5]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-325)[.
]{.note-number}Corruption of *redoute:* retreat.

[
[]{#calibre_link-101}]{.note-number}[[6]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-326)[.
]{.note-number}Paris: José Corti.

[
[]{#calibre_link-102}]{.note-number}[[7]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-327)[.
]{.note-number}O. V. de Milosz, [1877]{.scap1}--[1939]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-103}]{.note-number}[[8]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-328)[.
]{.note-number}In fact, it is interesting to note that the word *house*
does not appear in the very well-compiled index to the new edition of C.
G. Jung's *Metamorphosis of the Soul and Its Symbols.*

*[]{#calibre_link-104}*[[9]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-329)[.
]{.note-number}Jean Wahl, *Poèmes,* p. [23]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-105}]{.note-number}[[10]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-330)[.
]{.note-number}André Lafon, *Poésies*, "Le rêve d'un logis," p.
[91]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-106}]{.note-number}[[11]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-331)[.
]{.note-number}Annie Duthil, *La pêcheuse d'absolu* (Paris: Séghers), p.
[20]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-107}]{.note-number}[[12]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-332)[.
]{.note-number}Vincent Monteiro, *Vers sur verre,* p. [15]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-108}]{.note-number}[[13]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-333)[.
]{.note-number}Georges Spyridaki, *Mort lucide* (Paris: Séghers), p.
[35]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-109}]{.note-number}[[14]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-334)[.
]{.note-number}René Cazelles, *De terre et d'envolée* (Paris: "G.L.M."),
pp. [23]{.scap1}, [36]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-110}]{.note-number}[[15]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-335)[.
]{.note-number}Erich Neumann, *Die Bedeutung des Erdarchetyps für die
Neuzeit,* *Eranos* Jahrbuch, [1955]{.scap1}, p. [12]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-111}]{.note-number}[[16]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-336)[.
]{.note-number}Claude Hartmann, *Nocturnes* (Paris: La Galère).

[
[]{#calibre_link-112}]{.note-number}[[17]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-337)[.
]{.note-number}Jean Laroche, *Mémoires d'été* (Cahiers de Rochefort), p.
[9]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-113}]{.note-number}[[18]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-338)[.
]{.note-number}René Char, *Fureur et mystère,* p. [41]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-114}]{.note-number}[[19]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-339)[.
]{.note-number}Louis Guillaume, *Noir comme la mer* *(*Les Lettres), p.
[60]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-115}]{.note-number}[[20]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-340)[.
]{.note-number}Jean Bourdeillette, *Les étoiles dans la main* (Paris:
Séghers), p. [48]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-116}]{.note-number}[[21]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-341)[.
]{.note-number}Jean Bourdeillette, *op. cit.,* p. [28]{.scap1}. See also
(p. [64]{.scap1}) his recollection of a house that is lost and gone.

[
[]{#calibre_link-117}]{.note-number}[[22]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-342)[.
]{.note-number}Rilke, *Vergers,* XLI.

[
[]{#calibre_link-118}]{.note-number}[[23]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-343)[.
]{.note-number}André de Richaud, *Le droit d'asile* (Paris: Séghers), p.
[26]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-119}]{.note-number}[[24]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-344)[.
]{.note-number}Rilke, *Notebook of Malte Laurids Brigge* (French trans.,
p. [33]{.scap1}).

[
[]{#calibre_link-120}]{.note-number}[[25]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-345)[.
]{.note-number}William Goyen, *The House of Breath* (New York: Random
House).

[
[]{#calibre_link-121}]{.note-number}[[26]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-346)[.
]{.note-number}My imagination having been stimulated as a result of the
day-dreams set in motion by reading William Goyen, I have extended the
original quotation, used in [1948]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-122}]{.note-number}[[27]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-347)[.
]{.note-number}Théophile Briant, *Saint-Pol Roux* (Paris: Séghers), p.
[42]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-123}]{.note-number}[[28]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-348)[.
]{.note-number}Page [361]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-124}]{.note-number}[[29]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-349)[.
]{.note-number}Cf. *La dialecte de la durée* (Presses Universitaire de
France), p. [129]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-125}]{.note-number}[[30]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-350)[.
]{.note-number}André Saglio, *Maisons d'hommes célèbres* (Paris,
[1893]{.scap1}), p. [82]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-126}]{.note-number}[[31]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-351)[.
]{.note-number}Jules Supervielle, *Les amis inconnus,* pp. [93]{.scap1},
[96]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-127}]{.note-number}[[32]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-352)[.
]{.note-number}Henri Bosco, *Le jardin d'Hyacinthe* (Paris: Gallimard,
[1946]{.scap1}), p. [192]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-128}]{.note-number}[[33]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-353)[.
]{.note-number}Cf. *La psychanalyse du feu.*

*[]{#calibre_link-129}*[[34]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-354)[.
]{.note-number}Benvenuta, *Rilke et Benvenuta* (French trans., p.
[30]{.scap1}).

[
[]{#calibre_link-130}]{.note-number}[[35]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-355)[.
]{.note-number}*De Van Gogh et Seurat aux dessins d'enfants,*
illustrated catalogue of an exhibition held at the *Musée Pédagogique*
(Paris) in [1949]{.scap1}. Dr. F. Minkowska's comments on the drawings
appear on p. [137]{.scap1} of Mme Balif's article.

[3]{.scap1}: DRAWERS, CHESTS AND WARDROBES

[
[]{#calibre_link-131}]{.note-number}[[1]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-356)[.
]{.note-number}This refers to Bergson's *Matière et mémoire,* ch. II and
III.

[
[]{#calibre_link-132}]{.note-number}[[2]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-357)[.
]{.note-number}Cf. *loc. cit.*, p. [126]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-133}]{.note-number}[[3]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-358)[.
]{.note-number}Colette Wartz, *Paroles pour l'autre,* p. [26]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-134}]{.note-number}[[4]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-359)[.
]{.note-number}O. V. de Milosz, *Amoureuse initiation,* p.
[217]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-135}]{.note-number}[[5]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-360)[.
]{.note-number}Quoted by Albert Béguin in *Eve,* p. [49]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-136}]{.note-number}[[6]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-361)[.
]{.note-number}Arthur Rimbaud, *Les étrennes des orphelins.*

*[]{#calibre_link-137}*[[7]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-362)[.
]{.note-number}Another poet, Joseph Rouffange, writes:

*Dans le linge mort des placards*

*Je cherche le surnaturel*

(In the dead linen in cupboards

I seek the supernatural.)

*Deuil et luxe du coeur* (Rougerie).

[
[]{#calibre_link-138}]{.note-number}[[8]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-363)[.
]{.note-number}Anne de Tourville, *Jabadao,* p. [51]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-139}]{.note-number}[[9]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-364)[.
]{.note-number}Claude Vigée, *loc. cit.,* p. [161]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-140}]{.note-number}[[10]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-365)[.
]{.note-number}Denise Paulme, *Les sculptures de l'Afrique noire*
(Presses Universitaires de France), [1956]{.scap1}, p. [12]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-141}]{.note-number}[[11]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-366)[.
]{.note-number}Franz Hellens, *Fantômes vivants,* p. [126]{.scap1}. Cf.
the line in Baudelaire's *Les petits poèmes en prose,* p. [32]{.scap1},
in which he speaks of "the egoist, shut up like a box."

[
[]{#calibre_link-142}]{.note-number}[[12]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-367)[.
]{.note-number}Rilke, *Cahiers* (French trans.), p. [266]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-143}]{.note-number}[[13]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-368)[.
]{.note-number}Claire Goll, *Rilke et les femmes,* p. [70]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-144}]{.note-number}[[14]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-369)[.
]{.note-number}In a letter to Aubanel, Mallarmé wrote: "Every man has a
secret in him, many die without finding it, and will never find it
because they are dead, it no longer exists, nor do they. I am dead and
risen again with the jeweled key of my last spiritual casket. It is up
to me now to open it in the absence of any borrowed impression, and its
mystery will emanate in a sky of great beauty." (Letter dated July
[16]{.scap1}, [1866]{.scap1}.)

[
[]{#calibre_link-145}]{.note-number}[[15]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-370)[.
]{.note-number}Jean-Pierre Richard, "Le vertige de Baudelaire," in the
review *Critique,* nos. [100]{.scap1}--[1]{.scap1}, p. [777]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-146}]{.note-number}[[16]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-371)[.
]{.note-number}Charles Cros, *Poèmes et prose* (Paris: Gallimard), p.
[87]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-147}]{.note-number}[[17]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-372)[.
]{.note-number}In English in the text.

[
[]{#calibre_link-148}]{.note-number}[[18]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-373)[.
]{.note-number}Jules Supervielle, *Gravitations,* p. [17]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-149}]{.note-number}[[19]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-374)[.
]{.note-number}Joë Bousquet, *La neige d'un autre âge,* p. [90]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-150}]{.note-number}[[20]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-375)[.
]{.note-number}Cf. *La terre et les rêveries du repos,* ch. I, and *La
formation de l'esprit scientifique,* contribution to a psychoanalysis of
objective knowledge, ch. VI.

[4]{.scap1}: NESTS

[
[]{#calibre_link-151}]{.note-number}[[1]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-376)[.
]{.note-number}Victor Hugo, *Notre-Dame de Paris,* book IV, §
[3]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-152}]{.note-number}[[2]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-377)[.
]{.note-number}Maurice de Vlaminck, *Poliment,* [1931]{.scap1}, p.
[52]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-153}]{.note-number}[[3]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-378)[.
]{.note-number}Ambroise Paré, *Le livre des animaux et de l'intelligence
de l'homme*. *Oeuvres complètes,* edition J. F. Malgaigne, vol. III, p.
[740]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-154}]{.note-number}[[4]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-379)[.
]{.note-number}Arthur Landsborough Thomson, *Birds*. Reference is to
French translation (Cluny, [1934]{.scap1}), p. [104]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-155}]{.note-number}[[5]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-380)[.
]{.note-number}André Theuriet, *Colette*, p. [209]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-156}]{.note-number}[[6]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-381)[.
]{.note-number}L. Charbonneaux-Lassay, *Le bestiaire du Christ* (Paris,
[1940]{.scap1}), p. [489]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-157}]{.note-number}[[7]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-382)[.
]{.note-number}A. Toussenel, *Le monde des oiseaux*, Ornithologie
passionnelle (Paris, [1853]{.scap1}), p. [32]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-158}]{.note-number}[[8]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-383)[.
]{.note-number}Fernand Lequenne, *Plantes sauvages*, p. [269]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-159}]{.note-number}[[9]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-384)[.
]{.note-number}Van Gogh, *Lettres à Théo,* p. [12]{.scap1} (French
translation).

[
[]{#calibre_link-160}]{.note-number}[[10]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-385)[.
]{.note-number}Abbé Vincelot, *Les noms des oiseaux expliqués par leurs
moeurs, ou essais étymologiques sur I'ornithologie* (Angers,
[1867]{.scap1}), p. [233]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-161}]{.note-number}[[11]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-386)[.
]{.note-number}Jean Caubère, *Déserts* (Paris: Debresse), p.
[25]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-162}]{.note-number}[[12]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-387)[.
]{.note-number}Jules Michelet, *L'oiseau*, [4]{.scap1}th ed.
([1858]{.scap1}), p. [208]{.scap1}, etc. Joseph Joubert (*Pensées*, vol.
[11]{.scap1}, p. [167]{.scap1}) has also written: "It would be
interesting to find out if the forms that birds give their nests,
without ever having seen a nest, have not some analogy with their own
inner constitutions."

[
[]{#calibre_link-163}]{.note-number}[[13]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-388)[.
]{.note-number}Romain Rolland, *Colas Breugnon*, p. [107]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-164}]{.note-number}[[14]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-389)[.
]{.note-number}*Loc. cit*., p. [572]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-165}]{.note-number}[[15]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-390)[.
]{.note-number}Adolphe Shedrow, *Berceau sans promesses* (Paris:
Séghers), p. [33]{.scap1}. Shedrow also wrote: *I dreamed of a nest in
which the ages no longer slept*.

[
[]{#calibre_link-166}]{.note-number}[[16]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-391)[.
]{.note-number}French translation: *L'histoire de la poésie des
Hébreux*, p. [269]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-167}]{.note-number}[[17]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-392)[.
]{.note-number}*Cahiers G.L.M*., Autumn [1954]{.scap1}, p. [7]{.scap1},
translated by André du Bouchet.

[5]{.scap1}: SHELLS

[
[]{#calibre_link-168}]{.note-number}[[1]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-393)[.
]{.note-number}Edouard Monod-Herzen, *Principes de morphologie générale*
(Paris: Gauthier-Villars, [1927]{.scap1}), vol. [1]{.scap1}, p.
[119]{.scap1}. "Shells offer countless examples of spiral surfaces, on
which the joining lines of the successive whorls are spiral helices."
The geometry of a peacock's tail is more aerial: "The eyes in a
peacock's spread tail are situated at the intersecting point of a double
cluster of spirals, that are apparently Archimedean spirals" (vol. I, p.
[58]{.scap1}).

[
[]{#calibre_link-169}]{.note-number}[[2]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-394)[.
]{.note-number}Paul Valéry, *Les merveilles de la mer. Les coquillages*,
p. [5]{.scap1}. Collection "Isis," Plon, Paris.

[
[]{#calibre_link-170}]{.note-number}[[3]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-395)[.
]{.note-number}Jurgis Baltrusaitis, *Le moyen-âge fantastique* (Paris:
Colin), p. [57]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-171}]{.note-number}[[4]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-396)[.
]{.note-number}Jurgis Baltrusaitis, *loc. cit*., p. [56]{.scap1}. "On
the coins of Hatria, a woman's head, with her hair blown by the wind,
perhaps Aphrodite herself, is seen coming out of a round shell."

[
[]{#calibre_link-172}]{.note-number}[[5]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-397)[.
]{.note-number}*Loc. cit.*, p. [17]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-173}]{.note-number}[[6]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-398)[.
]{.note-number}Abbé de Vallemont, *Curiosités de la nature et de l'art
sur la végétation ou l'agriculture et le jardinage dans leur perfection*
(Paris, [1709]{.scap1}), first part, p. [189]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-174}]{.note-number}[[7]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-399)[.
]{.note-number}Charbonneaux-Lassay quotes Plato and Iamblichus. He also
refers the reader to *Les mystères d'Eleusis,* VI, by Victor Magnien
(Payot).

[
[]{#calibre_link-175}]{.note-number}[[8]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-400)[.
]{.note-number}Cf. Bachelard's *La formation de l'esprit scientifique*
(Vrin), p. [206]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-176}]{.note-number}[[9]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-401)[.
]{.note-number}*Le spectacle de la nature,* p. [231]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-177}]{.note-number}[[10]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-402)[.
]{.note-number}Léon Binet, *Secrets de la vie des animaux,* Essai de
physiologie animale, p. [19]{.scap1}, Presses Universitaires de France.

[
[]{#calibre_link-178}]{.note-number}[[11]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-403)[.
]{.note-number}Armand Landrin, *Les monstres marins* (Paris: Hachette),
[2]{.scap1}nd ed., p. [16]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-179}]{.note-number}[[12]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-404)[.
]{.note-number}Georges Duhamel, *Confession de minuit*, ch. VII.

[
[]{#calibre_link-180}]{.note-number}[[13]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-405)[.
]{.note-number}Maxime Alexandre, *La peau et les os* (Paris: Gallimard,
[1956]{.scap1}), p. [18]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-181}]{.note-number}[[14]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-406)[.
]{.note-number}Gaston Puel, *Le chant entre deux astres,* p.
[10]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-182}]{.note-number}[[15]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-407)[.
]{.note-number}Armand Landrin, *loc. cit.,* p. [15]{.scap1}. The same
fable is quoted by Ambroise Paré (*Oeuvres complètes,* vol. III, p.
[776]{.scap1}). The little crab aid is "seated like a porter at the
entrance of the shell." When a fish swims into the shell, the bitten
shellfish shuts the shell, "then, together, they nibble and eat their
prey."

[
[]{#calibre_link-183}]{.note-number}[[16]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-408)[.
]{.note-number}The correct version, of course, is: *Qui vole un oeuf
volera un boeuf* (He who steals an egg will steal an ox).

[
[]{#calibre_link-184}]{.note-number}[[17]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-409)[.
]{.note-number}Sixteenth-century scholar, potter and enamelist. One of
the creators of the ceramic arts in France.

[
[]{#calibre_link-185}]{.note-number}[[18]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-410)[.
]{.note-number}Bernard Palissy, *Recepte véritable,* p. [151]{.scap1},
published by *Bibliotheca romana.*

*[]{#calibre_link-186}*[[19]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-411)[.
]{.note-number}René Rouquier, *La boule de verre* (Paris: Séghers), p.
[52]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-187}]{.note-number}[[20]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-412)[.
]{.note-number}*Loc. cit.,* p. [78]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-188}]{.note-number}[[21]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-413)[.
]{.note-number}Noël Arnaud, *L'état d'ébauche* (Paris, [1950]{.scap1}).

[
[]{#calibre_link-189}]{.note-number}[[22]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-414)[.
]{.note-number}In *La revue de culture européenne*, [4]{.scap1}th
trimester ([1953]{.scap1}), p. [259]{.scap1}.

[6]{.scap1}: CORNERS

[
[]{#calibre_link-190}]{.note-number}[[1]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-415)[.
]{.note-number}*Le temps de la poésie,* *Cahiers* *G.L.M*., July
[1948]{.scap1}, p. [32]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-191}]{.note-number}[[2]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-416)[.
]{.note-number}Quoted earlier, p. [127]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-192}]{.note-number}[[3]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-417)[.
]{.note-number}[1929]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-193}]{.note-number}[[4]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-418)[.
]{.note-number}Michel Leiris, *Biffures*, p. [9]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-194}]{.note-number}[[5]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-419)[.
]{.note-number}*Poèmes à l'autre moi*, p. [48]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-195}]{.note-number}[[6]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-420)[.
]{.note-number}Eighteenth-century French moralist, friend of
Chateaubriand.

[7]{.scap1}: MINIATURE

[
[]{#calibre_link-196}]{.note-number}[[1]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-421)[.
]{.note-number}Charles Nodier, [1780]{.scap1}--[1844]{.scap1}. French
writer of tales of fantasy.

[
[]{#calibre_link-197}]{.note-number}[[2]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-422)[.
]{.note-number}Old measure, about [1]{.scap1}/[16]{.scap1} of a bushel.

[
[]{#calibre_link-198}]{.note-number}[[3]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-423)[.
]{.note-number}*Fontaine*, French literary review published in Algiers,
then in France, during the Second World War.

[
[]{#calibre_link-199}]{.note-number}[[4]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-424)[.
]{.note-number}*Journal de psychologie*, April--June [1947]{.scap1}, p.
[169]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-200}]{.note-number}[[5]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-425)[.
]{.note-number}How many of us, once we have eaten an apple, attack the
seed! In company, we restrain our innocent mania for decorticating the
seeds in order to chew them. And what thoughts we have, what daydreams,
when we eat the germs of plants!

[
[]{#calibre_link-201}]{.note-number}[[6]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-426)[.
]{.note-number}P. de Boissy, *Main première*, p. [21]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-202}]{.note-number}[[7]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-427)[.
]{.note-number}Cf. Bachelard's *La formation de l'esprit scientifique*.

[
[]{#calibre_link-203}]{.note-number}[[8]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-428)[.
]{.note-number}Edition *Métamorphoses* (Paris: Gallimard), p.
[105]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-204}]{.note-number}[[9]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-429)[.
]{.note-number}*Marbre* (Paris: Laffont), p. [63]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-205}]{.note-number}[[10]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-430)[.
]{.note-number}Victor Hugo, *Le Rhin*, Hetzel edition, vol. III, p.
[98]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-206}]{.note-number}[[11]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-431)[.
]{.note-number}Baron Georges Cuvier, eighteenth-century zoologist and
founder of the science of paleontology.

[
[]{#calibre_link-207}]{.note-number}[[12]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-432)[.
]{.note-number}*Niels Lyne* was a work that Rilke read and reread.

[
[]{#calibre_link-208}]{.note-number}[[13]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-433)[.
]{.note-number}Seventeenth-century French author of many fairy tales
that have become classics.

[
[]{#calibre_link-209}]{.note-number}[[14]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-434)[.
]{.note-number}André Breton, *Le revolver aux cheveux blancs* (Paris:
Cahiers Libres), p. [122]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-210}]{.note-number}[[15]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-435)[.
]{.note-number}Gaston Paris, *Le Petit Poucet et la Grande Ourse*
*(*Paris, [1875]{.scap1}).

[
[]{#calibre_link-211}]{.note-number}[[16]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-436)[.
]{.note-number}It should be noted, however, that certain neurotics
insist that they can see the microbes that are consuming their organs.

[
[]{#calibre_link-212}]{.note-number}[[17]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-437)[.
]{.note-number}"*Mon père m'a donné un mari, mon Dieu, quel petit
homme!"* Popular French folk song.

[
[]{#calibre_link-213}]{.note-number}[[18]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-438)[.
]{.note-number}Alas, in English, the "Grand Chariot" is the "Great
Bear," so this "key" will not fit the legend of our Tom Thumb.
(Translator's note.)

[
[]{#calibre_link-214}]{.note-number}[[19]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-439)[.
]{.note-number}Noël Bureau, *Les mains tendues,* p. [25]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-215}]{.note-number}[[20]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-440)[.
]{.note-number}Jules Supervielle, *Gravitations,* pp.
[183]{.scap1}--[85]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-216}]{.note-number}[[21]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-441)[.
]{.note-number}Baudelaire, *Curiosités esthétiques,* p. [429]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-217}]{.note-number}[[22]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-442)[.
]{.note-number}Baudelaire, *loc. cit.,* p. [316]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-218}]{.note-number}[[23]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-443)[.
]{.note-number}Joë Bousquet, *Le meneur de lune,* p. [162]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-219}]{.note-number}[[24]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-444)[.
]{.note-number}René-Guy Cadou, *Hélène ou le règne végétal* (Paris:
Séghers), p. [13]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-220}]{.note-number}[[25]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-445)[.
]{.note-number}Noël Bureau, *Les mains tendues,* p. [29]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-221}]{.note-number}[[26]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-446)[.
]{.note-number}Claude Vigée, *loc. cit.,* p. [68]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-222}]{.note-number}[[27]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-447)[.
]{.note-number}J. Moreau, "Du haschisch et de l'aliénation mentale,"
*Etudes Psychologiques*, [1845]{.scap1}, p. [71]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-223}]{.note-number}[[28]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-448)[.
]{.note-number}In French, *mandragore*.

[
[]{#calibre_link-224}]{.note-number}[[29]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-449)[.
]{.note-number}Published in *Les lettres*, no. [8]{.scap1},
[2]{.scap1}nd year.

[
[]{#calibre_link-225}]{.note-number}[[30]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-450)[.
]{.note-number}Loys Masson, *Icare ou le voyageur* (Paris: Séghers), p.
[15]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-226}]{.note-number}[[31]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-451)[.
]{.note-number}René Daumal, *Poésie noire, poésie blanche* (Paris:
Gallimard), p. [42]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-227}]{.note-number}[[32]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-452)[.
]{.note-number}Max Picard, *Die Welt des Schweigens* (Rentsch Verlag,
[1948]{.scap1}, English translation, London: Harvill Press,
[1952]{.scap1}).

[8]{.scap1}: INTIMATE IMMENSITY

[
[]{#calibre_link-228}]{.note-number}[[1]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-453)[.
]{.note-number}Cf. Supervielle, *L'escalier*, p. [124]{.scap1}.
"Distance bears me along in its mobile exile."

[
[]{#calibre_link-229}]{.note-number}[[2]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-454)[.
]{.note-number}Pierre Albert-Bireau, *Les amusements naturels*, p.
[192]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-230}]{.note-number}[[3]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-455)[.
]{.note-number}Marcault and Thérèse Brosse, *L'éducation de demain*, p.
[255]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-231}]{.note-number}[[4]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-456)[.
]{.note-number}"A characteristic of forests is to be closed and, at the
same time, open on every side." A. Pieyre de Mandiargues, *Le lis de
mer* ([1956]{.scap1}), p. [57]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-232}]{.note-number}[[5]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-457)[.
]{.note-number}Pierre-Jean Jouve, *Lyrique* (Paris: Mercure de France),
p. [13]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-233}]{.note-number}[[6]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-458)[.
]{.note-number}Pierre Guéguen, *La Bretagne*, p. [71]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-234}]{.note-number}[[7]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-459)[.
]{.note-number}René Ménard, *Le livre des arbres* (Paris: Arts et
Métiers Graphiques, [1956]{.scap1}), pp. [6]{.scap1}, [7]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-235}]{.note-number}[[8]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-460)[.
]{.note-number}Gaston Roupnel, *La campagne française*; see the chapter
entitled "*La forêt*," p. [75]{.scap1} ff. (Paris: Club des Libraires de
France).

[
[]{#calibre_link-236}]{.note-number}[[9]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-461)[.
]{.note-number}Cf. *La terre et les rêveries de la volonté*, ch. XII, §
VII, "La terre immense."

[
[]{#calibre_link-237}]{.note-number}[[10]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-462)[.
]{.note-number}The word *vast* is not included, however, in the
excellent index to *Fusées et journaux intimes*, edited by Jacques
Crépet (Paris: Mercure de France).

[
[]{#calibre_link-238}]{.note-number}[[11]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-463)[.
]{.note-number}Baudelaire, *Le mangeur d'opium,* p. [181]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-239}]{.note-number}[[12]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-464)[.
]{.note-number}Baudelaire, *Les paradis artificiels,* p. [325]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-240}]{.note-number}[[13]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-465)[.
]{.note-number}*Loc. cit.,* pp. [169]{.scap1}, [172]{.scap1},
[183]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-241}]{.note-number}[[14]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-466)[.
]{.note-number}Baudelaire, *Curiosités esthétiques,* p. [221]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-242}]{.note-number}[[15]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-467)[.
]{.note-number}Baudelaire, *L'art romantique*, p. [369]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-243}]{.note-number}[[16]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-468)[.
]{.note-number}Baudelaire, *Les paradis artificiels*, p. [169]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-244}]{.note-number}[[17]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-469)[.
]{.note-number}Baudelaire, *Journaux intimes*, p. [28]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-245}]{.note-number}[[18]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-470)[.
]{.note-number}Baudelaire, *L'art romantique*, § X.

[
[]{#calibre_link-246}]{.note-number}[[19]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-471)[.
]{.note-number}Cf. Edgar Allan Poe, La puissance de la parole, *apud.
Nouvelles histoires extraordinaires*, translated into French by
Baudelaire, p. [238]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-247}]{.note-number}[[20]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-472)[.
]{.note-number}For Victor Hugo the wind is vast. The wind says: *I am
the great passer-by, vast, invincible and vain* (*Dieu,* p.
[5]{.scap1}). In the three last words we hardly move our lips to
pronounce the *v* sounds.

[
[]{#calibre_link-248}]{.note-number}[[21]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-473)[.
]{.note-number}Max Picard, *Der Mensch und das Wort* (Eugen Rentsch
Verlag, [1955]{.scap1}), p. [15]{.scap1}. It goes without saying that
such a sentence as this should not be translated, since it obliges us to
listen to the vocality of the German language. Every language has its
words of great vocal value.

[
[]{#calibre_link-249}]{.note-number}[[22]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-474)[.
]{.note-number}Hippolyte Taine, French philosopher, historian and critic
([1828]{.scap1}--[1893]{.scap1}).

[
[]{#calibre_link-250}]{.note-number}[[23]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-475)[.
]{.note-number}"*Poème*" dated June [1924]{.scap1}, translated into
French by Claude Vigée, published in the review *Les lettres*,
[4]{.scap1}th year, nos. [14]{.scap1}, [15]{.scap1}, [16]{.scap1}, p.
[13]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-251}]{.note-number}[[24]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-476)[.
]{.note-number}Jules Supervielle, *L'escalier*, p. [106]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-252}]{.note-number}[[25]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-477)[.
]{.note-number}Henri Bosco, *Antonin*, p. [13]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-253}]{.note-number}[[26]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-478)[.
]{.note-number}Jules Supervielle, *L'escalier*, p. [123]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-254}]{.note-number}[[27]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-479)[.
]{.note-number}Joë Bousquet, *La neige d'un autre âge*, p. [92]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-255}]{.note-number}[[28]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-480)[.
]{.note-number}Pierre Loti, *Un jeune officier pauvre*, p. [85]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-256}]{.note-number}[[29]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-481)[.
]{.note-number}Philippe Diolé, *Le plus beau désert du monde* (Albin
Michel), p. [178]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-257}]{.note-number}[[30]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-482)[.
]{.note-number}Henri Bosco has also written on this subject
(*L'antiquaire*, p. [228]{.scap1}): "In the hidden desert that each one
of us bears within himself, and to which the desert of sand and stone
has penetrated, the expanse of the spirit is lost in the infinite,
uninhabited expanse that is the desolation of earth's place of
solitude." See also p. [227]{.scap1}.

Elsewhere on a bare plateau, on the plain that touches the sky, this
great dreamer gives profound expression to the analogies between the
desert on earth and the desert of the spirit. "Once more emptiness
stretched out inside me and I was a desert within a desert." The
meditation ends on this note: "My spirit had left me" (Henri Bosco,
*Hyacinthe*, pp. [33]{.scap1}, [34]{.scap1}).

[
[]{#calibre_link-258}]{.note-number}[[31]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-483)[.
]{.note-number}Gabriele d'Annunzio, *Le feu*, French translation, p.
[261]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-259}]{.note-number}[[32]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-484)[.
]{.note-number}Thoreau, *Walden*.

[9]{.scap1}: THE DIALECTICS OF OUTSIDE AND INSIDE

[
[]{#calibre_link-260}]{.note-number}[[1]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-485)[.
]{.note-number}Jean Hyppolite, spoken commentary on the *Verneinung*
(negation) of Freud. See *La psychanalyse*, no. [1]{.scap1}
([1956]{.scap1}), p. [35]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-261}]{.note-number}[[2]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-486)[.
]{.note-number}Hyppolite brings out the deep psychological inversion of
negation in denegation. Later, I plan to give examples of this
inversion, on the simple level of images.

[
[]{#calibre_link-262}]{.note-number}[[3]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-487)[.
]{.note-number}Spiral? If we banish geometry from philosophical
intuitions, it reappears almost immediately.

[
[]{#calibre_link-263}]{.note-number}[[4]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-488)[.
]{.note-number}Henri Michaux, *Nouvelles de l'étranger* (Paris: Mercure
de France, [1952]{.scap1}).

[
[]{#calibre_link-264}]{.note-number}[[5]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-489)[.
]{.note-number}Another poet writes: "To think that a mere word, a name,
suffices to make the dividing walls of your strength come tumbling
down." Pierre Reverdy, *Risques et périls*, p. [23]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-265}]{.note-number}[[6]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-490)[.
]{.note-number}André Fontainas, *L'ornement de la solitude* (Paris:
Mercure de France, [1899]{.scap1}), p. [22]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-266}]{.note-number}[[7]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-491)[.
]{.note-number}*Lettres* (Paris: Stock), p. [167]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-267}]{.note-number}[[8]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-492)[.
]{.note-number}Jules Supervielle, *Gravitations,* p. [19]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-268}]{.note-number}[[9]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-493)[.
]{.note-number}Jean Pellerin, *La romance du retour* (N.R.F.,
[1921]{.scap1}), p. [18]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-269}]{.note-number}[[10]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-494)[.
]{.note-number}Porphyrus, *The Nymph's Cave*, § [27]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-270}]{.note-number}[[11]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-495)[.
]{.note-number}Michel Barrault, *Dominicale,* vol. I, p. [11]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-271}]{.note-number}[[12]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-496)[.
]{.note-number}Ramon Gomez de la Serna, *Echantillons* (Paris: Grasset),
p. [167]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-272}]{.note-number}[[13]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-497)[.
]{.note-number}Maurice Blanchot, *L'arrét de mort*, p. [124]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-273}]{.note-number}[[14]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-498)[.
]{.note-number}Rilke, French translation, p. [106]{.scap1}, of *Les
cahiers*.

[
[]{#calibre_link-274}]{.note-number}[[15]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-499)[.
]{.note-number}Ed. Jean Pommier, *Corti*, p. [19]{.scap1}.

[10]{.scap1}: THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF ROUNDNESS

[
[]{#calibre_link-275}]{.note-number}[[1]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-500)[.
]{.note-number}Joë Bousquet, *Le meneur de lune*, p. [174]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-276}]{.note-number}[[2]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-501)[.
]{.note-number}Alas, in English, such a man is never "round" but
"square." (Translator's note.)

[
[]{#calibre_link-277}]{.note-number}[[3]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-502)[.
]{.note-number}Alfred de Vigny, *Cinq-Mars*, ch. XVI.

[
[]{#calibre_link-278}]{.note-number}[[4]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-503)[.
]{.note-number}This volume first appeared in [1958]{.scap1}.
(Translator's note.)

[
[]{#calibre_link-279}]{.note-number}[[5]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-504)[.
]{.note-number}Jules Michelet, *L'oiseau*, p. [291]{.scap1}.

[
[]{#calibre_link-280}]{.note-number}[[6]{.note-number}](#calibre_link-505)[.
]{.note-number}Rilke, *Poésie,* translated (into French) by Maurice
Betz, under the title: *Inquiétude,* p. [95]{.scap1}.
:::

::: basic-text-frame
[]{.scap1}
:::

::: basic-text-frame
[]{.scap1}
:::

::: basic-text-frame
[]{.scap1}
:::

::: basic-text-frame
[]{.scap1}
:::

::: basic-text-frame
[]{.scap1}
:::

::: basic-text-frame
[]{.scap1}
:::

::: basic-text-frame
[]{.scap1}
:::

::: basic-text-frame
[]{.scap1}
:::

::: basic-text-frame
[]{.scap1}
:::

::: basic-text-frame
[]{.scap1}
:::

::: basic-text-frame
[]{.scap1}
:::

::: basic-text-frame
[]{.scap1}
:::

::: basic-text-frame
[]{.scap1}
:::

::: basic-text-frame
[]{.scap1}
:::

::: basic-text-frame
[]{.scap1}
:::

::: basic-text-frame
[]{.scap1}
:::
::::::::::::::::::::

:::: {#calibre_link-506 .calibre}
::: calibre3
**Looking for more?**\
\
Visit Penguin.com for more about this author and a complete list of
their books.\
\
[**Discover your next great
read!**](http://links.penguin.com/type/eBookLanding/isbn/9780698170438?cmp=OTC-EBKREAD2)

[![Penguin Logo](images/000000.jpg){#calibre_link-537
.w1}](http://links.penguin.com/type/eBookLanding/isbn/9780698170438?cmp=OTC-EBKREAD2)
:::
::::
