---
title: "The Legend of Sigurd and Gudrún"
author: "J.R.R. Tolkien"
editor: "Christopher Tolkien"
voice: "J.R.R. Tolkien"
voice_role: "Mythmaker & Philologist - Sub-creation as Art"
tradition: "Norse/Germanic Literature"
period: "20th Century"
region: "England"
genre: "Epic Poetry"
form: "Eddaic Verse"
mode: "Norse Mythological Recreation"
work_type: "Primary Source"
source_type: "Complete Work"
source_quality: "Posthumous Edition"
chamber_integration: "June 2025"
significance: "Tolkien's mastery of Norse poetic form, recreating lost Eddaic tradition"
tags:
  - norse-mythology
  - eddaic-poetry
  - sigurd
  - volsunga-saga
  - philology
  - germanic-literature
  - tolkien
  - mythological-recreation
related_voices:
  - Snorri Sturluson
  - Volsunga Saga author
  - William Morris
  - Wagner
chamber_position: "First Ring - The Makers / Fourth Ring - Mythological Presences"
cross_cultural_bridge: "Anglo-Saxon scholar reviving Norse tradition"
status: "source-aware"
---

# The Legend of Sigurd and Gudrún

*J.R.R. Tolkien*  
*Edited by Christopher Tolkien*

---

*Chamber Note: Demonstrates Tolkien's profound philological engagement with Norse tradition, not merely translating but recreating lost Eddaic poetry in its original meters. Shows his role as bridge between ancient Germanic traditions and modern mythmaking.*[IX: DEILD](#calibre_link-16)

[COMMENTARY on VÖLSUNGAKVIÐA EN NÝJA](#calibre_link-17)

[GUÐRÚNARKVIÐA EN NÝJA eða DRÁP NIFLUNGA](#calibre_link-18)

[GUÐRÚNARKVIÐA EN NÝJA ('The New Lay of Gudrún')](#calibre_link-19)

[COMMENTARY on GUÐRÚNARKVIÐA EN NÝJA](#calibre_link-20)

[APPENDICES](#calibre_link-21)

[APPENDIX A A short account of the ORIGINS OF THE
LEGEND](#calibre_link-22)

[APPENDIX B THE PROPHECY OF THE SIBYL](#calibre_link-23)

[APPENDIX C FRAGMENTS OF A HEROIC POEM OF ATTILA IN OLD
ENGLISH](#calibre_link-24)

[WORKS BY J.R.R. TOLKIEN](#calibre_link-25)

[COPYRIGHT PAGE](#calibre_link-26)

[ABOUT THE PUBLISHER](#calibre_link-27)
:::

::: {#calibre_link-3 .calibre2}
# [FOREWORD](#calibre_link-28){.calibre5} {#foreword .fmh}

![art](images/000001.jpg){.calibre1}

FOREWORD

In his essay *On Fairy-Stories* (1947) my father wrote of books that he
read in his childhood, and in the course of this he said:

I had very little desire to look for buried treasure or fight pirates,
and *Treasure Island* left me cool. Red Indians were better: there were
bows and arrows (I had and have a wholly unsatisfied desire to shoot
well with a bow), and strange languages, and glimpses of an archaic mode
of life, and above all, forests in such stories. But the land of Merlin
and Arthur were better than these, and best of all the nameless North of
Sigurd and the Völsungs, and the prince of all dragons. Such lands were
pre-eminently desirable.

That the ancient poetry in the Old Norse language known by the names of
the *Elder Edda* or the *Poetic Edda* remained a deep if submerged force
in his later life's work is no doubt recognised. It is at any rate
well-known that he derived the names of the dwarves in *The Hobbit* from
the first of the poems in the Edda, the *Völuspá*, 'the Prophecy of the
Sibyl' -- remarking in a lightly sardonic but not uncharacteristic tone
to a friend in December 1937:

I don't much approve of *The Hobbit* myself, preferring my own mythology
(which is just touched on) with its consistent nomenclature . . . to
this rabble of Eddaic-named dwarves out of *Völuspá,* newfangled hobbits
and gollums (invented in an idle hour) and Anglo-Saxon runes.

But it is certainly not well-known, indeed scarcely known at all (though
it can be discovered from existing publications), that he wrote two
closely associated poems treating of the Völsung and Niflung (or
Nibelung) legend, using modern English fitted to the Old Norse metre,
amounting to more than five hundred stanzas: poems that have never been
published until now, nor has any line been quoted from them. These poems
bear the titles *Völsungakviða en nýja,* the New Lay of the Völsungs,
and *Guðrúnarkviða en nýja*, the New Lay of Gudrún.

My father's erudition was by no means confined to 'Anglo-Saxon', but
extended to an expert knowledge of the poems of the Elder Edda and the
Old Norse language (a term that in general use is largely equivalent to
Old Icelandic, since by far the greater part of Norse literature that
survives is written in Icelandic). In fact, for many years after he
became the professor of Anglo-Saxon at Oxford in 1925 he was the
professor of Old Norse, though no such title existed; he gave lectures
and classes on Norse language and literature in every year from 1926
until at least 1939. But despite his accomplishment in this field, which
was recognized in Iceland, he never wrote anything specifically on a
Norse subject for publication -- except perhaps the 'New Lays', and for
this, so far as I know, there is no evidence one way or the other,
unless the existence of an amanuensis typescript, of unknown date and
without other interest, suggests it. But there survive many pages of
notes and draftings for his lectures, although these were for the most
part written very rapidly and often on the brink of illegibility or
beyond.

The 'New Lays' arose from those studies and belong to that time. My
inclination is to date them later rather than earlier in his years at
Oxford before the Second War, perhaps to the earlier 1930s; but this is
scarcely more than an unarguable intuition. The two poems, which I
believe to have been closely related in time of composition, constitute
a very substantial work, and it seems possible, as a mere guess, since
there is no evidence whatsoever to confirm it, that my father turned to
the Norse poems as a new poetic enterprise after he abandoned the Lay of
Leithian (the legend of Beren and Lúthien) near the end of 1931 (*The
Lays of Beleriand,* p.304).

These poems stand in a complex relation to their ancient sources; they
are in no sense translations. Those sources themselves, various in their
nature, present obscurities, contradictions, and enigmas: and the
existence of these problems underlay my father's avowed purpose in
writing the 'New Lays'.

He scarcely ever (to my knowledge) referred to them. For my part, I
cannot recollect any conversation with him on the subject until very
near the end of his life, when he spoke of them to me, and tried
unsuccessfully to find them. But he briefly mentioned the work in two
letters to W.H. Auden. In that of 29 March 1967 (*The Letters of J.R.R.
Tolkien,* edited by Humphrey Carpenter, no.295), thanking Auden for
sending his translation of the *Völuspá*, he said that he hoped to send
him in return 'if I can lay my hands on it (I hope it isn't lost), a
thing I did many years ago when trying to learn the art of writing
alliterative poetry: an attempt to unify the lays about the Völsungs
from the Elder Edda, written in the old eight-line fornyrðislag stanza'
(that being the name given to the Norse alliterative stanzaic metre used
in the greater number of the 'Eddaic' poems, the 'Old Lore Metre'). And
in the following year, on 29 January 1968, he wrote: 'I believe I have
lying about somewhere a long unpublished poem called *Völsungakviða en
nýja* written in fornyrðislag 8-line stanzas in English: an attempt to
organise the Edda material dealing with Sigurd and Gunnar.'

To 'unify', to 'organise', the material of the lays of the Elder Edda:
that was how he put it some forty years later. To speak only of
*Völsungakviða en nýja*, his poem, as narrative, is essentially an
*ordering* and *clarification*, a bringing out of comprehensible design
or structure. But always to be borne in mind are these words of his:
'The people who wrote each of these poems \[of the Edda\] -- not the
collectors who copied and excerpted them later -- *wrote them as
distinct individual things to be heard isolated with only the general
knowledge of the story in mind.'*

It may be said, as it seems to me, that he presented his interpretation
of the sources in a mode that can be received independently of the
doubts and debates of 'Eddaic' and 'Nibelung' scholarship. The 'New
Lays' themselves, elaborate poems closely modelled in manner as in metre
on the 'Eddaic' lays, are therefore paramount; and they are presented
here in plain texts without any editorial interference; all else in the
book is ancillary.

That there should be, nonetheless, so much else in the book requires
some explanation. It may be felt that some account should be given of
the actual nature of my father's distinctive treatment of the legend. To
provide a comprehensive account of the much discussed problems that he
sought to resolve would lead all too easily to the first appearance of
the 'New Lays' after some eighty years with a great weight of scholarly
discussion hung about their necks. This is not to be thought of. But it
seems to me that the publication of his poems provides an opportunity to
hear the author himself, through the medium of the notes with which he
prepared for his lectures, speaking (as it were) in characteristic tones
on those very elements of doubt and difficulty that are found in the old
narratives.

It must also be said that his poems are not at all points easy to
follow, and this arises especially from the nature of the old poems that
were his models. In one of his lectures he said:
'[In](#calibre_link-29){#calibre_link-72} Old English breadth, fullness,
reflection, elegiac effect, were aimed at. Old Norse poetry aims at
*seizing a situation,* striking a blow that will be remembered,
illuminating a moment with a flash of lightning -- and tends to
concision, weighty packing of the language in sense and form . . .' That
'seizing a situation', 'illuminating a moment', without clear unfolding
of narrative sequence or other matters with a bearing on the 'moment',
will be found to be a marked characteristic of the 'New Lays'; and here
some guidance may be looked for in addition to the brief prose
statements that he added to some of the sections of the *Völsungakviða
en nýja.*

After much deliberation I have therefore provided, at the end of each
poem, a commentary, which is intended to clarify references, and
passages that may seem obscure; and also to point out significant
departures made by my father from the Old Norse sources or between
variant narratives, in such cases indicating his views, where possible,
by reference to what he said in his lectures. It must be emphasized that
nothing in those notes suggests that he had written, or had it in mind
to write, poems on the subject himself; on the other hand, as one might
expect, congruence between the views expressed in his lecture notes and
the treatment of the Norse sources in his poems can often be observed.

As a general introduction in this book to the Elder Edda I have cited at
length a more finished lecture with that title; and following this I
have contributed brief statements on the text of the poems, the
verse-form, and some other topics. At the end of the book I have given a
brief account of the origins of the legend and cited some other related
verses of my father's.

In thus making much use of my father's notes and draft discussions on
'the Matter of Old Norse', and the tragedy of the Völsungs and the
Niflungs, hastily set down and unfinished as they are, I have chosen to
try to make this book, as a whole, as much his work as I could achieve.
Of its nature it is not to be judged by views prevailing in contemporary
scholarship. It is intended rather as a presentation and record of his
perceptions, in his own day, of a literature that he greatly admired.

In the commentaries I refer to the two poems as 'the Lay of the
Völsungs' (*Völsungakviða*) and 'the Lay of Gudrún' (*Guðrúnarkviða*).
But in the title of the book, *The Legend of Sigurd and Gudrún*, I have
taken up the subordinate title that my father gave to the
*Völsungakviða* on the opening page of the manuscript, *Sigurðarkviða en
mesta*, 'the Longest Lay of Sigurd', on which see
[p.234.](#calibre_link-30){#calibre_link-259}

The sections of this book are each preceded by drawings made by Mr Bill
Sanderson. These are derived closely from wood carvings that adorn the
wide door-posts of the twelfth century church of Hylestad in the south
of Norway, which are now preserved in the Oldsaksamlingen of the
University of Oslo.

The scenes depict in continuous vertical series on each side of the
doorway the story of Sigurd's most famous deed, which in the Lay of the
Völsungs is told in section V, *Regin*: the slaying of the dragon
Fáfnir, which gave him the name *Fáfnisbani*. The carvings begin with
the forging of swords by Regin the smith and their testing. Then follow
the slaying of Fáfnir; Sigurd tasting his blood with his finger, which
enabled him to understand the voices of the birds (stanza 41 in the
Lay); the slaying of Regin (stanza 45); and Sigurd's horse Grani, famous
in legend, foal of Sleipnir, the mythical horse that Ódin rode: he is
shown here laden with the treasure of the dragon, although not portrayed
by that artist as so huge a burden as it is in the Völsunga Saga and in
the Lay (stanza 48). The continuous carving ends with a different scene:
Gunnar playing the harp in Atli's snake-pit (the Lay of Gudrún, stanza
135): in this version playing it with his feet, his hands being bound
(see [p.330](#calibre_link-31){#calibre_link-336}).

It will be seen that there is no reference in this book to the operas of
Richard Wagner that are known by the general title of *Der Ring des
Nibelungen,* or *The Ring.*

For his work Wagner drew primarily on Old Norse literature. His chief
sources, known to him in translation, were the lays of the Poetic Edda
and the Saga of the Völsungs, as they were my father's also. The great
epic poem *Das Nibelungenlied*, written about the beginning of the
thirteenth century in Middle High German, was not a source for Wagner's
libretti in at all the same sense as were the Norse works, though this
may be superficially disguised by his use of German name-forms
(Siegfried, Siegmund, Gunther, Hagen, Brünnhilde).

But Wagner's treatment of the Old Norse forms of the legend was less an
'interpretation' of the ancient literature than a new and transformative
impulse, taking up elements of the old Northern conception and placing
them in new relations, adapting, altering and inventing on a grand
scale, according to his own taste and creative intentions. Thus the
libretti of *Der Ring des Nibelungen*, though raised indeed on old
foundations, must be seen less as a continuation or development of the
long-enduring heroic legend than as a new and independent work of art,
to which in spirit and purpose *Völsungakviða en nýja* and
*Guðrúnarkviða en nýja* bear little relation.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-4 .calibre2}
# [INTRODUCTION](#calibre_link-32){.calibre5} {#introduction .fmh}

![art](images/000002.jpg){.calibre1}

INTRODUCTION

Many years ago my father referred to the words of William Morris
concerning what he called 'the Great Story of the North', which, he
insisted, should be to us 'what the Tale of Troy was to the Greeks', and
which far in the future 'should be to those that come after us no less
than the Tale of Troy has been to us.' On this my father observed: 'How
far off and remote sound now the words of William Morris! The Tale of
Troy has been falling into oblivion since that time with surprising
rapidity. But the Völsungs have not taken its place.'

It is obviously desirable that a theme and a mode become so exotic
should be 'introduced' in some fashion; and for this first publication
of my father's 'Norse' poems I have thought that it would be both
interesting and suitable if such an introduction could be provided by
the author rather than the editor.

Nowhere in his Norse papers is there any reference whatsoever to the New
Lays, except for a collection of four small slips of paper of unknown
date on which my father hastily wrote interpretative remarks about them
(they are given on pages [51](#calibre_link-33){#calibre_link-73}--55).
While of great interest in themselves they do not constitute any large
view of the mode and matter of his Norse lays in an historical context;
and in the absence of any such writing I have ventured to include here a
substantial part of the opening lecture (with the heading *General
Introduction*) of a series in the English Faculty at Oxford titled *The
'Elder Edda'.*

It is to be borne in mind that this is the draft and record of a spoken
lecture to a small audience. No thought of publication could be remotely
present. His purpose was to communicate his vision in broad clear
strokes. He set the Edda forcibly within a large temporal context, and
eloquently conveyed his own conception of this poetry and its place in
the history of the North. In other lectures, on particular poems or
specific topics, he expressed himself, of course, with caution; but here
he could be bold, or even extravagant, not hedging every statement with
qualifications in a subject where disagreement over doubtful evidence
dogs the steps. Indeed, 'perhaps' and 'probably', 'some hold' and 'it
may be thought', are notably absent from this account as he wrote it.

My impression is that this was a relatively early writing; and he added
later a number of qualifications to his original statements. There
survives also an earlier and much rougher draft lecture with the title
*Elder Edda*. This was expressly delivered to a 'club', unnamed; but it
was the basis of the much developed lecture of which a part is given
here. My father treated that first text in a characteristic manner,
retaining phrases amid much rewriting and addition, and produced a new
manuscript. It can hardly be doubted that the lecture in its earlier
form was what he read, with that title, to the Exeter College Essay
Society on 17 November 1926. But how long a time elapsed between the two
texts it is impossible to say.

It is primarily in order to hear the voice of the author of the poems
presented in this book, writing (in order to speak) personally and
vitally of the Poetic Edda, on which he has never been heard since he
last lectured on Old Norse at Oxford some seventy years ago, that I
print it here, in its later form.

The text is rapidly written and not at all points perfectly legible, and
it is here slightly edited and somewhat shortened, with a few
explanations added in square brackets and a few footnotes.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-5 .calibre2}
# [INTRODUCTION TO THE 'ELDER EDDA'](#calibre_link-34){.calibre5} {#introduction-to-the-elder-edda .fmh}

The poetry that goes by this misleading and unfortunate title attracts
occasionally from afar people of various sort -- philologists,
historians, folklorists, and others of that kidney, but also poets,
critics, and connoisseurs of new literary sensations. The philologists
(in a wide sense) have as usual done most of the work, and their ardour
has not more than usual (probably less than in *Beowulf* ) been diverted
from at least intelligent appreciation of the literary value of these
documents.

It is unusually true here that a real judgement and appreciation of
these poems -- whose obscurity and difficulty is such that only the
devoted labour of many philologists has made them available -- is
dependent on personal possession of a knowledge of the critical,
metrical, and linguistic problems. Without the philologist, of course,
we should not know what many of the words meant, how the lines ran, or
what the words sounded like: this last is in old Scandinavian verse of
possibly more importance even than usual. The poets expended an unusual
share of their ingenuity in securing at any rate that the noise of the
verse should be fine.

It remains true, all the same, that even robbed of their peculiar and
excellent form, and their own tongue whose shape and peculiarities are
intimately connected with the atmosphere and ideas of the poems
themselves, they have a power: moving many even in school or pre-school
days in filtered forms of translation and childish adaptation to a
desire for more acquaintance.

There remains too the impact of the first hearing of these things after
the preliminary struggle with Old Norse is over and one first reads an
Eddaic poem getting enough of the sense to go on with. Few who have been
through this process can have missed the sudden recognition that they
had unawares met something of tremendous force, something that in parts
(for it has various parts) is still endowed with an almost demonic
energy, in spite of the ruin of its form. The feeling of this impact is
one of the greatest gifts that reading of the Elder Edda gives. If not
felt early in the process it is unlikely to be captured by years of
scholarly thraldom; once felt it can never be buried by mountains or
molehills of research, and sustains long and weary labour.

This is unlike Old English, whose surviving fragments (*Beowulf*
especially) -- such at any rate has been my experience -- only reveal
their mastery and excellence slowly and long after the first labour with
the tongue and the first acquaintance with the verse are over. There is
truth in this generalization. It must not be pressed. Detailed study
will enhance one's feeling for the Elder Edda, of course. Old English
verse has an attraction in places that is immediate. But Old English
verse does not attempt to hit you in the eye. To hit you in the eye was
the deliberate intention of the Norse poet.

And so it is that the best (especially the most forcible of the *heroic*
Eddaic poems) seem to leap across the barrier of the difficult language,
and grip one in the very act of deciphering line by line.

Let none who listen to the poets of the Elder Edda go away imagining
that he has listened to voices of the Primitive Germanic forest, or that
in the heroic figures he has looked upon the lineaments of his noble if
savage ancestors -- such as fought by, with, or against the Romans. I
say this with all possible emphasis -- and yet so powerful is the notion
of hoary and primeval antiquity which clings to the name (quite recent)
*Elder Edda* in popular fancy (so far as popular fancy may be said to
play with so remote and unprofitable a theme at all) that, though the
tale ought to begin with the seventeenth century and a learned bishop,
insensibly I find myself leading off with the Stone Age.

The Scandinavian lands, archaeology says, have been inhabited since the
Stone Age (not to go into niceties of *palaeo* and *neo*). The cultural
continuity has never been broken: it has been several times modified and
renewed, from the South and East in the main. One seems more justified
in Scandinavia -- more justified than usual -- in saying that most of
the people now living there have always been there.

About 400 [A.D.]{.small} or earlier, our inscriptional (Runic) glimpses
of the Northern tongue begin. But these people, though speaking a
Germanic language -- it would seem in a somewhat archaic form -- did not
take part in the great Germanic heroic age, except by ceasing to be
Scandinavian. That is: the peoples whom later we call Swedes, Gautar,
Danes, etc., are descendants of people who did not go off, as a whole,
into the adventure, turmoil, and disasters of that period. Many of the
peoples who did go came ultimately out of Scandinavia, but they lost all
connexion with it: Burgundians, Goths, Lombards.

Echoes in the form of 'tidings', of strange news, and new songs imported
ready-made, or made at home from the raw material of news, these peoples
did receive from those now obscured and confused events. The material of
tale and verse came to them -- and found very different conditions in
Scandinavian lands to those which produced them: above all they found no
wealthy courts in the Southern sense, nor headquarters of powerful
warlike forces, no great captains of hosts or kings to encourage and pay
for poetic composition. And more, they found a different local store of
mythology and stories of local heroes and sea-captains. The local
legends and the local myths were modified, but they remained
Scandinavian, and they could not if we had them, and still less can the
tattered fragments of later disjointed memories of them, be taken as a
compensation for the loss of nearly all that belonged to more southerly
Germania, least of all as the virtual equivalent of those vanished
things. Related they were, but they were different.

Then the matter became confused further by the development of a private
Scandinavian heroic age -- the so-called Viking age, after 700
[A.D.]{.small} The stay-at-homes took to ranging all over the earth --
but without losing hold on their ancient lands and seas. Though courtly
conditions then arose, *epic poetry* never developed in those lands. The
reasons are little understood -- the answers to most really pertinent
questions are seldom given -- and at any rate we must here rest content
with the fact. The causes may be sought in the temper of the times and
of the people, and of their language which was the reflexion of them.
[It was not](#calibre_link-35){#calibre_link-52} until relatively late
that 'kings' in the North were rich enough or powerful enough to hold
splendid court, and when this did come about the development was
different -- verse developed its local brief, pithy, strophic \[i.e.
stanzaic\], often dramatic form not into *epic*, but into the
astonishing and euphonious but formal elaborations of Skaldic verse
\[see
pp.[34](#calibre_link-36){#calibre_link-51}--[37](#calibre_link-37){#calibre_link-57}\].
In the Eddaic verse it is seen 'undeveloped' (if 'strophic' verse could
ever anywhere at any time 'develop' into epic by insensible gradations,
without a break, a leap, a deliberate effort) -- undeveloped that is on
the formal side, though strengthened and pruned. But even here the
'strophic' form -- the selection of the dramatic and forcible moment --
is what we find, not the slow unfolding of an epic theme.

The latter, so far as represented, was accomplished in prose. In
Iceland, a Norwegian colony, there grew up the unique technique of the
*saga*, the prose tale. This was chiefly a tale of everyday life; it was
frequently the last word in sophisticated polish, and its natural field
was not legend. This of course is due to the temper and taste of the
audience rather than the actual meaning of the word -- merely something
said or told and not sung, and so 'saga' was also naturally applied to
such things as the partly romanticized *Völsunga Saga*, which is quite
unlike a typical Icelandic saga. To Norse use the Gospels or Acts of the
Apostles are a 'saga'.

But in Norway at the time we are looking at Iceland was not founded, and
there was no great king's court at all. Then Harald Fairhair arose and
subdued that proud land of many stubborn chiefs and independent
householders -- only to lose many of the best and proudest in the
process, in war or in the exodus to Iceland. In the first sixty years or
so of that colonization some 50,000 came to that island from Norway,
either direct or from Ireland and the British Isles. Nonetheless in
Harald Fairhair's court began the flourishing time of Norse verse to
which Eddaic poetry belongs.

This Norwegian poetry, then, is founded on ancient indigenous mythology
and religious beliefs, going back heaven knows how far, or where;
legends and folk-tales and heroic stories of many centuries telescoped
together, some local and prehistoric, some echoes of movements in the
South, some local and of the Viking age or later -- but the
disentanglement of the various strata in it would require for success an
understanding of the mystery of the North, so long hidden from view, and
a knowledge of the history of its populations and culture, that we are
never likely to possess.

In form -- and therefore probably also in some of its older content --
it is related to other Germanic things. Of course it is in a Germanic
language; but its older metres are closely connected with, say, Old
English metre; more -- it has formulas, half-lines, not to speak of
names, and allusions to places and persons and legends, actually current
independently in Old English: that is, it is a descendant of a common
Germanic verse and tradition of verse which now escapes us: of neither
the themes of this old Baltic verse nor its style have we anything left
save the suggestions afforded by the comparison of Norse and English.

But this form in the Edda remained simpler, more direct (compensating
for length, fullness, richness by force), than that developed, say, in
England. Of course, it is true that however much we emphasize the
Norwegian character and atmosphere of these poems it is not free from
importation. Actually imported themes -- such as pre-eminently the
Völsung and Burgundian and Hun stories -- not only acquired a leading
place in the Edda, but may even be said to have received in exile their
finest treatment. But this is because they were so thoroughly
naturalized and Norwegianized: the very uprooting had set the tales free
for artistic handling unhampered by history or antiquarianism, for
recolouring by Northern imagination, and association with the looming
figures of the Northern gods.

The only really important modification one must make is in favour of the
Goths -- difficult as it is to decipher the hints that survive the ages,
it is clear that these people of Scandinavian origin but whom fate had
marked out for a special history and tragedy were followed step by step
by the people of the North, and became with their enemies the Huns the
chief themes of poets -- so much so that in later days *gotar* remained
as a poetic word for 'warriors', when the old tales were overlaid and
mingled with other matters. From the Goths came the runes, and from the
Goths came (it would appear) [Óðinn](#calibre_link-38){#calibre_link-66}
(Gautr), the god of runic wisdom, of kings, of sacrifice. And he is
really important -- for the astonishing fact that he is clearly
un-Scandinavian in origin cannot alter the fact that he became the
greatest of the Northern gods.

This is a sort of picture of the development. This popular local verse
of intricate origin was then suddenly lifted up by the tide of Viking
wealth and glory to adorn the houses of kings and jarls. It was pruned
and improved, doubtless, in style and manners, made more dignified
(usually), but it retained in a unique fashion the simpler pithier
temper, a nearness to the soil and to ordinary life, which are seldom
found in so close a connexion with the graces of 'court' -- that is the
mastery of the deliberate and leisured artist, even occasionally the
pedantry of the genealogist and philologist. But this is in keeping with
what we know of the kings of that court and their men.

It must be remembered that the time was a heathen one -- still in
possession of special, local pagan traditions which had long been
isolated; of organized temples and priesthoods. But 'belief' was already
failing, mythology and still more anything that could be more properly
called 'religion' were already disintegrating without direct attack from
outside -- or perhaps better put, without conquest or conversion and
without destruction of temples and pagan organization, for the influence
of foreign ideas, and of the sudden rending of the veil over the North
(rent by men from within) cannot be dismissed. [This
was](#calibre_link-39){#calibre_link-53} a special transition-period --
one of poise between old and new, and one inevitably brief and not long
to be maintained.

To a large extent the spirit of these poems which has been regarded as
(a branch of) the common 'Germanic spirit' -- in which there is some
truth: Byrhtwold at Maldon would do well enough in Edda or Saga -- is
really the spirit of a special time. It might be called *Godlessness --*
reliance upon self and upon indomitable will. Not without significance
is the epithet applied to actual characters living at this moment of
history -- the epithet *goðlauss*, with the explanation that their creed
was *at trúa á mátt sín ok megin* \['to trust in one's own might and
main'\]. \[*Author's note, added later:* Yet on the reverse it must be
remembered that this was applied only to certain commanding and ruthless
characters, and would not in any case have been worth saying if many
(indeed the bulk of) men had not remained believers and practitioners of
pagan worship.\]

This applies more to the *heroic*, of course, than the *mythological.*
But it is not untrue of the mythological. Such tales of gods are of a
kind that can well survive to a time when they are rather the themes of
tales than the objects of cults, but yet to a time which has not
replaced the gods by anything new, and is still familiar with them and
interested in them. Nor of course was *blót* \[heathen sacrificial
feast\] given up. Heathenism was still very strong, though in Sweden
rather than in Norway. It had not suffered that uprooting from ancient
fanes \[temples\] and local habitations that is so fatal to it -- as it
proved in England.

The end of the period began with the violent apostolate of that great
heathen figure and hero of the North -- the christianizing king Ólaf
Tryggvason. After his fall, and the fall of many of the greatest men
through him or with him, there was a relapse into heathendom. But this
was quickly ended by the no less vigorous but far wiser christianizing
efforts of Ólaf the Holy, which at the time when Edward the Confessor
was reigning in England left Norway completely christianized, and the
heathen tradition destroyed.

The tenacity and conservatism of the North, however, can be measured not
only by the efforts which had to be made by such great figures as the
Ólafs, but in other smaller ways: such as the survival of the runes, so
closely if accidentally associated with pagan traditions, even after the
North had learned to write in Latin fashion. This happened chiefly in
Sweden, but all over Scandinavia runes remained in use (through direct
tradition, not revival) for such things as memorial inscriptions down to
the sixteenth century.

Nonetheless, after 1050, certainly after 1100, poetry dependent on the
heathen tradition was in old Scandinavia moribund or dead -- and this
means Skaldic verse whatever its subject, quite as much as lays actually
dealing with myths, for the Skaldic verse and language depended upon a
knowledge of these myths in writer and hearer, both of whom were
normally what we should call aristocratic -- nobles, kings and courtiers
after the Northern fashion.

In Iceland it survived for some time. There the change over (about the
year 1000) had been rather more peaceful and less embittered (a fact
probably not unconnected with removal and colonization). In fact poetry
became a profitable export industry of Iceland for a while; and in
Iceland alone was anything ever collected or written down. But the old
knowledge swiftly decayed. The fragments, much disjointed, were again
collected -- but in an antiquarian and philological revival of the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Perhaps it would be more true to say,
not antiquarian revival, but kindly burial. This was a new piety which
pieced the fragments together without completely understanding them:
indeed we often feel we understand them better. Certainly the old
religion and its attendant mythology as a connected whole or anything
like a 'system' (if it ever possessed one, as is, within limits,
probable) has not been preserved at all, and was certainly not within
the reach of the great prose artist, metrical expert, antiquarian and
ruthless politician Snorri Sturluson in the thirteenth century. How much
is lost can be appreciated by anyone who reflects how little we know now
of even the major details of the extremely important temples and their
'cultus' and the priestly organization in Sweden or in Norway.

The 'Younger Edda' or 'Prose Edda' of Snorri Sturluson was a pious
collection of fragments -- to help in the understanding and making of
verse which needed a knowledge of myths -- when gentle, even tolerant
and ironic, learning had supervened upon the struggle between religions.

After that the gods and heroes go down into their
Ragnarök,^[\*](#calibre_link-40)^[]{#calibre_link-372} vanquished, not
by the World-girdling serpent or Fenris-wolf, or the fiery men of
Múspellsheim, but by Marie de France, and sermons, medieval Latin and
useful information, and the small change of French courtesy.

Yet the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, at the darkest hour, saw a
resurrection after Ragnarök, almost as if there were fulfilled in it the
words which the *Völva* \[the sibyl who prophesies in the Eddaic poem
*Völuspá*\] speaks concerning the rearising of a new earth, and the
return of men and gods to find and marvel at the golden pieces in the
grass where once were the halls in which the gods had played at chess
\[see the tenth verse of the poem *The Prophecy of the Sibyl* given in
Appendix B\].

The discovery of the fallen pieces of the old splendour was often
accidental, and the research which led to the recovery proceeded from
various motives. In England theological zeal was powerfully blended with
the historical and linguistic curiosity which it begot by accident. In
the North this was not so. But whatever the motives the result was not
only the rescue from the wreck of time of such fragments as we have, but
swift recognition of their virtue, and regret for the loss of more. This
was specially so with the 'Edda'.

The salvage from the ruins left by natural losses, accidents of time,
the heedlessness and forgetfulness of men, and the ravages of war and
fanaticism (whether theological or classical) was scanty. Nonetheless
the eighteenth century seems to have marked its disapproval of these
'Gothic' bones dug from their graves by two fires which contrived to
destroy some part of what had been saved, and narrowly missed destroying
all the best. In 1728 in the fire at Copenhagen much of what had there
been collected went up in smoke. Three years later the Cotton collection
in London was partly burnt. *Beowulf* was scorched badly. But it
escaped, just -- for the embarrassment of later Schools of English. At
Copenhagen the finder's own parchment transcript of the manuscript of
the Elder Edda seems to have been among the losses. Lost it is at any
rate. But the manuscript itself survived. Yet the gods and heroes nearly
found a final and fatal Ragnarök, which would have left our knowledge
and estimate of northern literature in a totally different state.

When the 'Elder Edda' is mentioned, we practically mean a single
manuscript -- no. 2365 4° in the Royal Collection in Copenhagen: now
known as the *Codex Regius (of the Elder Edda).* It contains 29 poems.
There are 45 leaves of it left. After leaf 32 a gathering, probably of
[eight pages](#calibre_link-41){#calibre_link-226}, has been
[lost](#calibre_link-42){#calibre_link-58}.^[\*](#calibre_link-43)^[]{#calibre_link-373}
There appear to have been no losses at beginning and end -- where losses
frequently occur.

This is all we know about this remarkable survivor of time, fire, and
flood. In 1662 King Frederick III of Denmark sent the well-known Thormod
Torfæus with an open letter to the celebrated Brynjólfr Sveinsson. Since
1639 Brynjólfr had been bishop of Skálaholt in Iceland, and had been a
keen collector of manuscripts. Torfæus was commissioned to get his help
in collecting for the king materials for ancient history, and any
antiquities, curiosities, or rarities that could be found in Iceland. In
1663 the bishop sent the choicest of his collection to the king. Among
these now priceless treasures was the Codex Regius. Where the bishop had
found it, or what was its previous history is unknown, except that he
had picked it up twenty years earlier: for on the front page he had
written his monogram and a date (LL 1643, i.e. Lupus Loricatus =
Brynjólfr), just as we should scrawl our name and a date on a new and
interesting acquisition from a second-hand bookshop.

Two hundred and fifty years have
followed^[\*](#calibre_link-44)^[]{#calibre_link-375} -- of examining,
puzzling, construing, etymologizing, analysis, theorizing, arguing and
sifting argument, of asserting and refuting, until, short as are its
contents, Eddaic 'literature' has become a land and a desert in itself.
From all this study, amidst a vast disagreement, certain things have
reached, more or less, the stage of authoritative consensus of opinion.

[We now know](#calibre_link-45){#calibre_link-50}, at any rate, that
this collection of poems should not be called *Edda* at all. This is a
perpetuation of an act of baptism on the part of the bishop in which he
acted *ultra vires.* The collection had no comprehensive title at all so
far as we know or the manuscript shows. *Edda* is the title of one of
the works of Snorri Sturluson (died 1241), a work founded on these very
poems, and others now lost like them, and it is the title of that work
only, by rights; a work which is concerned primarily, even in the
earlier parts which are cast in narrative or dialogue form, with the
technicalities of Northern poetry, which for us it rescued from
oblivion. The name is therefore quite inapplicable to a collection of
actual antique poems, collected largely for their merits as verse, not
as exemplars of a craft.

Beyond this we can say little about the manuscript. It appears that the
Codex Regius belongs palaeographically to say about 1270 (early in the
latter half of the thirteenth century), and is itself apparently a copy
of an original belonging to 1200 (some say earlier). It belongs in fact
actually as we have it to a period thirty years after the death of
Snorri; but even if it were not a fact that Snorri used these very poems
substantially as we have them, it is clear enough internally that the
matter, the manner, and the language of the poems entitles them to the
name 'Elder'.

As for when they were written, we have no information other than an
examination of the poems themselves will yield. Naturally the datings
differ, especially in the case of individual poems. None of them, in
point of original composition, are likely to be much older than 900
[A.D.]{.small} As a kind of central period which cannot possibly be
extended in either direction we can say 850--1050 [A.D.]{.small} These
limits cannot be stretched -- least of all backwards. Nothing of them
can have been cast into the form we know (or rather into the forms of
which our manuscript offers us often a corrupt descendant), except for
occasional lines, allusions, or phrases, before 800. Doubtless they were
afterwards corrupted orally and scribally -- and even altered: I mean
that in addition to mere corruption producing either nonsense, or at
least ill-scanning lines, there were actual variants current. But in the
main these things were the products of individual authors, who, whatever
they used of old tradition, even older poems, wrote new things which had
not before existed.

The antiquity and origin of the mythology and legends met in the poems
is another matter. In general it is not really so important to criticism
(however attractive to curiosity) to know what answers can be made to
this sort of question, as it is to remember that wherever they got their
material the authors lived in the last centuries of heathenism in Norway
and Iceland, and treated their material in the style and spirit of those
lands and times. Even formal etymology has seldom much to say,
attractive though I personally find it. Even when, as often happens, we
can equate a name with its form in other Germanic languages it does not
tell us much. Thus *Jörmunrekkr* is *Ermanaríks*, and his name an echo
of the history of the Goths, their power and ruin \[see
pp.[322](#calibre_link-46){#calibre_link-334}--[23](#calibre_link-47){#calibre_link-335},
note to stanza 86\]; Gunnarr is Gundahari, and his story an echo of
events in Germany in the fifth century \[see Appendix A,
pp.[337](#calibre_link-48){#calibre_link-343}--[39](#calibre_link-49){#calibre_link-345}\].
But this does not tell us much of the state in which these tales first
reached the North, or the paths (certainly various) they came by. And
still less does it help us to unravel the literary problems concerning
the various treatment of the Burgundian theme in Scandinavia.

But intriguing as all this questioning is, we may end on the note we
struck before: it is not of the first importance. Far more important
than the names of the figures, or the origins of the details of the
story (except where this helps us to understand what is unintelligible
or to rescue a text from corruption) is the atmosphere, colouring,
style. These are products only in a very small degree of the origin of
the themes: they chiefly reflect the age and country in which the poems
were composed. And we shall not be far wrong in taking the mountains and
fjords of Norway, and the life of small communities in that disconnected
land, as the physical and social background of these poems -- a life of
a special sort of agriculture, combined with adventurous sea-faring and
fishery. And the time: days of the fading of a special, individual,
pagan culture, not elaborate materially, but in many ways highly
civilized, a culture which had possessed not only (in some degree) an
organized religion, but a store of partly organized and systematized
legends and poetry. Days of a fading of belief, when in a sudden
changing of the world the South went up in flames, and its plunder
enriched the wooden halls of the Norse chieftains till they shone with
gold. Then came Harald Fairhair, and a great kingship, and a court, and
the colonization of Iceland (as an incident in a vast series of
adventures), and the ruinous wars of Ólaf Tryggvason, and the dying down
of the flame, into the gentle smoulder of the Middle Ages, taxes and
trade-regulations, and the jog-trot of pigs and herrings.

It may be that it was with that characteristic flourish that my father
ended this lecture; at any rate (though the manuscript text continues,
and soon turns to a consideration of individual poems) it seems a good
place to end it here.

I append here a number of notes and brief statements on various topics
that are best treated separately, as follows.

§1 The 'Prose Edda' of Snorri Sturluson

§2 The Saga of the Völsungs (*Völsunga Saga*)

§3 The text of the poems

§4 The spelling of Norse names

§5 The verse-form of the poems

§6 Notes on the poems by the author

# §1 THE 'PROSE EDDA' OF SNORRI STURLUSON {#the-prose-edda-of-snorri-sturluson .fm}

The name *Edda* properly belongs only to a celebrated work by the
Icelander Snorri Sturluson (1179--1241). This is a treatise on the
distinctive art of Icelandic poetry which in Snorri's day was dying out:
the old metrical rules disregarded, the old mythological knowledge
essential to it attacked by a clergy hostile to any survival of
heathendom. This book, in its three parts, is a retelling in prose
narrative of ancient myths and legends; an account of, and explanation
of, the strange diction of the old 'court poetry'; and exemplification
of its verse-forms.

In my father's lecture ([p.29](#calibre_link-50){#calibre_link-45}) he
noted that the application of the name *Edda* by Bishop Brynjólf of
Skálaholt to the poems of the great Codex that he acquired in 1643 was
without historical justification. In Brynjólf's time it had come to be
supposed among Icelanders interested in the ancient literature that
there must have been 'an older *Edda*' from which Snorri's work was
derived. Brynjólf himself wrote in a letter in 1641, before he knew of
the existence of the Codex: 'Where now are those huge treasuries of all
human knowledge written by Sæmund the Wise, and above all that most
noble Edda, of which we possess now, beyond the name, scarcely a
thousandth part; and that indeed which we do possess would have been
utterly lost, had not the epitome of Snorri Sturluson left to us rather
the shadow and footprints than the true body of that ancient Edda.'

Sæmund the Wise (1056--1133) was a priest whose prodigious learning
became a legend, but for the title *Sæmundar Edda* that Brynjólf gave to
the Codex there was no foundation. Thus arose the conception of the two
*Eddas*, the Poetic or Elder Edda and the Prose or Younger Edda. Why
Snorri's work was named *Edda* is not known, but there have been several
explanations: by some it is related to the word *óðr* in the sense
'poem, poetry', as if it meant 'Poetics', by others derived from the
place Oddi in south-west Iceland, a centre of Icelandic learning where
Snorri grew up.

From the 'Poetic Edda' emerged the adjective *Eddaic* (and *Eddic*),
used in contrast to [*Skaldic*](#calibre_link-51){#calibre_link-36} (a
modern derivative from the Old Norse word *skáld* meaning 'poet'). Of
Skaldic verse my father wrote in his lecture on the Elder Edda
([p.20](#calibre_link-52){#calibre_link-35}): 'It was not until
relatively late that "kings" in the North were rich enough or powerful
enough to hold splendid court, and when this did come about . . . verse
developed its local brief, pithy, strophic, often dramatic form not into
*epic*, but into the astonishing and euphonious but formal elaborations
of Skaldic verse.' This 'court poetry', as it may also be called, was an
extraordinarily intricate and distinctive art, with extreme elaboration
of verse-forms subject to rules of exacting strictness: 'elaborations',
in my father's words, 'in which various kinds of internal and final
full-rhyme and half-rhyme both vocalic and consonantal are interwoven
with the principles of "weight" and stress and alliteration, with the
deliberate object of utilizing to the full the vigour, force and rolling
beat of the Norse tongue.' To which must be added the huge poetic
vocabulary, and the extraordinary cultivation (described below) of the
device of the 'kenning'.

'To us,' he wrote, 'thinking of the Elder Edda, "Eddaic" means the
simpler, more straightforward language of the heroic and mythological
verse, in contrast to the artificial language of the Skalds. And usually
this contrast is thought of as one of age as well: old simplicity of
good old Germanic days, unhappily given up in a new taste for poetry
become an elaborate riddle.

'But the opposition between "Eddaic" and "Skaldic" verse is quite unreal
as one of *time,* as between older and younger, as of a fine old popular
manner being pushed out by a younger, newer fashion. They are related
growths, branches on the same tree, essentially connected, even possibly
sometimes by the same hands. Skalds can be found to write in
*fornyrðislag*, the oldest of old metres; Skaldic kennings can be found
in Eddaic lays.

'All that remains true of this contrast of age is the fact that the
simpler metres, e.g. *fornyrðislag* and the style that goes with it, are
far older, much closer, for instance, to other Germanic things, to Old
English verse, than the specially Skaldic verse and manner. The Eddaic
poems we have belong to the same period as Skaldic, but the metrical
traditions and style they employ carries on still, without fundamental
alteration, something of the common Germanic tradition. Old and new in
metre rubbed shoulders -- it was as we have seen already a transition
period, a period of poise between old and new, not maintainable for long
\[see [p.23](#calibre_link-53){#calibre_link-39}\].'

It is the highly artificial Skaldic poetry that is the subject of
Snorri's instruction in his *Edda*, and indeed by far the greater part
of what survives of it owes its survival to him. In the second part of
the book, *Skáldskaparmál* ('Poetic Diction'), he treats above all of
kennings, with a great number of exemplifying verses by named skalds:
but very many of these kennings are wholly incomprehensible without a
knowledge of the myths and legends to which they allude -- and such
themes are not characteristically the subject of the Skaldic poems
themselves. In the first part of the *Edda* (the *Gylfaginning*) Snorri
drew extensively on Eddaic poetry; and in the *Skáldskaparmál* also he
told the stories on which certain kennings rest. The following is a
single example.

*Hvernig skal kenna gull?* How shall gold be named?

Thus: by calling it the Fire of Ægir; the Pine-needles of Glasir; the
Hair of Síf; the Head-band of Fulla; Freyja's Tears; the Drop, or Rain,
or Shower of Draupnir \[Ódin's gold ring, from which dropped other
rings\]; Otter's Ransom; Forced Payment of the Æsir; . . .

[Following](#calibre_link-54){#calibre_link-161} such a list as this,
Snorri gave explanations of these locutions.

*Hver er sök til þess, at gull er kallat otrgjöld?* What is the reason
that gold is called Otter's ransom?

It is told that when the Æsir, Ódin and Loki and Hœnir, went out to
explore the world they came to a certain river, and they went along the
river to a waterfall; and by the waterfall was an otter . . .

And thus it is that we have the story of Andvari's Gold told both by the
author of the *Völsunga Saga* and by Snorri Sturluson (see the
Commentary on the Lay of the Völsungs,
pp.[188](#calibre_link-55){#calibre_link-157}--[91](#calibre_link-56){#calibre_link-164});
but indeed Snorri here continued his narrative into a résumé of the
whole history of the Völsungs.

It remains to add that the celebrity of Snorri's book in the centuries
that followed, and most especially of the *Skáldskaparmál*, led, before
the emergence of the Codex Regius, to the term *Edda* being widely used
to mean, expressly, the technical rules of the old 'court' poetry, or
'Skaldic' verse. In those days poets complained of the tyranny of
*Edda,* or offered apologies for their lack of proficiency in the art of
*Edda*. In the words of Gudbrand Vigfússon: 'An untaught poet who called
a spade a spade, instead of describing it by a mythological
circumlocution, would be scouted as "Eddaless"' (*Eddu-lauss*, 'having
no Eddaic art'). Thus the term 'Eddaic', as now used, *in opposition to*
'Skaldic', is a perfect reversal of its former
[meaning](#calibre_link-57){#calibre_link-37}.

# §2 THE SAGA OF THE VÖLSUNGS (*Völsunga Saga*) {#the-saga-of-the-völsungs-völsunga-saga .fm}

The Codex Regius of the Poetic Edda is a collection of poems of great
diversity, composed by poets who lived centuries apart; but it was
compiled and ordered with intelligent care. Most of the heroic poems are
concerned with the story of the Völsungs and the Niflungs; and these the
compiler of the collection arranged, so far as the diverse structure and
scope of the individual lays allowed him, in a narrative sequence,
adding explanatory passages in prose at the beginning and end of many of
the lays, and narrative links in the course of them.

But much of the material thus arranged is of the utmost difficulty.
Poems are disordered or defective, or even patchworks of different
origin altogether, and there are very many obscurities of detail; while
worst of all, the fifth gathering of the Codex Regius disappeared long
ago (see p.[28](#calibre_link-58){#calibre_link-42}), with the loss of
all Eddaic poetry for the central part of the legend of Sigurd.

In this situation, there is an essential aid to the understanding of the
Northern legend. This is the *Völsunga Saga*, written, probably in
Iceland, in the thirteenth century, though the oldest manuscript is much
later: a prose tale of the fate of the whole Völsung race from the far
ancestry of Sigmund, father of Sigurd, and continuing on to the fall of
the Niflungs and the death of Atli (Attila) and beyond. It is founded
both on Eddaic lays that survive and other sources now lost; and 'it is
solely from the lays that it has used,' my father said in a lecture,
'that it derives its power and the attraction that it has for all those
who come to it,' for he did not hold the author's artistic capacity in
high regard.

This author was faced with wholly divergent traditions (seen in the
preserved Eddaic lays) concerning Sigurd and Brynhild: stories that
cannot be combined, for they are essentially contradictory. Yet he
combined them; and in doing so produced a narrative that is certainly
mysterious, but (in its central point) unsatisfying: as it were a puzzle
that is presented as completed but in which the looked for design is
incomprehensible and at odds with itself.

In the commentary that follows each poem in this book I have noticed
many features in which my father departed from the *Völsunga Saga*
narrative, more especially in the case of his Lay of the Völsungs, where
the Saga is of much greater importance as a source. He seems not to have
set down any critical account of the Saga as a whole, or if he did it
has not survived; but comments of his on the author's work in individual
passages will be found in the commentary (see
pp.[208](#calibre_link-59){#calibre_link-199}--[11](#calibre_link-60){#calibre_link-209},
[221](#calibre_link-61){#calibre_link-224},
[244](#calibre_link-62){#calibre_link-297}--[45](#calibre_link-63){#calibre_link-300}).

# §3 THE TEXT OF THE POEMS {#the-text-of-the-poems .fm}

It is at once obvious that the manuscript of the two lays is a fair copy
intended to be final, for my father's handwriting is clear and uniform
throughout, with scarcely any corrections made at the time of writing
(and of very few of his manuscripts, however 'final' in intention, can
that be said). While it cannot be shown to be the case, there is at any
rate no indication that the two poems were not written out
consecutively.

It is a remarkable fact that no more than a few pages survive of work on
the poems preceding the final text, and those pages relate exclusively
to the opening (*Upphaf*, the Beginning) of *Völsungakviða en nýja*, to
section I 'Andvari's Gold', and to a small part of section II, 'Signý'.
Beyond this point there is no trace of any earlier drafting whatsoever;
but the earlier manuscript material is interesting, and I have discussed
it in a note on
p.[246](#calibre_link-64){#calibre_link-301}--[49](#calibre_link-65){#calibre_link-305}.

The final manuscript of the poems did however itself undergo correction
at some later time. By a rough count there are some eighty to ninety
emendations scattered through the two texts, from changes of a single
word to (but rarely) the substitution of several half-lines; some lines
are marked for alteration but without any replacement provided.

The corrections are written rapidly and often indistinctly in pencil,
and all are concerned with vocabulary and metre, not with the substance
of the narrative. I have the impression that my father read through the
text many years later (the fact that a couple of the corrections are in
red ball-point pen points to a late date) and quickly emended points
that struck him as he went -- perhaps with a view to possible
publication, though I know of no evidence that he ever actually proposed
it.

I have taken up virtually all these late corrections into the text given
in this book.

There are two notable differences in the presentation of *Völsungakviða
en nýja* and *Guðrúnarkviða en nýja* in the manuscript. One concerns the
actual organization of the poem. The Lay of the Völsungs following the
opening section *Upphaf* ('Beginning') is divided into nine sections, to
which my father gave titles in Norse without translation, as follows:

  ------ --------------------------------------------
  I      Andvara-gull \[Andvari's gold\]
  II     Signý
  III    Dauði Sinfjötla \[The Death of Sinfjötli\]
  IV     Fœddr Sigurðr \[Sigurd born\]
  V      Regin
  VI     Brynhildr
  VII    Guðrún
  VIII   Svikin Brynhildr \[Brynhild Betrayed\]
  IX     Deild \[Strife\]
  ------ --------------------------------------------

I have retained these titles in the text, but added translations, as
above, to those which are not simply proper names. In the Lay of Gudrún,
on the other hand, there is no division into sections.

To sections I, II, V, and VI in the Lay of the Völsungs, but not to the
other five, explanatory prose head-notes are added (perhaps in imitation
of the prose notes inserted by the compiler of the Codex Regius of the
Edda).

The marginal indications of the speakers in both poems are given exactly
as they appear in the manuscript, as also are the indications of new
'moments' in the narrative.

The second difference in presentation between the two poems concerns the
line-divisions. In *Upphaf,* alone of the sections of the Lay of the
Völsungs, but throughout the Lay of Gudrún, the stanzas are written in
eight short lines: that is to say, the unit of the verse, the half-line
or *vísuorð*, is written separately:

Of old was an age\
when was emptiness

(the opening of *Upphaf* ). But apart from *Upphaf* the whole of the Lay
of the Völsungs is written in long lines (without a metrical space
between the halves):

Of old was an age when Ódin walked

(the opening of *Andvara-gull* ). At the top of this page, however, my
father wrote in pencil: 'This should all be written in short line form,
which looks better -- as in *Upphaf .*' I have therefore set out the
text of the Lay of the Völsungs in this way.

# §4 THE SPELLING OF NORSE NAMES {#the-spelling-of-norse-names .fm}

I have thought it best to follow closely my father's usage in respect of
the writing of Norse names in an English context. The most important
features, which appear in his manuscript of the poems with great
consistency, are these:

The sound *ð* of voiced 'th' as in English 'then' is replaced by *d*:
thus *Guðrún* becomes *Gudrún, Hreiðmarr* becomes *Hreidmar, Buðli*
becomes *Budli*, *Ásgarðr* becomes *Ásgard.*

As two of these examples show, the nominative ending *-r* is omitted: so
also *Frey, Völsung, Brynhild, Gunnar* for *Freyr, Völsungr, Brynhildr,
Gunnarr.*

The letter *j* is retained, as in *Sinfjötli*, *Gjúki,* where it is
pronounced like English 'y' in 'you' (Norse *Jórk* is 'York').

The only case where I have imposed consistency is that of the name of
the god who in Norse is *Óðinn.* In his lecture notes my father
naturally used the Norse form (which I have retained in the text of his
lecture on the 'Elder Edda',
p.[22](#calibre_link-66){#calibre_link-38}). In the carefully written
manuscript of the 'New Lays', on the other hand, he 'anglicized' it,
changing *ð* to *d,* but (as generally in all such cases) retaining the
acute accent indicating a long vowel. But he used two forms, favouring
one or the other in different parts of the Lay of the Völsungs: *Ódin*
and *Ódinn.* But in section VI, *Brynhildr*, where the name occurs
frequently in the form *Ódinn,* he wrote (stanza 8) *Ódinn bound me,
Ódin's chosen.* This is because in the Norse genitive *nn* changes to
*ns*: *Óðins sonr,* 'son of Ódin'.

Seeing that in section VIII, stanza 5, where the name is repeated, *Ódin
dooms it; Ódinn hearken!,* my father later struck out the second *n* of
*Ódinn,* and since it seems to me that inconsistency in the form of the
name serves no purpose, I have settled for *Ódin.* In the case of the
name that is in Norse *Reginn* my father wrote *Regin* throughout, and I
have followed this.

# §5 THE VERSE-FORM OF THE POEMS {#the-verse-form-of-the-poems .fm}

The metrical form of these Lays was very evidently a primary element in
my father's purpose. As he said in his letters to W.H. Auden, he wrote
in 'the old eight-line *fornyrðislag* stanza', and I give here an
abbreviated account of its nature.

There are three metres found in the Eddaic poems, *fornyrðislag*,
*malaháttr*, and *ljóðaháttr* (on this last see the note to the Lay of
the Völsungs, section V, lines 42--44,
pp.[211](#calibre_link-67){#calibre_link-210}--[13](#calibre_link-68){#calibre_link-212});
but here we need only consider the first, in which most of the narrative
poems of the Edda are composed. The name *fornyrðislag* is believed to
mean 'Old Story Metre' or 'Old Lore Metre' -- a name which, my father
observed, cannot have arisen until after later elaborations had been
invented and made familiar; he favoured the view that the older name was
*kviðuháttr*, meaning 'the "manner" for poems named *kviða',* since the
old poems in *fornyrðislag*, when their names have any metrical import,
are usually called \~*kviða*: hence his names *Völsungakviða* and
*Guðrúnarkviða*.

The ancient Germanic metre depended, in my father's words, on 'the
utilization of the main factors of Germanic speech, *length* and
*stress*'; and the same rhythmical structure as is found in Old English
verse is found also in *fornyrðislag*. That structure was expounded by
my father in a preface to the revised edition (1940) of the translation
of *Beowulf* by J.R. Clark-Hall, and reprinted in J.R.R. Tolkien, *The
Monsters and the Critics and Other Essays* (1983). In that account he
defined the nature of the Old English verse-structure in these words.

The Old English line was composed of two opposed word-groups or
'halves'. Each half was an example, or variation, of one of six basic
patterns.

The patterns were made of *strong* and *weak* elements, which may be
called 'lifts' and 'dips'. The standard lift was a *long stressed*
syllable, (usually with a relatively high tone). The standard dip was an
*unstressed* syllable, long or short, with a low tone.

The following are examples in modern English of normal forms of the six
patterns:

![art](images/000003.jpg){.calibre1}

A, B, C have equal feet, each containing a lift and dip. D and E have
unequal feet: one consists of a single lift, the other has a subordinate
stress (marked \`) inserted.

These are the normal patterns of four elements into which Old English
words naturally fell, and into which modern English words still fall.
They can be found in any passage of prose, ancient or modern. Verse of
this kind differs from prose, *not* in re-arranging words to fit a
special rhythm, repeated or varied in successive lines, but in choosing
the simpler and more compact word-patterns and clearing away extraneous
matter, so that these patterns stand opposed to one another.

The *selected* patterns were all of approximately equal metrical
*weight*^[\*](#calibre_link-69)^[]{#calibre_link-376} : the effect of
loudness (combined with length and voice-pitch), as judged by the ear in
conjunction with emotional and logical
*significance*^[†](#calibre_link-70)^[]{#calibre_link-377}. The line was
thus essentially a *balance* of two equivalent blocks. These blocks
might be, and usually were, of different pattern and rhythm. There was
in consequence no common tune or rhythm shared by lines in virtue of
being 'in the same metre'. The ear should not listen for any such thing,
but should attend to the shape and balance of the halves. Thus *the
róaring séa rólling lándward* is not metrical because it contains an
'iambic' or a 'trochaic' rhythm, but because it is a balance of B + A.

These patterns are found also in *fornyrðislag,* and can be readily
identified in my father's Norse lays: as for example in stanza 45 of the
Lay of Gudrún (p.[268](#calibre_link-71){#calibre_link-312}), lines
2--6:

  --------- -------------------
  A         rúnes of héaling
  D (*a*)   wórds wéll-gràven
  B         on wóod to réad
  E         fást bìds us fáre
  C         to féast gládly
  --------- -------------------

In the variations on the 'basic patterns' ('overweighting', 'extension',
etc.) described in my father's account there are indeed differences in
Old Norse from Old English, tending to greater brevity; but I will enter
only into the most radical and important difference between the
verse-forms, namely, that all Norse poetry is 'strophic', or 'stanzaic',
that is, composed in strophes or stanzas. This is in the most marked
contrast to Old English, where any such arrangements were altogether
avoided; and my father wrote of it (see
p.[7](#calibre_link-72){#calibre_link-29}): 'In Old English breadth,
fullness, reflection, elegiac effect, were aimed at. Old Norse aims at
seizing a situation, striking a blow that will be remembered,
illuminating a moment with a flash of lightning -- and tends to
concision, weighty packing of the language in sense and form, and
gradually to greater regularity of form of verse.'

'The norm of the strophe (for *fornyrðislag*),' he said, 'is four lines
(eight half-lines) with a complete pause at the end, and also a pause
(not necessarily so marked) at the end of the fourth half-line. But, at
least as preserved, the texts in the manuscripts do not work out
regularly on this plan, and great shufflement and lacuna-making has gone
on among editors (so that one can never tell to a strophe or two what
references refer to in different editions).'

Noting that this variability in the length of the strophes occurs in
some of the earlier and least corrupt texts, and that '*Völundarkviða*,
undoubtedly an ancient poem, is particularly irregular and particularly
plagued by editors (who are much more daring and wilful in Old Norse
than in Old English)', he accepted the view that, in the main, this
freedom should be seen as an archaic feature. 'The strict strophe had
not fully developed, any more than the strict line limited
syllabically'; in other words, the strophic form was a Norse innovation,
and developed only gradually.

In my father's Lays the strophic form is entirely regular, and the
half-line tends to brevity and limitation of syllables.

## *Alliteration* {#alliteration .calibre16}

Old Norse poetry follows precisely the same principles in the matter of
'alliteration' as does Old English poetry. Those principles were
formulated thus by my father in his account of Old English metre cited
earlier.

One full lift in each half-line must alliterate. The 'key alliteration'
was borne by the *first lift* in the *second* half. (This sound was
called by Snorri Sturluson *höfuðstafr*, whence the term 'head-stave'
used in English books.) With the head-stave the stronger lift in the
first half-line *must* alliterate, and both lifts may do so. In the
second half-line the second lift *must not* alliterate.

Thus, in the opening section of the Lay of the Völsungs, *Upphaf*, in
the thirteenth stanza, lines 5--6, *the [d]{.under}eep [Dr]{.under}agon*
/ *shall be [d]{.under}oom of Thór*, the *d* of *doom* is the
head-stave, while in Snorri's terminology the *d* of *deep* and *Dragon*
are the *stuðlar*, the props or supports. The *Th* of *Thór*, the second
lift of the second half-line, does not alliterate. It will be seen that
in *Upphaf* both lifts of the first half do in fact alliterate with the
head-stave in the majority of cases.

It is important to recognize that in Germanic verse 'alliteration'
refers, not to *letters*, but to *sounds*; it is the agreement of the
*stressed elements* beginning with *the same consonant,* or with *no
consonant*: all vowels 'alliterate' with one another, as in the opening
line of *Upphaf, Of [o]{.under}ld was an [a]{.under}ge / when was
[e]{.under}mptiness.* In English the phonetic agreement is often
disguised to the eye by the spelling: thus in the same stanza, where
lines 5--6 alliterate on '*r'*, *un[wr]{.under}ought was Earth, /
un[r]{.under}oofed was Heaven;* or in stanza 8 of section IV of the Lay
of the Völsungs, where lines 1--2 alliterate on the sound '*w'*: *A
[w]{.under}arrior strange, / [o]{.under}ne-eyed, awful.*

The consonant-combinations *sk, sp,* and *st* will usually only
alliterate with themselves; thus in the Lay of the Völsungs section IV,
stanza 9, lines 3--4, *the [s]{.under}word of Grímnir /[s]{.under}inging
[sp]{.under}lintered* does not show alliteration on both lifts of the
second half-line, nor does section V, stanza 24, line 3--4, *was
[s]{.under}ired this horse, / [s]{.under}wiftest, [str]{.under}ongest.*

# §6 [NOTES ON THE POEMS](#calibre_link-73){#calibre_link-33}, BY THE AUTHOR {#notes-on-the-poems-by-the-author .fm}

Together with the manuscript of the New Lays were placed some small
slips of paper on which my father made some interpretative remarks about
them. They were written very rapidly in ink or in pencil, and in the
case of (iv) in pencil overwritten and added to in ink, clearly at the
same time. It seems impossible to put any even relative date on them; a
sense of distance and detachment may be artificial.

\(i\)

After the mythical introduction and the account of the Hoard, the Lay
turns to the Völsung-family, and traces the history of Völsung, Sigmund,
and Sigurd. The chief part is the tragedy of Sigurd and Brynhild, which
is of interest for itself; but the whole is given unity as a study of
the way in which a wilful deed of Loki, the purposeless slaying of Otr,
and his ruthless method of extricating Ódin and himself from the peril
into which this deed has brought them sets in motion a curse that at the
last brings Sigurd to his death.

The full working of this curse is only hastened by Ódin's own
interventions -- to provide Sigurd with horse and weapon fit for his
task, and to provide him with a fit bride, the fairest of all Ódin's
Valkyries, Brynhild. (It appears that Ódin purposes through Sigurd to
punish the family of Hreidmar (Fáfnir and Regin) for the exaction of the
ransom of Otr.) In the story of Sigurd

Here this text breaks off.

[(ii)](#calibre_link-74){#calibre_link-325}

Grímhild, wife of Gjúki King of the Burgundians (or Niflungs), is the
chief agent of evil, not because of any farsighted plans of wickedness:
she is rather an example of that wickedness that looks only to each
situation as it occurs, and sticks at nothing to gain from it what seems
immediately profitable. She is 'grey with wisdom' being a witch in lore
and still more skilled in the reading of minds and hearts to use their
weaknesses and follies. Her will dominates her daughter Gudrún and her
oldest son Gunnar.

Gudrún is a simple maiden, incapable of any great plans for profit or
vengeance. She falls in love with Sigurd, and for herself has no further
motive. A sensitive but weak character, she is capable of disastrous
speech or action under provocation. The occasions of this that are
described are her fatal retort to the taunting of Brynhild, which more
than anything is the immediate cause of Sigurd's murder, and in the
sequel, the Slaying of the Niflungs, her terrible deeds at the end when
driven to madness and despair.

Gunnar is a hot impatient character, dominated by Grímhild. Though not
too stupid to perceive prudence, in cases of doubt or difficulty he
becomes fey and reckless, turning to violence.

\(iii\)

After Sigurd was slain, Brynhild took her own life, and they were both
burned on one pyre. Gudrún did not take her own life, but for grief was
for a time half-witless. She would not look upon her kinsmen nor upon
her mother, and dwelt apart in a house in the woods. There after a while
she began to weave in a tapestry the history of the Dragon-hoard and of
Sigurd.

Atli son of Budli became king of the Huns, ancient enemies of the
Burgundians, who had before slain his
father.^[\*](#calibre_link-75)^[]{#calibre_link-378} His power growing
great becomes a threat to Gunnar, who is now king in his father Gjúki's
stead; and as Högni his brother had foretold they miss now the valour of
King Sigurd their sworn-brother.

\(iv\)

[This lay](#calibre_link-76){#calibre_link-147} \[i.e. *Guðrúnarkviða en
nýja*\] is a sequel to the Lay of Sigurd and assumes knowledge of it,
though by the device of Gudrún's tapestry the history of the accursed
Hoard and of Sigurd is brought to mind and outlined at the beginning.

In the former Lay it was told how the dominion of the Gods was from the
first threatened with destruction. Ódin, Lord of Gods and Men, begets in
the world many mighty men, whom he gathers in Valhöll to be his
companions in the Last Battle. One family in especial he singles out,
the Völsungs,^[\*](#calibre_link-77)^[]{#calibre_link-379} all of whom
are his chosen warriors, and one, Sigurd son of Sigmund, is to be the
chief of all, their leader in the Last Day; for Ódin hopes that by his
hand the Serpent shall in the end be slain, and a new world made
possible.

None of the Gods can accomplish this, but only one who has lived on
Earth first as a mortal, and died. (This motive of the special function
of Sigurd is an invention of the present poet, or an interpretation of
the Norse sources in which it is not explicit.)

Evil is not, however, to be found only in the ever-watchful host of the
Enemies of Gods and Men. It is found also in Ásgard itself in the person
of [Loki](#calibre_link-78){#calibre_link-167}, by whose deeds, wilful,
merely mischievous, or wholly malicious, the counsels and hopes of Ódin
seem ever turned awry or defeated.

Yet Loki is seen ever walking the world at the left hand of Ódin, who
does not rebuke him, nor dismiss him, nor refuse the aid of his cunning.
At Ódin's right hand there walks another figure, a nameless shadow. It
would seem that this poet (seeing that the Northern Gods represent but
written large the ways of Men in the hostile world) has taken this old
legend to symbolize Man's prudence and wisdom and its ever present
accompaniment of folly and malice that defeats it, only to bring forth
greater heroism and deeper wisdom; while ever at the right hand walks
the shadow that is neither Ódin nor Loki but in some aspect Fate, the
real story that must be blended of both. Yet Ódin is master of the Three
and the final outcome will resemble rather the hope of Ódin than the
malice (shorter sighted) of Loki. Ódin at times gives expression to
this, saying that his hope looks out beyond the seeming disasters of
this world. Though Ódin's chosen come all to an evil end or untimely
death, that will only make them of greater worth for their ultimate
purpose in the [Last Battle](#calibre_link-79){#calibre_link-148}. On
this in many ways mysterious writing see the commentary on the *Upphaf*
of the Lay of the Völsungs, and the commentary on the first section of
the poem, *Andvari's Gold,* stanza 1.

In conclusion, this seems a suitable place to refer to remarks of my
father's that bear upon, but have no (at any rate overt) relation to,
*Guðrúnarkviða en nýja.* In his introduction to lectures at Oxford on
the Eddaic poem *Guðrúnarkviða en forna*, the Old Lay of Gudrún, he said
that 'curiously enough' he was more interested in Gudrún, 'who is
usually slighted, and considered as of secondary interest', than in
Brynhild. By implication, he contrasted the long agony of Gudrún with
the irruption of Brynhild, who soon departs, 'and her passion and death
remain only in the background of the tale, a brief and terrible storm
beginning in fire and ending in it.'
:::

::: {#calibre_link-6 .calibre2}
[VÖLSUNGAKVIÐA EN NÝJA\
eða\
[SIGURÐARKVIÐA EN MESTA]{.small}](#calibre_link-80){.calibre5}

![art](images/000004.jpg){.calibre1}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-7 .calibre2}
# [VÖLSUNGAKVIÐA EN NÝJA](#calibre_link-81) {#völsungakviða-en-nýja .ct}

### UPPHAF {#upphaf .sub}

#### (Beginning) {#beginning .sub1}

+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 1                                   | Of old was an age\                  |
|                                     | when was emptiness,\                |
|                                     | there was sand nor sea\             |
|                                     | nor surging waves;\                 |
|                                     | unwrought was Earth,\               |
|                                     | unroofed was Heaven --\             |
|                                     | an abyss yawning,\                  |
|                                     | and no blade of grass.              |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 2                                   | The Great Gods then\                |
|                                     | began their toil,\                  |
|                                     | the wondrous world\                 |
|                                     | they well builded.\                 |
|                                     | From the South the Sun\             |
|                                     | from seas rising\                   |
|                                     | gleamed down on grass\              |
|                                     | green at morning.                   |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 3                                   | They hall and hallow\               |
|                                     | high uptowering,\                   |
|                                     | gleaming-gabled,\                   |
|                                     | golden-posted,\                     |
|                                     | rock-hewn ramparts\                 |
|                                     | reared in splendour,\               |
|                                     | forge and fortress\                 |
|                                     | framed immortal.                    |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 4                                   | Unmarred their mirth\               |
|                                     | in many a court,\                   |
|                                     | where men they made\                |
|                                     | of their minds' cunning;\           |
|                                     | under hills of Heaven\              |
|                                     | on high builded\                    |
|                                     | they lived in laughter\             |
|                                     | long years ago.                     |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 5                                   | Dread shapes arose\                 |
|                                     | from the dim spaces\                |
|                                     | over sheer mountains\               |
|                                     | by the Shoreless Sea,\              |
|                                     | friends of darkness,\               |
|                                     | foes immortal,\                     |
|                                     | old, unbegotten,\                   |
|                                     | out of ancient void.                |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 6                                   | To the world came war:\             |
|                                     | the walls of Gods\                  |
|                                     | giants beleaguered;\                |
|                                     | joy was ended.\                     |
|                                     | The mountains were moved,\          |
|                                     | mighty Ocean\                       |
|                                     | surged and thundered,\              |
|                                     | the Sun trembled.                   |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 7                                   | The Gods gathered\                  |
|                                     | on golden thrones,\                 |
|                                     | of doom and death\                  |
|                                     | deeply pondered,\                   |
|                                     | how fate should be fended,\         |
|                                     | their foes vanquished,\             |
|                                     | their labour healed,\               |
|                                     | light rekindled.                    |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 8                                   | In forge's fire\                    |
|                                     | of flaming wrath\                   |
|                                     | was heaviest hammer\                |
|                                     | hewn and wielded.\                  |
|                                     | Thunder and lightning\              |
|                                     | Thór the mighty\                    |
|                                     | flung among them,\                  |
|                                     | felled and sundered.                |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 9                                   | In fear then fled they,\            |
|                                     | foes immortal,\                     |
|                                     | from the walls beaten\              |
|                                     | watched unceasing;\                 |
|                                     | ringed Earth around\                |
|                                     | with roaring sea\                   |
|                                     | and mountains of ice\               |
|                                     | on the margin of the world.         |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| \*                                                                        |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 10                                  | A seer long silent\                 |
|                                     | her song upraised --\               |
|                                     | the halls hearkened --\             |
|                                     | on high she stood.\                 |
|                                     | Of doom and death\                  |
|                                     | dark words she spake,\              |
|                                     | of the last battle\                 |
|                                     | of the leaguered Gods.              |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 11                                  | 'The horn of Heimdal\               |
|                                     | I hear ringing;\                    |
|                                     | the Blazing Bridge\                 |
|                                     | bends neath horsemen;\              |
|                                     | the Ash is groaning,\               |
|                                     | his arms trembling,\                |
|                                     | the Wolf waking,\                   |
|                                     | warriors riding.                    |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 12                                  | The sword of Surt\                  |
|                                     | smoketh redly;\                     |
|                                     | the slumbering Serpent\             |
|                                     | in the sea moveth;\                 |
|                                     | a shadowy ship\                     |
|                                     | from shores of Hell\                |
|                                     | legions bringeth\                   |
|                                     | to the last battle.                 |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 13                                  | The wolf Fenrir\                    |
|                                     | waits for Ódin,\                    |
|                                     | for Frey the fair\                  |
|                                     | the flames of Surt;\                |
|                                     | the deep Dragon\                    |
|                                     | shall be doom of Thór --\           |
|                                     | shall all be ended,\                |
|                                     | shall Earth perish?                 |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 14                                  | If in day of Doom\                  |
|                                     | one deathless stands,\              |
|                                     | who death hath tasted\              |
|                                     | and dies no more,\                  |
|                                     | the serpent-slayer,\                |
|                                     | seed of Ódin,\                      |
|                                     | then all shall not end,\            |
|                                     | nor Earth perish.                   |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 15                                  | On his head shall be helm,\         |
|                                     | in his hand lightning,\             |
|                                     | afire his spirit,\                  |
|                                     | in his face splendour.\             |
|                                     | The Serpent shall shiver\           |
|                                     | and Surt waver,\                    |
|                                     | the Wolf be vanquished\             |
|                                     | and the world rescued.'             |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| \*                                                                        |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 16                                  | The Gods were gathered\             |
|                                     | on guarded heights,\                |
|                                     | of doom and death\                  |
|                                     | deep they pondered.\                |
|                                     | Sun they rekindled,\                |
|                                     | and silver Moon\                    |
|                                     | they set to sail\                   |
|                                     | on seas of stars.                   |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 17                                  | Frey and Freyia\                    |
|                                     | fair things planted,\               |
|                                     | trees and flowers,\                 |
|                                     | trembling grasses;\                 |
|                                     | Thór in chariot\                    |
|                                     | thundered o'er them\                |
|                                     | through Heaven's gateways\          |
|                                     | to the hills of stone.              |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 18                                  | Ever would Ódin\                    |
|                                     | on earth wander\                    |
|                                     | weighed with wisdom\                |
|                                     | woe foreknowing,\                   |
|                                     | the Lord of lords\                  |
|                                     | and leaguered Gods,\                |
|                                     | his seed sowing,\                   |
|                                     | sire of heroes.                     |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 19                                  | Valhöll he built\                   |
|                                     | vast and shining;\                  |
|                                     | shields the tiles were,\            |
|                                     | shafts the rafters.\                |
|                                     | Ravens flew thence\                 |
|                                     | over realms of Earth;\              |
|                                     | at the doors an eagle\              |
|                                     | darkly waited.                      |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 20                                  | The guests were many:\              |
|                                     | grim their singing,\                |
|                                     | boar's-flesh eating,\               |
|                                     | beakers draining;\                  |
|                                     | mighty ones of Earth\               |
|                                     | mailclad sitting\                   |
|                                     | for one they waited,\               |
|                                     | the World's chosen.                 |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| \*                                                                        |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
:::

::: {#calibre_link-8 .calibre2}
# [I](#calibre_link-82){.calibre5} {#i .cn}

# [ANDVARA-GULL](#calibre_link-82) {#andvara-gull .ct1}

## [(Andvari's Gold)]{.small} {#andvaris-gold .sub2}

Here first is told how Ódin and his companions were trapped in the house
of the demon Hreidmar, and his sons. These dwelt now in the world in the
likeness of men or of beasts.

+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 1                                        | Of old was an age\    |
|                         |                                          | when Ódin walked\     |
|                         |                                          | by wide waters\       |
|                         |                                          | in the world's        |
|                         |                                          | beginning;\           |
|                         |                                          | lightfooted Loki\     |
|                         |                                          | at his left was       |
|                         |                                          | running,\             |
|                         |                                          | at his right Hoenir\  |
|                         |                                          | roamed beside him.    |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | [2](#calibre_link-83){#calibre_link-186} | The falls of Andvari\ |
|                         |                                          | frothed and murmured\ |
|                         |                                          | with fish teeming\    |
|                         |                                          | in foaming pools.\    |
|                         |                                          | As a pike there       |
|                         |                                          | plunged\              |
|                         |                                          | his prey hunting\     |
|                         |                                          | Dwarf Andvari\        |
|                         |                                          | from his dark cavern. |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 3                                        | There hunted hungry\  |
|                         |                                          | Hreidmar's            |
|                         |                                          | offspring:\           |
|                         |                                          | the silver salmon\    |
|                         |                                          | sweet he thought      |
|                         |                                          | them.\                |
|                         |                                          | Otr in otter's form\  |
|                         |                                          | there ate blinking,\  |
|                         |                                          | on the bank brooding\ |
|                         |                                          | of black waters.      |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 4                                        | With stone struck     |
|                         |                                          | him,\                 |
|                         |                                          | stripped him naked,\  |
|                         |                                          | Loki lighthanded,\    |
|                         |                                          | loosing evil.\        |
|                         |                                          | The fell they         |
|                         |                                          | flayed,\              |
|                         |                                          | fared then onward;\   |
|                         |                                          | in Hreidmar's halls\  |
|                         |                                          | housing sought they.  |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 5                                        | There wrought Regin\  |
|                         |                                          | by the red embers\    |
|                         |                                          | rune-written iron,\   |
|                         |                                          | rare, enchanted;\     |
|                         |                                          | of gold things        |
|                         |                                          | gleaming,\            |
|                         |                                          | of grey silver,\      |
|                         |                                          | there Fáfnir lay\     |
|                         |                                          | by the fire dreaming. |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Hreidmar*              | [6](#calibre_link-84){#calibre_link-187} | 'Do fetters fret      |
|                         |                                          | you,\                 |
|                         |                                          | folk of Ásgard?\      |
|                         |                                          | Regin hath wrought    |
|                         |                                          | them\                 |
|                         |                                          | with runes binding.\  |
|                         |                                          | Redgolden rings,\     |
|                         |                                          | ransom costly,\       |
|                         |                                          | this fell must fill,\ |
|                         |                                          | this fur cover!'      |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 7                                        | Lightshod Loki\       |
|                         |                                          | over land and waves\  |
|                         |                                          | to Rán came running\  |
|                         |                                          | in her realm of sea.\ |
|                         |                                          | The queen of Ægir\    |
|                         |                                          | his quest granted:\   |
|                         |                                          | a net she knotted\    |
|                         |                                          | noosed with evil.     |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Loki*                  | 8                                        | 'What fish have I     |
|                         |                                          | found\                |
|                         |                                          | in the flood          |
|                         |                                          | leaping,\             |
|                         |                                          | rashly roaming?\      |
|                         |                                          | Ransom pay me!'       |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Andvari*               |                                          | 'I am Andvari.\       |
|                         |                                          | Óin begot me\         |
|                         |                                          | to grievous fate.\    |
|                         |                                          | Gold I bid thee!'     |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Loki*                  | [9](#calibre_link-85){#calibre_link-188} | 'What hides thy hand\ |
|                         |                                          | thus hollow           |
|                         |                                          | bending?'\            |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Andvari*               |                                          | 'The ring is little   |
|                         |                                          | --\                   |
|                         |                                          | let it rest with me!' |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Loki*                  |                                          | 'All, Andvari,\       |
|                         |                                          | all shalt render,\    |
|                         |                                          | light rings and       |
|                         |                                          | heavy,\               |
|                         |                                          | or life itself!'      |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 10                                       | (The Dwarf spake      |
|                         |                                          | darkly\               |
|                         |                                          | from his delvéd       |
|                         |                                          | stone:)               |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Andvari*               |                                          | 'My ring I will       |
|                         |                                          | curse\                |
|                         |                                          | with ruth and woe!\   |
|                         |                                          | Bane it bringeth\     |
|                         |                                          | to brethren two;\     |
|                         |                                          | seven princes slays;\ |
|                         |                                          | swords it kindles --\ |
|                         |                                          | end untimely\         |
|                         |                                          | of Ódin's hope.'      |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 11                                       | In Hreidmar's house\  |
|                         |                                          | they heaped the gold. |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Hreidmar*              |                                          | 'A hair unhidden\     |
|                         |                                          | I behold there yet!'\ |
|                         |                                          | Out drew Ódin\        |
|                         |                                          | Andvari's ring,\      |
|                         |                                          | cursed he cast it\    |
|                         |                                          | on accurséd gold.     |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Ódin*                  | 12                                       | 'Ye gold have         |
|                         |                                          | gained:\              |
|                         |                                          | a god's ransom,\      |
|                         |                                          | for thyself and sons\ |
|                         |                                          | seed of evil.'\       |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Hreidmar*              |                                          | 'Gods seldom give\    |
|                         |                                          | gifts of healing;\    |
|                         |                                          | gold oft begrudgeth\  |
|                         |                                          | the greedy hand!'     |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 13                                       | Words spake Loki\     |
|                         |                                          | worse thereafter:     |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Loki*                  |                                          | 'Here deadly dwells\  |
|                         |                                          | the doom of kings!\   |
|                         |                                          | Here is fall of       |
|                         |                                          | queens,\              |
|                         |                                          | fire and weeping,\    |
|                         |                                          | end untimely\         |
|                         |                                          | of Ódin's hope!'      |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Ódin*                  | 14                                       | 'Whom Ódin chooseth\  |
|                         |                                          | ends not untimely,\   |
|                         |                                          | though ways of men\   |
|                         |                                          | he walk briefly.\     |
|                         |                                          | In wide Valhöll\      |
|                         |                                          | he may wait feasting  |
|                         |                                          | --\                   |
|                         |                                          | it is to ages after\  |
|                         |                                          | that Ódin looks.'     |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Hreidmar*              | 15                                       | 'The hope of Ódin\    |
|                         |                                          | we heed little!\      |
|                         |                                          | Redgolden rings\      |
|                         |                                          | I will rule alone.\   |
|                         |                                          | Though Gods grudge    |
|                         |                                          | it\                   |
|                         |                                          | gold is healing.\     |
|                         |                                          | From Hreidmar's       |
|                         |                                          | house\                |
|                         |                                          | haste now swiftly!'   |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                                                                    | \*                    |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
:::

::: {#calibre_link-9 .calibre2}
# [II  SIGNÝ](#calibre_link-86){.calibre5} {#ii-signý .cn}

[Rerir](#calibre_link-87){#calibre_link-171} was the son of the son of
Ódin. After him reigned Völsung, to whom Ódin gave a Valkyrie as wife.
Sigmund and Signý were their eldest children and twins. They had nine
sons beside. Sigmund was of all men the most valiant, unless his sons be
named. Signý was fair and wise and foresighted. She was given unwilling
and against her foreboding to Siggeir king of Gautland, for the
strengthening of the power of King Völsung. Here is told how hate grew
between Gauts and Völsungs, and of the slaying of Völsung. The ten
brothers of Signý were set in fetters in the forest and all perished
save Sigmund. Long time he dwelt in a cave in the guise of a dwarvish
smith. By Signý was a fierce vengeance devised and fulfilled.

+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 1                                         | On the coasts of the North\                |
|                         |                                           | was king renowned\                         |
|                         |                                           | Rerir sea-roving,\                         |
|                         |                                           | the raven's lord.\                         |
|                         |                                           | Shield-hung his ships,\                    |
|                         |                                           | unsheathed his sword;\                     |
|                         |                                           | his sire of old\                           |
|                         |                                           | was son of Ódin.                           |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 2                                         | Him Völsung followed\                      |
|                         |                                           | valiant-hearted,\                          |
|                         |                                           | child of longing,\                         |
|                         |                                           | chosen of Ódin.\                           |
|                         |                                           | Valkyrie fair\                             |
|                         |                                           | did Völsung wed,\                          |
|                         |                                           | Ódin's maiden,\                            |
|                         |                                           | Ódin's chosen.                             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 3                                         | Sigmund and Signý,\                        |
|                         |                                           | a son and daughter,\                       |
|                         |                                           | she bare at a birth\                       |
|                         |                                           | in his builded halls.\                     |
|                         |                                           | High rose their roofs,\                    |
|                         |                                           | huge their timbers,\                       |
|                         |                                           | and wide the walls\                        |
|                         |                                           | of wood carven.                            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 4                                         | A tree there towered\                      |
|                         |                                           | tall and branching,\                       |
|                         |                                           | that house upholding,\                     |
|                         |                                           | the hall's wonder;\                        |
|                         |                                           | its leaves their hangings,\                |
|                         |                                           | its limbs rafters,\                        |
|                         |                                           | its mighty bole\                           |
|                         |                                           | in the midst standing.                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                                                                     | \*                                         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Völsung*               | 5                                         | 'What sails be these\                      |
|                         |                                           | in the seas shining?\                      |
|                         |                                           | What ships be those\                       |
|                         |                                           | with shields golden?'                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Signý*                 |                                           | 'Gautland's banners\                       |
|                         |                                           | gilt and silver\                           |
|                         |                                           | Gautland's greeting\                       |
|                         |                                           | grievous bearing.'                         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Völsung*               | 6                                         | 'Wherefore grievous?\                      |
|                         |                                           | Are guests hateful?\                       |
|                         |                                           | Gautland's master\                         |
|                         |                                           | glorious reigneth.'                        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Signý*                 |                                           | 'For Gautland's master\                    |
|                         |                                           | glory endeth;\                             |
|                         |                                           | grief is fated\                            |
|                         |                                           | for Gautland's queen.'                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 7                                         | Birds sang blithely\                       |
|                         |                                           | o'er board and hearth,\                    |
|                         |                                           | bold men and brave\                        |
|                         |                                           | on benches sitting.\                       |
|                         |                                           | Mailclad, mighty,\                         |
|                         |                                           | his message spake there\                   |
|                         |                                           | a Gautish lord\                            |
|                         |                                           | gleaming-harnessed.                        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Gaut*                  | 8                                         | 'Siggeir sent me\                          |
|                         |                                           | swiftly steering:\                         |
|                         |                                           | fame of Völsung\                           |
|                         |                                           | far is rumoured.\                          |
|                         |                                           | Signý's beauty,\                           |
|                         |                                           | Signý's wisdom,\                           |
|                         |                                           | to his bed he wooeth,\                     |
|                         |                                           | bride most lovely.'                        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Völsung*               | 9                                         | 'What saith Sigmund?\                      |
|                         |                                           | Shall his sister go\                       |
|                         |                                           | with lord so mighty\                       |
|                         |                                           | league to bind us?'                        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Sigmund*               |                                           | 'With lord so mighty\                      |
|                         |                                           | league and kinship\                        |
|                         |                                           | let us bind, and grant him\                |
|                         |                                           | bride most lovely!'                        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 10                                        | Ere summer faded\                          |
|                         |                                           | sails came shining,\                       |
|                         |                                           | ships came shoreward\                      |
|                         |                                           | with shields gleaming.\                    |
|                         |                                           | Many and mighty\                           |
|                         |                                           | mailclad warriors\                         |
|                         |                                           | to the seats of Völsung\                   |
|                         |                                           | with Siggeir strode.                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 11                                        | Birds sang blissful\                       |
|                         |                                           | over boards laden,\                        |
|                         |                                           | over Signý pale,\                          |
|                         |                                           | Siggeir eager.\                            |
|                         |                                           | Dark wine they drank,\                     |
|                         |                                           | doughty princes,\                          |
|                         |                                           | Gautland's chieftains;\                    |
|                         |                                           | glad their voices.                         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | [12](#calibre_link-88){#calibre_link-174} | [Wan](#calibre_link-89){#calibre_link-196} |
|                         |                                           | night cometh;\                             |
|                         |                                           | wind ariseth;\                             |
|                         |                                           | doors are opened,\                         |
|                         |                                           | the din is silenced.\                      |
|                         |                                           | A man there enters,\                       |
|                         |                                           | mantled darkly,\                           |
|                         |                                           | hoary-bearded,\                            |
|                         |                                           | huge and ancient.                          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | [13](#calibre_link-90){#calibre_link-175} | A sword he sweeps\                         |
|                         |                                           | from swathing cloak,\                      |
|                         |                                           | into standing stem\                        |
|                         |                                           | stabs it swiftly:                          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Grímnir*               |                                           | 'Who dares to draw,\                       |
|                         |                                           | doom unfearing,\                           |
|                         |                                           | the gift of Grímnir\                       |
|                         |                                           | gleaming deadly?'                          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 14                                        | Doors clanged backward;\                   |
|                         |                                           | din was wakened;\                          |
|                         |                                           | men leapt forward\                         |
|                         |                                           | mighty-handed.\                            |
|                         |                                           | Gaut and Völsung\                          |
|                         |                                           | glory seeking\                             |
|                         |                                           | strove they starkly,\                      |
|                         |                                           | straining vainly.                          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 15                                        | Sigmund latest\                            |
|                         |                                           | seized it lightly,\                        |
|                         |                                           | the blade from bole\                       |
|                         |                                           | brandished flaming.\                       |
|                         |                                           | Siggeir yearning\                          |
|                         |                                           | on that sword gazing\                      |
|                         |                                           | red gold offered,\                         |
|                         |                                           | ransom kingly.                             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Sigmund*               | 16                                        | 'Though seas of silver\                    |
|                         |                                           | and sands of gold\                         |
|                         |                                           | thou bade in barter,\                      |
|                         |                                           | thy boon were vain!\                       |
|                         |                                           | To my hand made,\                          |
|                         |                                           | for me destined,\                          |
|                         |                                           | I sell no sword\                           |
|                         |                                           | to Siggeir ever.'                          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                                                                     | \*                                         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Signý*                 | 17                                        | 'My heart is heavy\                        |
|                         |                                           | my home leaving!\                          |
|                         |                                           | Signý's wisdom\                            |
|                         |                                           | Signý burdens.\                            |
|                         |                                           | From this wedding waketh\                  |
|                         |                                           | woe and evil --\                           |
|                         |                                           | break, sire, the bonds\                    |
|                         |                                           | thou hast bound me in!'                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Völsung*               | 18                                        | 'Woe and evil\                             |
|                         |                                           | are woman's boding!\                       |
|                         |                                           | Fate none can flee.\                       |
|                         |                                           | Faith man can hold.\                       |
|                         |                                           | Ships await thee!\                         |
|                         |                                           | Shame to sunder\                           |
|                         |                                           | the bridal bed,\                           |
|                         |                                           | the bounden word.                          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Signý*                 | 19                                        | 'Sigmund, farewell!\                       |
|                         |                                           | Siggeir calls me.\                         |
|                         |                                           | Weak might hath woman\                     |
|                         |                                           | for wisdom's load.\                        |
|                         |                                           | Last night I lay\                          |
|                         |                                           | where loath me was;\                       |
|                         |                                           | with less liking\                          |
|                         |                                           | I may lay me yet.'                         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 20                                        | 'Hail! toft and Tree,\                     |
|                         |                                           | timbers carven!\                           |
|                         |                                           | Maid here was once\                        |
|                         |                                           | who is mournful queen.'\                   |
|                         |                                           | Wild blew the wind\                        |
|                         |                                           | waves white-crested.\                      |
|                         |                                           | On land of Völsung\                        |
|                         |                                           | she looked no more.                        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                                                                     | \*                                         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 21                                        | A ship came shining\                       |
|                         |                                           | to shores foaming,\                        |
|                         |                                           | gloomy Gautland's\                         |
|                         |                                           | guarded havens.\                           |
|                         |                                           | Sigmund lordly,\                           |
|                         |                                           | sire and kindred,\                         |
|                         |                                           | to fair feasting\                          |
|                         |                                           | fearless journeyed.                        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Signý*                 | 22                                        | 'Father Völsung,\                          |
|                         |                                           | fairest kinsman!\                          |
|                         |                                           | Back my brethren!\                         |
|                         |                                           | This beach tread not!\                     |
|                         |                                           | A bitter drinking,\                        |
|                         |                                           | baleful meeting,\                          |
|                         |                                           | swords hath Siggeir\                       |
|                         |                                           | set to greet you.'                         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 23                                        | With thousand thanes,\                     |
|                         |                                           | thronging spearmen,\                       |
|                         |                                           | his guests welcomed\                       |
|                         |                                           | Gautland's master.\                        |
|                         |                                           | Ten times Völsung\                         |
|                         |                                           | towering wrathful\                         |
|                         |                                           | casque and corslet\                        |
|                         |                                           | clove asunder.                             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 24                                        | Through and through them\                  |
|                         |                                           | thrice went Sigmund;\                      |
|                         |                                           | as grass in Gautland\                      |
|                         |                                           | grimly mowed them.\                        |
|                         |                                           | His shield he shed:\                       |
|                         |                                           | with shining sword\                        |
|                         |                                           | smoking redly\                             |
|                         |                                           | slew two-handed.                           |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                                                                     | \*                                         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 25                                        | Black the raven\                           |
|                         |                                           | by the body croaketh,\                     |
|                         |                                           | bare are Völsung's\                        |
|                         |                                           | bones once mighty.\                        |
|                         |                                           | In bonds the brethren\                     |
|                         |                                           | are bound living;\                         |
|                         |                                           | Siggeir smileth,\                          |
|                         |                                           | Signý weeps not.                           |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Signý*                 | 26                                        | 'Sweet still is sight\                     |
|                         |                                           | while see one may!\                        |
|                         |                                           | A boon, my husband --\                     |
|                         |                                           | bid men linger!\                           |
|                         |                                           | Slay not swiftly\                          |
|                         |                                           | seed of Völsung!\                          |
|                         |                                           | For death is lasting,\                     |
|                         |                                           | though the doom tarry.'                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Siggeir*               | 27                                        | 'Wild and witless\                         |
|                         |                                           | words of Signý,\                           |
|                         |                                           | that pain and torment\                     |
|                         |                                           | plead for kindred!\                        |
|                         |                                           | Glad will I grant it,\                     |
|                         |                                           | grimly bind them\                          |
|                         |                                           | in the forest fettered,\                   |
|                         |                                           | faint and hungry.'                         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 28                                        | In the forest fettered,\                   |
|                         |                                           | faint and naked,\                          |
|                         |                                           | her ten brethren\                          |
|                         |                                           | torment suffered.\                         |
|                         |                                           | There one by one\                          |
|                         |                                           | a wolf rent them;\                         |
|                         |                                           | by night after night\                      |
|                         |                                           | another sought she.                        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Signý*                 | 29                                        | 'What found ye in the forest,\             |
|                         |                                           | my fair servants?'                         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Servants*              |                                           | 'Nine brothers' bones\                     |
|                         |                                           | under night gleaming;\                     |
|                         |                                           | yet were shackles broken,\                 |
|                         |                                           | she-wolf lying\                            |
|                         |                                           | torn and tongueless\                       |
|                         |                                           | by the tree riven.'                        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                                                                     | \*                                         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Signý*                 | 30                                        | 'Who hath deeply delved\                   |
|                         |                                           | this dark cavern?\                         |
|                         |                                           | Dwarvish master,\                          |
|                         |                                           | thy doors open!'                           |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Sigmund*               |                                           | 'Who knocks at night\                      |
|                         |                                           | at nameless doors?\                        |
|                         |                                           | In may enter\                              |
|                         |                                           | elvish maiden!'                            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 31                                        | Brother and sister\                        |
|                         |                                           | in a bed lying,\                           |
|                         |                                           | brief love, bitter,\                       |
|                         |                                           | blent with loathing!\                      |
|                         |                                           | Answer, earth-dweller --\                  |
|                         |                                           | in thy arms who lies,\                     |
|                         |                                           | chill, enchanted,\                         |
|                         |                                           | changed, elfshapen?                        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 32                                        | Back went Signý\                           |
|                         |                                           | to Siggeir's hall,\                        |
|                         |                                           | nine months brooding\                      |
|                         |                                           | no word speaking.\                         |
|                         |                                           | Wolves were wailing,\                      |
|                         |                                           | her women shuddering,\                     |
|                         |                                           | Signý silent,\                             |
|                         |                                           | when a son she bore.                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                                                                     | \*                                         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Sigmund*               | 33                                        | 'Who calls so clear\                       |
|                         |                                           | at cavern's doorway,\                      |
|                         |                                           | fords so fearless\                         |
|                         |                                           | the foaming stream?\                       |
|                         |                                           | Fair one, thy father\                      |
|                         |                                           | thy face gave not!\                        |
|                         |                                           | What bringest bound\                       |
|                         |                                           | in bast folded?'                           |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Sinfjötli*             | 34                                        | 'My face is Völsung's,\                    |
|                         |                                           | father of Signý.\                          |
|                         |                                           | Signý sent me\                             |
|                         |                                           | a sword bearing.\                          |
|                         |                                           | Long years it lay\                         |
|                         |                                           | on the lap of Siggeir;\                    |
|                         |                                           | Sigmund drew it,\                          |
|                         |                                           | since hath no man.'                        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 35                                        | Thus son of Signý\                         |
|                         |                                           | came Sinfjötli,\                           |
|                         |                                           | to vengeance bred\                         |
|                         |                                           | of Völsung slain.\                         |
|                         |                                           | In the forest faring\                      |
|                         |                                           | far in warfare\                            |
|                         |                                           | long they laboured,\                       |
|                         |                                           | long they waited.                          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 36                                        | Wide they wandered\                        |
|                         |                                           | wolvish-coated,\                           |
|                         |                                           | men they murdered,\                        |
|                         |                                           | men they plundered.\                       |
|                         |                                           | Daylong slept they\                        |
|                         |                                           | in dark cavern\                            |
|                         |                                           | after dreadful deeds\                      |
|                         |                                           | of death in Gautland.                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 37                                        | Moon was shining,\                         |
|                         |                                           | men were singing,\                         |
|                         |                                           | Siggeir sitting\                           |
|                         |                                           | in his sounding hall.\                     |
|                         |                                           | Völsung vanquished\                        |
|                         |                                           | voices chanted;\                           |
|                         |                                           | wolves came howling\                       |
|                         |                                           | wild and dreadful.                         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 38                                        | Doors were opened,\                        |
|                         |                                           | din fell silent.                           |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Gautar*                |                                           | 'Eyes we see there\                        |
|                         |                                           | like eager fire!\                          |
|                         |                                           | wolves have entered,\                      |
|                         |                                           | watchmen slaying!\                         |
|                         |                                           | Flames are round us\                       |
|                         |                                           | fire-encircled.'                           |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                         | 39                                        | Sigmund stood there\                       |
|                         |                                           | his sword wielding,\                       |
|                         |                                           | and Signý's son\                           |
|                         |                                           | at his side laughing.                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Sigmund &Sinfjötli*    |                                           | 'Pass may no man,\                         |
|                         |                                           | prince nor servant!\                       |
|                         |                                           | In pain shall perish\                      |
|                         |                                           | pride of Siggeir.'                         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Sigmund*               | 40                                        | 'Come forth, Signý,\                       |
|                         |                                           | sister fairest!\                           |
|                         |                                           | Gautland's glory\                          |
|                         |                                           | grimly endeth.\                            |
|                         |                                           | Glad the greeting,\                        |
|                         |                                           | grief is over;\                            |
|                         |                                           | avenged is Völsung\                        |
|                         |                                           | valiant-hearted!'                          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Signý*                 | 41                                        | (Sigmund's sister\                         |
|                         |                                           | Signý answered:)\                          |
|                         |                                           | 'Son Sinfjötli,\                           |
|                         |                                           | Sigmund father!\                           |
|                         |                                           | Signý comes not,\                          |
|                         |                                           | Siggeir calls her.\                        |
|                         |                                           | Where I lay unwilling\                     |
|                         |                                           | I now lay me glad;\                        |
|                         |                                           | I lived in loathing,\                      |
|                         |                                           | now lief I die.'                           |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                                                                     | \*                                         |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
:::

::: {#calibre_link-10 .calibre2}
# [III](#calibre_link-91){.calibre5} {#iii .cn}

# [DAUÐI SINFJÖTLA](#calibre_link-91) {#dauði-sinfjötla .ct1}

## (The Death of Sinfjötli) {#the-death-of-sinfjötli .sub2}

+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 1                                         | Ships they laded\     |
|                         |                                           | with shining gear,\   |
|                         |                                           | gems and jewels,\     |
|                         |                                           | joys of Gautland.\    |
|                         |                                           | Wild blew the winds,\ |
|                         |                                           | waves were foaming;\  |
|                         |                                           | they viewed afar\     |
|                         |                                           | the Völsung shore.    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | [2](#calibre_link-92){#calibre_link-169}  | Long ruled Sigmund,\  |
|                         |                                           | sire and uncle;\      |
|                         |                                           | Sinfjötli sat\        |
|                         |                                           | at his side proudly.\ |
|                         |                                           | There towered the     |
|                         |                                           | tree,\                |
|                         |                                           | tall and ancient,\    |
|                         |                                           | birds in the          |
|                         |                                           | branches\             |
|                         |                                           | were blithe again.    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 3                                         | Ever Grímnir's gift\  |
|                         |                                           | gleamed in warfare;\  |
|                         |                                           | at Sigmund's side\    |
|                         |                                           | Sinfjötli strode.\    |
|                         |                                           | Hard, handlinkéd,\    |
|                         |                                           | helm and corslet\     |
|                         |                                           | glasswhite glittered\ |
|                         |                                           | with grey silver.     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 4                                         | Seven kings they      |
|                         |                                           | slew,\                |
|                         |                                           | their cities          |
|                         |                                           | plundered;\           |
|                         |                                           | wide waxed their      |
|                         |                                           | realm\                |
|                         |                                           | the world over.\      |
|                         |                                           | Of women fairest\     |
|                         |                                           | in war taken\         |
|                         |                                           | a wife took Sigmund;\ |
|                         |                                           | woe she brought him.  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 5                                         | Sinfjötli came\       |
|                         |                                           | sailing proudly\      |
|                         |                                           | ships goldladen\      |
|                         |                                           | to the shore          |
|                         |                                           | steering.             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sigmund*               |                                           | 'Hail! Ódin's son,\   |
|                         |                                           | eager-hearted!\       |
|                         |                                           | War no longer!\       |
|                         |                                           | Wine is pouring.'     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 6                                         | In came the queen\    |
|                         |                                           | evil pondering --\    |
|                         |                                           | her sire was slain\   |
|                         |                                           | by Sinfjötli -- :\    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Queen*                 |                                           | 'Hail! Völsung fell,\ |
|                         |                                           | valiant-hearted!\     |
|                         |                                           | Weary art thou.\      |
|                         |                                           | Wine I bring thee.    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 7                                         | Steep stands the      |
|                         |                                           | horn,\                |
|                         |                                           | Stepson thirsty!'     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sinfjötli*             |                                           | 'Dark seems the       |
|                         |                                           | drink,\               |
|                         |                                           | deadly blended!'\     |
|                         |                                           | Sigmund seized it,\   |
|                         |                                           | swiftly drained it;\  |
|                         |                                           | no venom vanquished\  |
|                         |                                           | Völsung's eldest.     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Queen*                 | 8                                         | 'Beer I bring thee\   |
|                         |                                           | brown and potent!'    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sinfjötli*             |                                           | 'Guile there          |
|                         |                                           | gleameth\             |
|                         |                                           | grimly blended!'\     |
|                         |                                           | Sigmund seized it,\   |
|                         |                                           | swiftly drank it;\    |
|                         |                                           | that prince of men\   |
|                         |                                           | poison harmed not.    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Queen*                 | 9                                         | 'Ale I offer thee,\   |
|                         |                                           | eager Völsung!\       |
|                         |                                           | Völsungs valiant\     |
|                         |                                           | at venom blench not;\ |
|                         |                                           | heroes ask not\       |
|                         |                                           | help in drinking --\  |
|                         |                                           | if drink thou         |
|                         |                                           | darest,\              |
|                         |                                           | drink Sinfjötli!'     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 10                                        | Dead Sinfjötli\       |
|                         |                                           | drinking stumbled.    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sigmund*               |                                           | 'Woe! thou witchwife\ |
|                         |                                           | weary-hearted!\       |
|                         |                                           | Of the seed of        |
|                         |                                           | Völsung\              |
|                         |                                           | in Signý's child\     |
|                         |                                           | the fairest flower\   |
|                         |                                           | fades untimely!'      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 11                                        | There sorrowladen\    |
|                         |                                           | Sigmund raised him,\  |
|                         |                                           | in arms caught him;\  |
|                         |                                           | out he wandered.\     |
|                         |                                           | Over wood and wild\   |
|                         |                                           | to the waves foaming\ |
|                         |                                           | witless strayed he\   |
|                         |                                           | to the waves roaring. |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Boatman*               | [12](#calibre_link-93){#calibre_link-197} | 'Whither bringest     |
|                         |                                           | thou\                 |
|                         |                                           | thy burden heavy?\    |
|                         |                                           | My boat is ready\     |
|                         |                                           | to bear it hence.'\   |
|                         |                                           | A man there steered,\ |
|                         |                                           | mantled darkly,\      |
|                         |                                           | hooded and hoary,\    |
|                         |                                           | huge and awful.       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 13                                        | Alone was Sigmund\    |
|                         |                                           | by the land's         |
|                         |                                           | margin;\              |
|                         |                                           | in Valhöllu\          |
|                         |                                           | Völsung feasted:      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Völsung*               |                                           | 'Son's son welcome,\  |
|                         |                                           | and son of daughter!\ |
|                         |                                           | But one yet await     |
|                         |                                           | we,\                  |
|                         |                                           | the World's chosen.'  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                                                                     | \*                    |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
:::

::: {#calibre_link-11 .calibre2}
# [IV](#calibre_link-94){.calibre5} {#iv .cn}

# [FŒDDR SIGURÐR](#calibre_link-94) {#fœddr-sigurðr .ct1}

## (Sigurd Born) {#sigurd-born .sub2}

+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 1                                        | Alone dwelt Sigmund\  |
|                         |                                          | his land ruling;\     |
|                         |                                          | cold was his bower,\  |
|                         |                                          | queenless,            |
|                         |                                          | childless.\           |
|                         |                                          | In songs he heard\    |
|                         |                                          | of sweetest maiden,\  |
|                         |                                          | of Sigrlinn's         |
|                         |                                          | beauty,\              |
|                         |                                          | Sváfnir's daughter.   |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 2                                        | Old was Sigmund,\     |
|                         |                                          | as an oak gnarléd;\   |
|                         |                                          | his beard was grey\   |
|                         |                                          | as bark of ash.\      |
|                         |                                          | Young was Sigrlinn\   |
|                         |                                          | and yellow-gleaming\  |
|                         |                                          | her locks hung long\  |
|                         |                                          | on lissom shoulder.   |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 3                                        | Seven sons of kings\  |
|                         |                                          | sued the maiden:\     |
|                         |                                          | Sigmund took her;\    |
|                         |                                          | sails were hoisted.\  |
|                         |                                          | The Völsung land\     |
|                         |                                          | they viewed afar,\    |
|                         |                                          | the windy cliffs,\    |
|                         |                                          | the waves foaming.    |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sigmund*               | 4                                        | 'Say me, Sigrlinn,\   |
|                         |                                          | sweeter were it\      |
|                         |                                          | young king to wed\    |
|                         |                                          | and yellow-bearded,\  |
|                         |                                          | or wife of a          |
|                         |                                          | Völsung,\             |
|                         |                                          | the World's chosen\   |
|                         |                                          | in my bed to bear,\   |
|                         |                                          | bride of Ódin?'       |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                                                                    | \*                    |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sigrlinn*              | 5                                        | 'What sails be these\ |
|                         |                                          | in the seas shining?  |
|                         |                                          | --\                   |
|                         |                                          | the shields are       |
|                         |                                          | scarlet,\             |
|                         |                                          | ships uncounted.'     |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sigmund*               |                                          | 'Seven sons of kings\ |
|                         |                                          | seeking welcome!\     |
|                         |                                          | Grímnir's gift shall\ |
|                         |                                          | gladly meet them!'    |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 6                                        | High sang the horns,\ |
|                         |                                          | helms were gleaming,\ |
|                         |                                          | shafts were shaken,\  |
|                         |                                          | shields them          |
|                         |                                          | answered.\            |
|                         |                                          | Vikings' standards,\  |
|                         |                                          | Völsung's banner\     |
|                         |                                          | on strand were        |
|                         |                                          | streaming;\           |
|                         |                                          | stern the onslaught.  |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 7                                        | Old was Sigmund\      |
|                         |                                          | as the oak gnarléd;\  |
|                         |                                          | his sword swung he\   |
|                         |                                          | smoking redly.\       |
|                         |                                          | Fate him fended\      |
|                         |                                          | fearless striding\    |
|                         |                                          | with dew of battle\   |
|                         |                                          | dyed to shoulder.     |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | [8](#calibre_link-95){#calibre_link-198} | A warrior strange,\   |
|                         |                                          | one-eyed, awful,\     |
|                         |                                          | strode and stayed     |
|                         |                                          | him\                  |
|                         |                                          | standing silent,\     |
|                         |                                          | huge and hoary\       |
|                         |                                          | and hooded darkly.\   |
|                         |                                          | The sword of Sigmund\ |
|                         |                                          | sang before him.      |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 9                                        | His spear he raised:\ |
|                         |                                          | sprang asunder\       |
|                         |                                          | the sword of          |
|                         |                                          | Grímnir,\             |
|                         |                                          | singing splintered.\  |
|                         |                                          | The king is fallen\   |
|                         |                                          | cloven-breasted;\     |
|                         |                                          | lords lie round him;\ |
|                         |                                          | the land darkens.     |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 10                                       | Men were moaning,\    |
|                         |                                          | the moon sinking.\    |
|                         |                                          | Sigrlinn sought him,\ |
|                         |                                          | sadly raised him:     |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sigrlinn*              |                                          | 'Hope of healing\     |
|                         |                                          | for thy hurts I       |
|                         |                                          | bring,\               |
|                         |                                          | my lord beloved,\     |
|                         |                                          | last of Völsungs.'    |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sigmund*               | 11                                       | 'From wanhope many\   |
|                         |                                          | have been won to      |
|                         |                                          | life,\                |
|                         |                                          | yet healing I ask     |
|                         |                                          | not.\                 |
|                         |                                          | Hope is needless.\    |
|                         |                                          | Ódin calls me\        |
|                         |                                          | at the end of days.\  |
|                         |                                          | Here lies not lost\   |
|                         |                                          | the last Völsung!     |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 12                                       | Thy womb shall wax\   |
|                         |                                          | with the World's      |
|                         |                                          | chosen,\              |
|                         |                                          | serpent-slayer,\      |
|                         |                                          | seed of Ódin.\        |
|                         |                                          | Till ages end\        |
|                         |                                          | all shall name him\   |
|                         |                                          | chief of chieftains,\ |
|                         |                                          | changeless glory.     |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 13                                       | Of Grímnir's gift\    |
|                         |                                          | guard the fragments;\ |
|                         |                                          | of the shards shall   |
|                         |                                          | be shaped\            |
|                         |                                          | a shining blade.\     |
|                         |                                          | Too soon shall I see\ |
|                         |                                          | Sigurd bear it\       |
|                         |                                          | to glad Valhöll\      |
|                         |                                          | greeting Ódin.'       |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 14                                       | Cold came morning\    |
|                         |                                          | o'er the king         |
|                         |                                          | lifeless\             |
|                         |                                          | and woeful Sigrlinn\  |
|                         |                                          | her watch keeping.\   |
|                         |                                          | Ships came sailing\   |
|                         |                                          | to the shore          |
|                         |                                          | crowding,\            |
|                         |                                          | rovers northern\      |
|                         |                                          | to the red beaches    |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 15                                       | The bride of Sigmund\ |
|                         |                                          | as a bondwoman\       |
|                         |                                          | over sounding seas\   |
|                         |                                          | sadly journeyed.\     |
|                         |                                          | Wild blew the winds,\ |
|                         |                                          | waves them lifted;\   |
|                         |                                          | she viewed afar\      |
|                         |                                          | the Völsung land.     |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 16                                       | Wind was wailing,\    |
|                         |                                          | waves were crying,\   |
|                         |                                          | Sigrlinn sorrowful,\  |
|                         |                                          | when a son she bore.\ |
|                         |                                          | Sigurd golden\        |
|                         |                                          | as a sun shining,\    |
|                         |                                          | forth came he fair\   |
|                         |                                          | in a far country.     |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Woman*                 | 17                                       | 'O woman woeful\      |
|                         |                                          | in war taken,\        |
|                         |                                          | who was thy husband\  |
|                         |                                          | while his house       |
|                         |                                          | lasted?\              |
|                         |                                          | What father begot\    |
|                         |                                          | such fair offspring?  |
|                         |                                          | --\                   |
|                         |                                          | grey steel glitters\  |
|                         |                                          | in his gleaming       |
|                         |                                          | eyes.'                |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sigrlinn*              | 18                                       | 'The sire of Sigurd\  |
|                         |                                          | Sigmund Völsung;\     |
|                         |                                          | Seed of Ódin\         |
|                         |                                          | songs shall call      |
|                         |                                          | him.'                 |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Woman*                 |                                          | 'Fair shall be        |
|                         |                                          | fostered\             |
|                         |                                          | that father's child;\ |
|                         |                                          | his mother be mated\  |
|                         |                                          | to a mighty king.'    |
+-------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                                                                    | \*                    |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
:::

::: {#calibre_link-12 .calibre2}
# [V](#calibre_link-96){.calibre5} {#v .cn}

# [REGIN](#calibre_link-96) {#regin .ct2}

The king of that land took Sigrlinn to wife. Sigurd was sent to be
fostered by Regin, of whom it has been told above. Regin dwelt now in
the forest and was deemed wise in many other matters than smithwork.
Regin egged Sigurd to slay Fáfnir. With the sword Gram and the horse
Grani, of which it is here spoken, he accomplished this, though Regin
had concealed from him both the great power of Fáfnir and the nature of
the hoard that the serpent guarded. Here also are given the dark words
of Regin in which the undermeaning is that the real cause of the
serpent's death is Regin, who should therefore have the gold (though
this he has promised, at least in large share, to Sigurd); but that
Regin should slay the slayer of his brother. Sigurd deeming him only
weighed with the thought of his guilt in brother-murder, dismisses his
words with scorn. Nor does Sigurd heed the dragon's words concerning the
curse, thinking them merely the device of greed to protect the gold even
though its guardian be slain. This indeed was the dragon's chief purpose
in revealing the curse at the hour of his death. Yet that curse began to
work swiftly.

+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 1                                          | The forge was smoking\                              |
|                         |                                            | in the forest-darkness;\                            |
|                         |                                            | there wrought Regin\                                |
|                         |                                            | by the red embers.\                                 |
|                         |                                            | There was Sigurd sent,\                             |
|                         |                                            | seed of Völsung,\                                   |
|                         |                                            | lore deep to learn;\                                |
|                         |                                            | long his fostering.                                 |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 2                                          | Runes of wisdom\                                    |
|                         |                                            | then Regin taught him,\                             |
|                         |                                            | and weapons' wielding,\                             |
|                         |                                            | works of mastery;\                                  |
|                         |                                            | the language of lands,\                             |
|                         |                                            | lore of kingship,\                                  |
|                         |                                            | wise words he spake\                                |
|                         |                                            | in the wood's fastness.                             |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Regin*                 | 3                                          | 'Full well couldst thou wield\                      |
|                         |                                            | wealth and kingship,\                               |
|                         |                                            | O son of Sigmund,\                                  |
|                         |                                            | a sire's treasure.'                                 |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Sigurd*                |                                            | 'My father is fallen,\                              |
|                         |                                            | his folk scattered,\                                |
|                         |                                            | his wealth wasted,\                                 |
|                         |                                            | in war taken!'                                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Regin*                 | 4                                          | 'A hoard have I heard\                              |
|                         |                                            | on a heath lying,\                                  |
|                         |                                            | gold more glorious\                                 |
|                         |                                            | than greatest king's.\                              |
|                         |                                            | Wealth and worship\                                 |
|                         |                                            | would wait on thee,\                                |
|                         |                                            | if thou durst to deal\                              |
|                         |                                            | with its dragon master.'                            |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 5                                          | 'Men sing of serpents\                              |
|                         |                                            | ceaseless guarding\                                 |
|                         |                                            | gold and silver\                                    |
|                         |                                            | greedy-hearted;\                                    |
|                         |                                            | but fell Fáfnir\                                    |
|                         |                                            | folk all name him\                                  |
|                         |                                            | of dragons direst,\                                 |
|                         |                                            | dreaming evil.'                                     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Regin*                 | 6                                          | 'Dragons all are dire\                              |
|                         |                                            | to the dull-hearted;\                               |
|                         |                                            | yet venom feared not\                               |
|                         |                                            | Völsung's children.'                                |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Sigurd*                |                                            | 'Eager thou urgest me,\                             |
|                         |                                            | though of age untried --\                           |
|                         |                                            | tell me now truly\                                  |
|                         |                                            | why thou tauntest me!'                              |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                                                  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Regin*                 | [7](#calibre_link-97){#calibre_link-165}   | '[The](#calibre_link-98){#calibre_link-189} falls   |
|                         |                                            | of Andvari\                                         |
|                         |                                            | frothed and spouted\                                |
|                         |                                            | with fish teeming\                                  |
|                         |                                            | in foaming pools.\                                  |
|                         |                                            | There Otr sported,\                                 |
|                         |                                            | mine own brother;\                                  |
|                         |                                            | to snare salmon\                                    |
|                         |                                            | sweet he thought it.                                |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 8                                          | With stone smote him,\                              |
|                         |                                            | stripped him naked,\                                |
|                         |                                            | a robber roving\                                    |
|                         |                                            | ruthless-handed;\                                   |
|                         |                                            | at Hreidmar's house\                                |
|                         |                                            | hailed my father,\                                  |
|                         |                                            | that fairest fell\                                  |
|                         |                                            | for food offered.                                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 9                                          | There wrought Regin\                                |
|                         |                                            | by the red embers\                                  |
|                         |                                            | rough iron hewing\                                  |
|                         |                                            | and runes marking;\                                 |
|                         |                                            | there Fáfnir lay\                                   |
|                         |                                            | by the fire sleeping,\                              |
|                         |                                            | fell-hearted son,\                                  |
|                         |                                            | fiercely dreaming.                                  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *(Hreidmar)*            | 10                                         | "Redgolden rings,\                                  |
|                         |                                            | ransom costly,\                                     |
|                         |                                            | this fell must fill,\                               |
|                         |                                            | this fur cover."\                                   |
|                         |                                            | From the foaming force\                             |
|                         |                                            | as a fish netted\                                   |
|                         |                                            | was Dwarf Andvari\                                  |
|                         |                                            | dragged and plundered.                              |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | [11](#calibre_link-99){#calibre_link-166}  | [All](#calibre_link-100){#calibre_link-190} must    |
|                         |                                            | Andvari,\                                           |
|                         |                                            | all surrender,\                                     |
|                         |                                            | light rings and heavy,\                             |
|                         |                                            | or life itself.\                                    |
|                         |                                            | In Hreidmar's house\                                |
|                         |                                            | heaped he laid them,\                               |
|                         |                                            | gold ring on gold,\                                 |
|                         |                                            | a great weregild.                                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *(Regin & Fáfnir)*      | 12                                         | "Shall not brethren share\                          |
|                         |                                            | in brother's ransom\                                |
|                         |                                            | their grief to gladden? --\                         |
|                         |                                            | gold is healing."                                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *(Hreidmar)*            |                                            | "The wreathéd rings\                                |
|                         |                                            | I will rule alone,\                                 |
|                         |                                            | as long as life is\                                 |
|                         |                                            | they leave me never!"                               |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 13                                         | Then Fáfnir's heart\                                |
|                         |                                            | fiercely stung him;\                                |
|                         |                                            | Hreidmar he hewed\                                  |
|                         |                                            | in his house asleep.\                               |
|                         |                                            | Fáfnir's heart\                                     |
|                         |                                            | as a fire burneth:\                                 |
|                         |                                            | part nor portion\                                   |
|                         |                                            | he pays to Regin.                                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 14                                         | In [dragon's](#calibre_link-101){#calibre_link-202} |
|                         |                                            | likeness\                                           |
|                         |                                            | darkling lies he;\                                  |
|                         |                                            | deep his dungeons,\                                 |
|                         |                                            | and dread he knows not.\                            |
|                         |                                            | A helm of horror\                                   |
|                         |                                            | his head weareth\                                   |
|                         |                                            | on                                                  |
|                         |                                            | [Gnitaheiði](#calibre_link-102){#calibre_link-262}\ |
|                         |                                            | grimly creeping.'                                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 15                                         | 'With kin unkindly\                                 |
|                         |                                            | wert thou cursed Regin!\                            |
|                         |                                            | His fire and venom\                                 |
|                         |                                            | affright me not!\                                   |
|                         |                                            | Yet why thou eggest me,\                            |
|                         |                                            | I ask thee still --\                                |
|                         |                                            | for father's vengeance,\                            |
|                         |                                            | or for Fáfnir's gold?'                              |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Regin*                 | 16                                         | 'A sire avenged\                                    |
|                         |                                            | were sweet to Regin;\                               |
|                         |                                            | the gold thy guerdon,\                              |
|                         |                                            | the glory thine.\                                   |
|                         |                                            | A sword for Sigurd\                                 |
|                         |                                            | will the smith fashion,\                            |
|                         |                                            | the blade most bitter\                              |
|                         |                                            | ever borne to war.'                                 |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                                                  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 17                                         | The forge was smoking,\                             |
|                         |                                            | the fire smouldered.\                               |
|                         |                                            | Two swords there fashioned\                         |
|                         |                                            | twice he broke them:\                               |
|                         |                                            | hard the anvil\                                     |
|                         |                                            | hewed he mightily --\                               |
|                         |                                            | sword was splintered,\                              |
|                         |                                            | smith was angered.                                  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 18                                         | 'Sigrlinn, say me,\                                 |
|                         |                                            | was sooth told me\                                  |
|                         |                                            | of gleaming shards\                                 |
|                         |                                            | of Grímnir's sword?\                                |
|                         |                                            | Sigmund's son\                                      |
|                         |                                            | now seeks them from thee --\                        |
|                         |                                            | now Gram shall Regin\                               |
|                         |                                            | guileless weld me!'                                 |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 19                                         | The forge was flaring,\                             |
|                         |                                            | the fire blazing:\                                  |
|                         |                                            | a blade they brought him\                           |
|                         |                                            | with blue edges;\                                   |
|                         |                                            | they flickered with flame,\                         |
|                         |                                            | as it flashed singing --\                           |
|                         |                                            | the cloven anvil\                                   |
|                         |                                            | clashed asunder.                                    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 20                                         | The Rhine river\                                    |
|                         |                                            | ran by swiftly;\                                    |
|                         |                                            | there tufts of wool\                                |
|                         |                                            | on the tide he cast.\                               |
|                         |                                            | Sharp it shore them\                                |
|                         |                                            | in the sheer water:\                                |
|                         |                                            | glad grew Sigurd,\                                  |
|                         |                                            | Gram there brandished.                              |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 21                                         | 'Where lies the heath\                              |
|                         |                                            | and hoard golden?\                                  |
|                         |                                            | Now rede me Regin\                                  |
|                         |                                            | of roads thither!'                                  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Regin*                 |                                            | 'Far lies Fáfnir\                                   |
|                         |                                            | in the fells hiding --\                             |
|                         |                                            | a horse must thou have,\                            |
|                         |                                            | high and sturdy.'                                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 22                                         | In Busiltarn ran\                                   |
|                         |                                            | blue the waters,\                                   |
|                         |                                            | green grew the grass\                               |
|                         |                                            | for grazing horse.\                                 |
|                         |                                            | A man them minded\                                  |
|                         |                                            | mantled darkly,\                                    |
|                         |                                            | hoary-bearded,\                                     |
|                         |                                            | huge and ancient.                                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 23                                         | They drove the horses\                              |
|                         |                                            | into deep currents;\                                |
|                         |                                            | to the bank they backed\                            |
|                         |                                            | from the bitter water.\                             |
|                         |                                            | But grey Grani\                                     |
|                         |                                            | gladly swam there:\                                 |
|                         |                                            | Sigurd chose him,\                                  |
|                         |                                            | swift and flawless.                                 |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Man*                   | 24                                         | 'In the stud of Sleipnir,\                          |
|                         |                                            | steed of Ódin,\                                     |
|                         |                                            | was sired this horse,\                              |
|                         |                                            | swiftest, strongest.\                               |
|                         |                                            | Ride now! ride now!\                                |
|                         |                                            | rocks and mountains,\                               |
|                         |                                            | horse and hero,\                                    |
|                         |                                            | hope of Ódin!'                                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                                                  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 25                                         | Gand rode Regin\                                    |
|                         |                                            | and Grani Sigurd;\                                  |
|                         |                                            | the waste lay withered,\                            |
|                         |                                            | wide and empty.\                                    |
|                         |                                            | Fathoms thirty fell\                                |
|                         |                                            | the fearful cliff\                                  |
|                         |                                            | whence the dragon bowed him\                        |
|                         |                                            | drinking thirsty.                                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 26                                         | In deep hollow\                                     |
|                         |                                            | on the dark hillside\                               |
|                         |                                            | long there lurked he;\                              |
|                         |                                            | the land trembled.\                                 |
|                         |                                            | Forth came Fáfnir,\                                 |
|                         |                                            | fire his breathing;\                                |
|                         |                                            | down the mountain rushed\                           |
|                         |                                            | mists of poison.                                    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 27                                         | [The fire](#calibre_link-103){#calibre_link-200}    |
|                         |                                            | and fume\                                           |
|                         |                                            | over fearless head\                                 |
|                         |                                            | rushed by                                           |
|                         |                                            | [roaring](#calibre_link-104){#calibre_link-201};\   |
|                         |                                            | rocks were groaning.\                               |
|                         |                                            | The black belly,\                                   |
|                         |                                            | bent and coiling,\                                  |
|                         |                                            | over hidden hollow\                                 |
|                         |                                            | hung and glided.                                    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 28                                         | Gram was brandished;\                               |
|                         |                                            | grimly ringing\                                     |
|                         |                                            | to the hoary stone\                                 |
|                         |                                            | heart it sundered.\                                 |
|                         |                                            | In Fáfnir's throe\                                  |
|                         |                                            | were threshed as flails\                            |
|                         |                                            | his writhing limbs\                                 |
|                         |                                            | and reeking head.                                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 29                                         | Black flowed the blood,\                            |
|                         |                                            | belching drenched him;\                             |
|                         |                                            | in the hollow hiding\                               |
|                         |                                            | hard grew Sigurd.\                                  |
|                         |                                            | Swift now sprang he\                                |
|                         |                                            | sword withdrawing:\                                 |
|                         |                                            | there each saw other\                               |
|                         |                                            | with eyes of hate.                                  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Fáfnir*                | 30                                         | 'O man of mankind!\                                 |
|                         |                                            | What man begot thee?\                               |
|                         |                                            | Who forged the flame\                               |
|                         |                                            | for Fáfnir's heart?'                                |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Sigurd*                |                                            | 'As the wolf I walk\                                |
|                         |                                            | wild and lonely,\                                   |
|                         |                                            | no father owning,\                                  |
|                         |                                            | a flame bearing.'                                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Fáfnir*                | 31                                         | 'A wolf was thy sire --\                            |
|                         |                                            | full well I know it!\                               |
|                         |                                            | Who egged thee eager\                               |
|                         |                                            | to mine undoing?'                                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Sigurd*                |                                            | 'My sire was Sigmund,\                              |
|                         |                                            | seed of Völsung;\                                   |
|                         |                                            | my heart egged me,\                                 |
|                         |                                            | my hand answered.'                                  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Fáfnir*                | 32                                         | 'Nay! Regin wrought this,\                          |
|                         |                                            | rogue and master!\                                  |
|                         |                                            | O son of Sigmund!\                                  |
|                         |                                            | sooth I tell thee:\                                 |
|                         |                                            | my guarded gold\                                    |
|                         |                                            | gleams with evil,\                                  |
|                         |                                            | bale it bringeth\                                   |
|                         |                                            | to both my foes.'                                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 33                                         | 'Life each must leave\                              |
|                         |                                            | on his latest day,\                                 |
|                         |                                            | yet gold gladly\                                    |
|                         |                                            | will grasp living!'                                 |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Fáfnir*                |                                            | 'Fools! saith Fáfnir --\                            |
|                         |                                            | with fate of woe\                                   |
|                         |                                            | this gold is glamoured.\                            |
|                         |                                            | Grasp not! Flee thou!'                              |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 34                                         | 'A fool, saith Sigurd,\                             |
|                         |                                            | could not fend himself\                             |
|                         |                                            | with helm of horror --\                             |
|                         |                                            | hell now seize him!'\                               |
|                         |                                            | In the heather had hidden\                          |
|                         |                                            | as a hare cowering\                                 |
|                         |                                            | the fear-daunted smith;\                            |
|                         |                                            | forth now crept he.                                 |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Regin*                 | 35                                         | 'Hail! O Völsung\                                   |
|                         |                                            | victory-crownéd,\                                   |
|                         |                                            | of mortal men\                                      |
|                         |                                            | mightiest hero!'                                    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Sigurd*                |                                            | 'In the halls of Ódin\                              |
|                         |                                            | more hard to choose!\                               |
|                         |                                            | many brave are born\                                |
|                         |                                            | who blades stain not.'                              |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Regin*                 | 36                                         | 'Yet glad is Sigurd,\                               |
|                         |                                            | of gold thinking,\                                  |
|                         |                                            | as Gram on the grey\                                |
|                         |                                            | grass he wipeth!\                                   |
|                         |                                            | 'Twas blood of my brother\                          |
|                         |                                            | that blade did spill,\                              |
|                         |                                            | though somewhat the slaying\                        |
|                         |                                            | I myself must share.'                               |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 37                                         | 'Far enow thou fleddest,\                           |
|                         |                                            | when Fáfnir came.\                                  |
|                         |                                            | This sword slew him,\                               |
|                         |                                            | and Sigurd's prowess.'                              |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Regin*                 |                                            | 'This sword I smithied.\                            |
|                         |                                            | Yet would serpent live,\                            |
|                         |                                            | had not Regin's counsel\                            |
|                         |                                            | wrought his ending!'                                |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 38                                         | 'Nay, blame not thyself,\                           |
|                         |                                            | backward helper!\                                   |
|                         |                                            | Stout heart is better\                              |
|                         |                                            | than strongest sword.'                              |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Regin*                 |                                            | 'Yet the sword I smithied,\                         |
|                         |                                            | the serpent's bane!\                                |
|                         |                                            | The bold oft are beaten\                            |
|                         |                                            | who have blunt weapons.'                            |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 39                                         | Thus heavy spake Regin\                             |
|                         |                                            | Ridil unsheathing,\                                 |
|                         |                                            | fell Fáfnir's heart\                                |
|                         |                                            | from the flesh cleaving.\                           |
|                         |                                            | Dark blood drank he\                                |
|                         |                                            | from the dragon welling;\                           |
|                         |                                            | deep drowsing fell\                                 |
|                         |                                            | on dwarvish smith.                                  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Regin*                 | 40                                         | 'Sit now, Sigurd!\                                  |
|                         |                                            | Sleep o'ercomes me.\                                |
|                         |                                            | Thou Fáfnir's heart\                                |
|                         |                                            | at the fire roast me.\                              |
|                         |                                            | His dark thought's dwelling\                        |
|                         |                                            | after drink potent\                                 |
|                         |                                            | I fain would eat,\                                  |
|                         |                                            | feast of wisdom.'                                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | [41](#calibre_link-105){#calibre_link-204} | Sharp spit shaped he;\                              |
|                         |                                            | at shining fire\                                    |
|                         |                                            | the fat of Fáfnir there frothed and hissed.\        |
|                         |                                            | To tongue he touched\                               |
|                         |                                            | testing finger --\                                  |
|                         |                                            | beasts' cry he knew,\                               |
|                         |                                            | [and birds'                                         |
|                         |                                            | voices](#calibre_link-106){#calibre_link-205}.      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                                                  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *first bird*            | 42                                         | 'A head shorter\                                    |
|                         |                                            | should hoary liar\                                  |
|                         |                                            | go hence to nether hell!\                           |
|                         |                                            | The heart of Fáfnir\                                |
|                         |                                            | I whole would eat\                                  |
|                         |                                            | if I myself were Sigurd.'                           |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *second bird*           | [43](#calibre_link-107){#calibre_link-206} | '[Who](#calibre_link-108){#calibre_link-207} a foe  |
|                         |                                            | lets free\                                          |
|                         |                                            | is fool indeed,\                                    |
|                         |                                            | when he was bane of                                 |
|                         |                                            | [brother](#calibre_link-109){#calibre_link-208}!\   |
|                         |                                            | I alone would be lord\                              |
|                         |                                            | of linkéd gold,\                                    |
|                         |                                            | if my wielded sword had won it.'                    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *first bird*            | 44                                         | 'A head shorter\                                    |
|                         |                                            | should hiding dwarf\                                |
|                         |                                            | deprived of gold perish!\                           |
|                         |                                            | There Regin rouses\                                 |
|                         |                                            | in rustling heather;\                               |
|                         |                                            | Vengeance he vows for brother.'                     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                                                  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 45                                         | Round turned Sigurd,\                               |
|                         |                                            | and Regin saw he\                                   |
|                         |                                            | in the heath crawling\                              |
|                         |                                            | with hate gleaming.\                                |
|                         |                                            | Black spilled the blood\                            |
|                         |                                            | as blade clove him,\                                |
|                         |                                            | the head hewing\                                    |
|                         |                                            | of Hreidmar's son.                                  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 46                                         | Dark red the drink\                                 |
|                         |                                            | and dire the meat\                                  |
|                         |                                            | whereon Sigurd feasted\                             |
|                         |                                            | seeking wisdom.\                                    |
|                         |                                            | Dark hung the doors\                                |
|                         |                                            | and dread the timbers\                              |
|                         |                                            | in the earth under\                                 |
|                         |                                            | of iron builded.                                    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 47                                         | Gold piled on gold\                                 |
|                         |                                            | there glittered palely:\                            |
|                         |                                            | that gold was glamoured\                            |
|                         |                                            | with grim curses.\                                  |
|                         |                                            | The Helm of Horror\                                 |
|                         |                                            | on his head laid he:\                               |
|                         |                                            | swart fell the shadow\                              |
|                         |                                            | round Sigurd standing.                              |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 48                                         | Great and grievous\                                 |
|                         |                                            | was Grani's burden,\                                |
|                         |                                            | yet lightly leaped he\                              |
|                         |                                            | down the long mountain.\                            |
|                         |                                            | Ride now! ride now\                                 |
|                         |                                            | road and woodland,\                                 |
|                         |                                            | horse and hero,\                                    |
|                         |                                            | hope of Ódin!                                       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                                                  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 49                                         | Ever wild and wide\                                 |
|                         |                                            | the wandering paths;\                               |
|                         |                                            | long lay the shadow\                                |
|                         |                                            | of lone rider.\                                     |
|                         |                                            | Birds in the branches\                              |
|                         |                                            | blithe were singing:\                               |
|                         |                                            | their words he heard,\                              |
|                         |                                            | their wit he knew not.                              |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Raven*                 | [50](#calibre_link-110){#calibre_link-221} | 'High stands a hall\                                |
|                         |                                            | on Hindarfell,\                                     |
|                         |                                            | fire it fenceth\                                    |
|                         |                                            | flaming-tonguéd;\                                   |
|                         |                                            | steep stands the path,\                             |
|                         |                                            | stern the venture,\                                 |
|                         |                                            | where mountains beckon\                             |
|                         |                                            | to mighty heart.'                                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Finch*                 | 51                                         | 'A maid have I seen\                                |
|                         |                                            | as morning fair,\                                   |
|                         |                                            | golden-girdled,\                                    |
|                         |                                            | garland-crownéd.\                                   |
|                         |                                            | Green run the roads\                                |
|                         |                                            | to Gjúki's land;\                                   |
|                         |                                            | fate leads them on,\                                |
|                         |                                            | who fare that way.'                                 |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Raven*                 | [52](#calibre_link-111){#calibre_link-219} | 'Slumber bindeth\                                   |
|                         |                                            | the sun-maiden\                                     |
|                         |                                            | on mountain high,\                                  |
|                         |                                            | mail about her.\                                    |
|                         |                                            | Thorn of Ódin\                                      |
|                         |                                            | is thrust in bosom --\                              |
|                         |                                            | to what shall she wake,\                            |
|                         |                                            | woe or laughter?'                                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Finch*                 | 53                                         | 'The Gjúkings proudly,\                             |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar and Högni,\                                  |
|                         |                                            | there rule a realm\                                 |
|                         |                                            | by Rhine-water.\                                    |
|                         |                                            | Gudrún groweth\                                     |
|                         |                                            | golden-lovely,\                                     |
|                         |                                            | as flower unfolded\                                 |
|                         |                                            | fair at morning.'                                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Raven*                 | [54](#calibre_link-112){#calibre_link-222} | 'Too peerless proud\                                |
|                         |                                            | her power wielding,\                                |
|                         |                                            | victory swaying\                                    |
|                         |                                            | as Valkyrie,\                                       |
|                         |                                            | she heard nor heeded\                               |
|                         |                                            | hests of Ódin,\                                     |
|                         |                                            | and Ódin smote\                                     |
|                         |                                            | whom Ódin loved.'                                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
:::

::: {#calibre_link-13 .calibre2}
# [VI](#calibre_link-113){.calibre5} {#vi .cn}

# [BRYNHILDR](#calibre_link-113) {#brynhildr .ct1}

Here is told of the awakening of Brynhild by Sigurd. Doomed by Ódin to
go no longer to warfare but to wed, she has vowed to wed only the
greatest of all warriors, the World's chosen. Sigurd and Brynhild plight
their troth, amid great joy, although of her wisdom she foresees that
great perils beset Sigurd's path. They depart together, but the pride of
Brynhild causes her to bid Sigurd depart and come back to her only when
he has won all men's honour, and a kingdom.

+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 1                                         | Ever wide and wild\   |
|                         |                                           | the wandering path;\  |
|                         |                                           | long lay the shadow\  |
|                         |                                           | of lone rider.\       |
|                         |                                           | Ever high and high\   |
|                         |                                           | stood Hindarfell,\    |
|                         |                                           | mountain mighty\      |
|                         |                                           | from mist rising.     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 2                                         | A fire at crown,\     |
|                         |                                           | fence of lightning,\  |
|                         |                                           | high to heavenward\   |
|                         |                                           | hissed and wavered.\  |
|                         |                                           | Greyfell Grani,\      |
|                         |                                           | glory seeking,\       |
|                         |                                           | leaped the lightning\ |
|                         |                                           | lightning-sinewed.    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 3                                         | A wall saw Sigurd\    |
|                         |                                           | of woven shields,\    |
|                         |                                           | a standard streaming\ |
|                         |                                           | striped with silver;\ |
|                         |                                           | a man there           |
|                         |                                           | war-clad,\            |
|                         |                                           | mailclad, lying,\     |
|                         |                                           | with sword beside     |
|                         |                                           | him,\                 |
|                         |                                           | sleeping deadly.      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 4                                         | The helm he lifted:\  |
|                         |                                           | hair fell shining,\   |
|                         |                                           | a woman lay there\    |
|                         |                                           | wound in slumber;\    |
|                         |                                           | fast her corslet\     |
|                         |                                           | as on flesh growing   |
|                         |                                           | --\                   |
|                         |                                           | the gleaming links,\  |
|                         |                                           | Gram there clave      |
|                         |                                           | them.                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                                                                     | \*                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Brynhild awakening*    | 5                                         | 'Hail! O Daylight\    |
|                         |                                           | and Day's children!\  |
|                         |                                           | Hail, Night and Noon\ |
|                         |                                           | and Northern Star!\   |
|                         |                                           | Hail, Kingly Gods,\   |
|                         |                                           | Queens of Ásgard!\    |
|                         |                                           | Hail, Earth's bosom\  |
|                         |                                           | all-abounding!        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 6                                         | Hands of healing,\    |
|                         |                                           | hear and grant us,\   |
|                         |                                           | light in darkness,\   |
|                         |                                           | life and wisdom;\     |
|                         |                                           | to both give          |
|                         |                                           | triumph,\             |
|                         |                                           | truth unfailing,\     |
|                         |                                           | to both in gladness\  |
|                         |                                           | glorious meeting!'    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                                                                     | \*                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Brynhild*              | 7                                         | 'Brynhild greets      |
|                         |                                           | thee,\                |
|                         |                                           | O brave and fair!\    |
|                         |                                           | What prince hath      |
|                         |                                           | pierced\              |
|                         |                                           | my pale fetters?'     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sigurd*                |                                           | 'A man fatherless,\   |
|                         |                                           | yet man-begotten,\    |
|                         |                                           | here red from battle\ |
|                         |                                           | raven-haunted.'       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Brynhild*              | [8](#calibre_link-114){#calibre_link-220} | 'Ódin bound me,\      |
|                         |                                           | Ódin's chosen;\       |
|                         |                                           | no more to battle,\   |
|                         |                                           | to mate doomed me.\   |
|                         |                                           | An oath I uttered\    |
|                         |                                           | for ever lasting,\    |
|                         |                                           | to wed but one,\      |
|                         |                                           | the World's chosen.'  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 9                                         | 'In the halls of      |
|                         |                                           | Ódin\                 |
|                         |                                           | it were hard to       |
|                         |                                           | choose\               |
|                         |                                           | man there mightiest,\ |
|                         |                                           | most renownéd.'       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Brynhild*              |                                           | 'Yet one they wait    |
|                         |                                           | for,\                 |
|                         |                                           | in wide Valhöll,\     |
|                         |                                           | the serpent-slayer,\  |
|                         |                                           | seed of Ódin.'        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 10                                        | 'Seed of Ódin\        |
|                         |                                           | is Sigmund's child,\  |
|                         |                                           | and Sigurd's sword\   |
|                         |                                           | is serpent's bane.'   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Brynhild*              |                                           | 'Hail, son of         |
|                         |                                           | Sigmund,\             |
|                         |                                           | seed of Völsung!\     |
|                         |                                           | Warriors wait for     |
|                         |                                           | thee\                 |
|                         |                                           | in wide Valhöll.'     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 11                                        | 'Hail, bright and     |
|                         |                                           | splendid!\            |
|                         |                                           | Hail, battle-maiden,\ |
|                         |                                           | bride of Völsung\     |
|                         |                                           | Brynhild chosen!'\    |
|                         |                                           | Troth in triumph\     |
|                         |                                           | twain there plighted\ |
|                         |                                           | alone on mountain;\   |
|                         |                                           | light was round them. |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Brynhild*              | 12                                        | 'A beaker I bring     |
|                         |                                           | thee,\                |
|                         |                                           | O battle-wielder,\    |
|                         |                                           | mighty-blended\       |
|                         |                                           | mead of glory,\       |
|                         |                                           | brimmed with bounty,\ |
|                         |                                           | blessed with          |
|                         |                                           | healing,\             |
|                         |                                           | and rimmed with       |
|                         |                                           | runes\                |
|                         |                                           | of running laughter.' |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 13                                        | 'I drink, all         |
|                         |                                           | daring:\              |
|                         |                                           | doom or glory;\       |
|                         |                                           | drink of splendour\   |
|                         |                                           | dear the bearer!'     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Brynhild*              |                                           | 'Dear the drinker!\   |
|                         |                                           | Doom and glory\       |
|                         |                                           | both me bodeth,\      |
|                         |                                           | thou bright and       |
|                         |                                           | fair!'                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 14                                        | 'I flee nor flinch,\  |
|                         |                                           | though fey standing,\ |
|                         |                                           | words of wisdom,\     |
|                         |                                           | woe, or gladness.'    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Brynhild*              |                                           | 'Words of wisdom\     |
|                         |                                           | warning darkly\       |
|                         |                                           | hear thou and hold,\  |
|                         |                                           | hope of Ódin!         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 15                                        | Be slow to            |
|                         |                                           | vengeance,\           |
|                         |                                           | seed of Völsung!\     |
|                         |                                           | In swearing           |
|                         |                                           | soothfast,\           |
|                         |                                           | the sworn holding.\   |
|                         |                                           | Grim grow the boughs\ |
|                         |                                           | in guile rooted;\     |
|                         |                                           | fair flowers the      |
|                         |                                           | tree\                 |
|                         |                                           | in faith planted!     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 16                                        | Where the             |
|                         |                                           | witch-hearted\        |
|                         |                                           | walks or houses\      |
|                         |                                           | linger not, lodge     |
|                         |                                           | not,\                 |
|                         |                                           | though lone the       |
|                         |                                           | road!\                |
|                         |                                           | Though beauty         |
|                         |                                           | blindeth\             |
|                         |                                           | bright as morning,\   |
|                         |                                           | let no daughter of    |
|                         |                                           | kings\                |
|                         |                                           | thy dreams master!    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 17                                        | Hail, Sigmund's son!\ |
|                         |                                           | Swift thy glory,\     |
|                         |                                           | yet a cloud meseems\  |
|                         |                                           | creepeth nigh thee.\  |
|                         |                                           | Long life, I fear,\   |
|                         |                                           | lies not before       |
|                         |                                           | thee,\                |
|                         |                                           | but strife and storm\ |
|                         |                                           | stand there darkly.'  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 18                                        | 'Hail, Brynhild       |
|                         |                                           | wise!\                |
|                         |                                           | Bright thy splendour\ |
|                         |                                           | though fate be        |
|                         |                                           | strong\               |
|                         |                                           | to find its end.\     |
|                         |                                           | Faith ever will I     |
|                         |                                           | hold\                 |
|                         |                                           | firm, unyielding,\    |
|                         |                                           | though strife and     |
|                         |                                           | storm\                |
|                         |                                           | stand about me.'      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 19                                        | Faith then they       |
|                         |                                           | vowed\                |
|                         |                                           | fast, unyielding,\    |
|                         |                                           | there each to each\   |
|                         |                                           | in oaths binding.\    |
|                         |                                           | Bliss there was born\ |
|                         |                                           | when Brynhild woke;\  |
|                         |                                           | yet fate is strong\   |
|                         |                                           | to find its end.      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                                                                     | \*                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 20                                        | Ever wild and wide\   |
|                         |                                           | the wandering paths;\ |
|                         |                                           | on roads shining\     |
|                         |                                           | went riders two.\     |
|                         |                                           | High towered the      |
|                         |                                           | helm;\                |
|                         |                                           | hair flowed in wind;\ |
|                         |                                           | mail glinted bright\  |
|                         |                                           | on mountain dark.     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Brynhild*              | 21                                        | 'Here, Sigmund's      |
|                         |                                           | son,\                 |
|                         |                                           | swift and fearless,\  |
|                         |                                           | is our way's          |
|                         |                                           | parting,\             |
|                         |                                           | to woe or joy.\       |
|                         |                                           | Here, lord, I leave   |
|                         |                                           | thee,\                |
|                         |                                           | to my land turning;\  |
|                         |                                           | hence Grani bears     |
|                         |                                           | thee\                 |
|                         |                                           | glory seeking.'       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 22                                        | 'Why, Brynhild wise,\ |
|                         |                                           | bride of Völsung,\    |
|                         |                                           | when at one are the   |
|                         |                                           | riders\               |
|                         |                                           | do our ways sunder?'  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Brynhild*              |                                           | 'I was queen of       |
|                         |                                           | yore,\                |
|                         |                                           | and a king shall      |
|                         |                                           | wed.\                 |
|                         |                                           | Lands lie before thee |
|                         |                                           | --\                   |
|                         |                                           | thy lordship win!'    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 23                                        | To her land she       |
|                         |                                           | turned\               |
|                         |                                           | lonely shining;\      |
|                         |                                           | green ran the roads\  |
|                         |                                           | that Grani strode.\   |
|                         |                                           | To her land she       |
|                         |                                           | came,\                |
|                         |                                           | long the waiting;\    |
|                         |                                           | in Gjúki's house\     |
|                         |                                           | glad the singing.     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                                                                     | \*                    |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
:::

::: {#calibre_link-14 .calibre2}
# [VII](#calibre_link-115){.calibre5} {#vii .cn}

# [GUÐRÚN](#calibre_link-115) {#guðrún .ct2}

+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Gudrún*                | 1                                          | 'O mother, hear me!\  |
|                         |                                            | Mirth is darkened,\   |
|                         |                                            | dreams have troubled  |
|                         |                                            | me,\                  |
|                         |                                            | dreams of boding.'    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Grímhild*              |                                            | 'Dreams come most     |
|                         |                                            | oft\                  |
|                         |                                            | in dwindling moon,\   |
|                         |                                            | or weather changing.\ |
|                         |                                            | Of woe think not!'    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Gudrún*                | 2                                          | 'No wind, nor wraith\ |
|                         |                                            | of waking thought --\ |
|                         |                                            | a hart we hunted\     |
|                         |                                            | over hill and         |
|                         |                                            | valley;\              |
|                         |                                            | all would take him,\  |
|                         |                                            | 'twas I caught him:\  |
|                         |                                            | his hide was golden,\ |
|                         |                                            | his horns towering.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 3                                          | A woman wildly\       |
|                         |                                            | on the wind riding\   |
|                         |                                            | with a shaft stung    |
|                         |                                            | him,\                 |
|                         |                                            | shooting pierced      |
|                         |                                            | him;\                 |
|                         |                                            | at my knees he fell\  |
|                         |                                            | in night of woe,\     |
|                         |                                            | my heart too heavy\   |
|                         |                                            | might I hardly bear.  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 4                                          | A wolf they gave me\  |
|                         |                                            | for woe's comfort;\   |
|                         |                                            | in my brethren's      |
|                         |                                            | blood\                |
|                         |                                            | he bathed me red.\    |
|                         |                                            | Dreams have vexed     |
|                         |                                            | me,\                  |
|                         |                                            | direst boding,\       |
|                         |                                            | not wind or weather\  |
|                         |                                            | or waning moon.'      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Grímhild*              | 5                                          | 'Dreams oft token\    |
|                         |                                            | the dark by light,\   |
|                         |                                            | good by evil,\        |
|                         |                                            | Gudrún daughter!\     |
|                         |                                            | Lift up thine eyes\   |
|                         |                                            | eager shining!\       |
|                         |                                            | Green lie the lands\  |
|                         |                                            | round Gjúki's house.' |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Gudrún*                | 6                                          | 'The roads run green\ |
|                         |                                            | to the Rhine-water!\  |
|                         |                                            | Who rides here lone,\ |
|                         |                                            | arrayed for war?\     |
|                         |                                            | His helm is high,\    |
|                         |                                            | his horse fleeting,\  |
|                         |                                            | his shield is         |
|                         |                                            | shining\              |
|                         |                                            | with sheen of gold!'  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 7                                          | Thus Gudrún gazed,\   |
|                         |                                            | Gjúki's daughter,\    |
|                         |                                            | from wall and window\ |
|                         |                                            | in wonder looking.\   |
|                         |                                            | Thus Sigurd rode,\    |
|                         |                                            | seed of Völsung,\     |
|                         |                                            | into Gjúki's courts\  |
|                         |                                            | gleaming-harnessed.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 8                                          | There Gjúki dwelt\    |
|                         |                                            | his gold dealing\     |
|                         |                                            | in Niflung land,\     |
|                         |                                            | the Niflung lord.\    |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar and Högni\     |
|                         |                                            | were Gjúki's sons,\   |
|                         |                                            | mighty princes;\      |
|                         |                                            | men them hearkened.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 9                                          | There Grímhild        |
|                         |                                            | dwelt,\               |
|                         |                                            | guileful in counsel,\ |
|                         |                                            | grimhearted queen\    |
|                         |                                            | grey with wisdom,\    |
|                         |                                            | with lore of          |
|                         |                                            | leechcraft,\          |
|                         |                                            | lore of poison,\      |
|                         |                                            | with chill            |
|                         |                                            | enchantment\          |
|                         |                                            | and with changing     |
|                         |                                            | spells.               |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 10                                         | As ravens dark\       |
|                         |                                            | were those            |
|                         |                                            | raven-friends;\       |
|                         |                                            | fair their faces,\    |
|                         |                                            | fierce their          |
|                         |                                            | glances.\             |
|                         |                                            | With Huns they waged\ |
|                         |                                            | hate and warfare,\    |
|                         |                                            | gold ever gathering\  |
|                         |                                            | in great dungeons.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 11                                         | Silent they sat\      |
|                         |                                            | when Sigurd entered\  |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar greeting,\     |
|                         |                                            | Gjúki hailing.        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Gjúki*                 |                                            | 'Who comes unbidden\  |
|                         |                                            | in battle's harness,\ |
|                         |                                            | helm and hauberk,\    |
|                         |                                            | to halls of mine?'    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 12                                         | 'The son of Sigmund,\ |
|                         |                                            | Sigurd Völsung,\      |
|                         |                                            | a king's son cometh\  |
|                         |                                            | to kingly house.\     |
|                         |                                            | Fame of Niflungs\     |
|                         |                                            | far is rumoured,\     |
|                         |                                            | not yet hath faded\   |
|                         |                                            | fame of Völsung.'     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 13                                         | There swift for       |
|                         |                                            | Sigurd\               |
|                         |                                            | seat was ordered;\    |
|                         |                                            | the feast grew fair,\ |
|                         |                                            | folk were mirthful.\  |
|                         |                                            | There Gunnar grasped\ |
|                         |                                            | his golden harp;\     |
|                         |                                            | while songs he sang\  |
|                         |                                            | silence fell there.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *     Of these\         | [14](#calibre_link-116){#calibre_link-322} | By mighty Mirkwood\   |
| things sang\            |                                            | on the marches of the |
|      Gunnar*            |                                            | East\                 |
|                         |                                            | the great Goth-kings\ |
|                         |                                            | in glory ruled.\      |
|                         |                                            | By Danpar-banks\      |
|                         |                                            | was dread warfare\    |
|                         |                                            | with the hosts of     |
|                         |                                            | Hunland,\             |
|                         |                                            | horsemen countless.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | [15](#calibre_link-117){#calibre_link-323} | Horsemen countless\   |
|                         |                                            | hastened westward;\   |
|                         |                                            | the Borgund lords\    |
|                         |                                            | met Budli's host.\    |
|                         |                                            | In Budli's brother\   |
|                         |                                            | their blades          |
|                         |                                            | reddened\             |
|                         |                                            | the glad Gjúkings,\   |
|                         |                                            | gold despoiling.      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *     Of these\         | 16                                         | Then Sigurd seized\   |
| things sang\            |                                            | the sounding harp;\   |
|       Sigurd*           |                                            | hushed they           |
|                         |                                            | hearkened\            |
|                         |                                            | in the hall           |
|                         |                                            | listening.\           |
|                         |                                            | The waste lay         |
|                         |                                            | withered\             |
|                         |                                            | wide and empty;\      |
|                         |                                            | forth came Fáfnir,\   |
|                         |                                            | fire around him.      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 17                                         | Dark hung the doors\  |
|                         |                                            | on deep timbers;\     |
|                         |                                            | gold piled on gold\   |
|                         |                                            | there glittered       |
|                         |                                            | wanly.\               |
|                         |                                            | The hoard was         |
|                         |                                            | plundered,\           |
|                         |                                            | helm was lifted,\     |
|                         |                                            | and Grani greyfell\   |
|                         |                                            | grievous burdened.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 18                                         | High Hindarfell,\     |
|                         |                                            | hedged with           |
|                         |                                            | lightning,\           |
|                         |                                            | mountain mighty\      |
|                         |                                            | from mists uprose.\   |
|                         |                                            | Brynhild wakened,\    |
|                         |                                            | bright her splendour  |
|                         |                                            | --\                   |
|                         |                                            | song fell silent,\    |
|                         |                                            | and Sigurd ended.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 19                                         | By Gjúki's chair\     |
|                         |                                            | Grímhild hearkened,\  |
|                         |                                            | of Gudrún thinking\   |
|                         |                                            | and the golden        |
|                         |                                            | hoard.\               |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar and Högni\     |
|                         |                                            | gladly bade him\      |
|                         |                                            | in league and love\   |
|                         |                                            | long to dwell there.  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 20                                         | The Borgund lords\    |
|                         |                                            | their battle          |
|                         |                                            | furnished;\           |
|                         |                                            | banners were          |
|                         |                                            | broidered,\           |
|                         |                                            | blades were           |
|                         |                                            | sharpened.\           |
|                         |                                            | White shone           |
|                         |                                            | hauberks,\            |
|                         |                                            | helms were            |
|                         |                                            | burnished;\           |
|                         |                                            | under horses' hooves\ |
|                         |                                            | Hunland trembled.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 21                                         | Grim was Gunnar\      |
|                         |                                            | on Goti riding;\      |
|                         |                                            | under haughty Högni\  |
|                         |                                            | Hölkvir strode;\      |
|                         |                                            | but fleeter was       |
|                         |                                            | Grani,\               |
|                         |                                            | foal of Sleipnir;\    |
|                         |                                            | flamed all before\    |
|                         |                                            | the fire of Sigurd.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 22                                         | Foes were             |
|                         |                                            | vanquished,\          |
|                         |                                            | fields were wasted,\  |
|                         |                                            | grimly garnered\      |
|                         |                                            | Gram the harvest.\    |
|                         |                                            | Where Gjúkings rode\  |
|                         |                                            | glory won they,\      |
|                         |                                            | ever glory Sigurd\    |
|                         |                                            | greater conquered.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 23                                         | Wide waxed their      |
|                         |                                            | realm\                |
|                         |                                            | in world of old;\     |
|                         |                                            | Dane-king they slew,\ |
|                         |                                            | doughty princes.\     |
|                         |                                            | Dread fell on folk;\  |
|                         |                                            | doom they wielded;\   |
|                         |                                            | victory rode ever\    |
|                         |                                            | with the Völsung      |
|                         |                                            | lord.                 |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | [24](#calibre_link-118){#calibre_link-193} | High they honoured    |
|                         |                                            | him,\                 |
|                         |                                            | in heart loved him,\  |
|                         |                                            | Hun-gold gave him\    |
|                         |                                            | in the hall sitting.\ |
|                         |                                            | But his heart         |
|                         |                                            | remembered\           |
|                         |                                            | house of Völsung,\    |
|                         |                                            | and Sigmund slain\    |
|                         |                                            | on sands afar.        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 25                                         | A host he gathered,\  |
|                         |                                            | help of Gjúkings;\    |
|                         |                                            | to the sea he rode\   |
|                         |                                            | and sails hoisted.\   |
|                         |                                            | His ship was shining\ |
|                         |                                            | with shields and      |
|                         |                                            | mail;\                |
|                         |                                            | it was                |
|                         |                                            | dragon-headed,\       |
|                         |                                            | dire and golden.      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 26                                         | As fire and tempest\  |
|                         |                                            | to his father's land\ |
|                         |                                            | came Sigurd sailing;\ |
|                         |                                            | the sand was          |
|                         |                                            | reddened.\            |
|                         |                                            | Clashed the cloven\   |
|                         |                                            | casque and hauberk;\  |
|                         |                                            | shields were          |
|                         |                                            | splintered,\          |
|                         |                                            | shorn was corslet.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 27                                         | Men learned there     |
|                         |                                            | lived yet\            |
|                         |                                            | line of Völsung!\     |
|                         |                                            | Now of Völsung land\  |
|                         |                                            | was a Völsung lord.\  |
|                         |                                            | But the house once    |
|                         |                                            | high\                 |
|                         |                                            | was hollow,           |
|                         |                                            | roofless;\            |
|                         |                                            | the limbs were        |
|                         |                                            | rotten\               |
|                         |                                            | of their leafy tree.  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 28                                         | A man there walked\   |
|                         |                                            | mantled darkly,\      |
|                         |                                            | his beard was         |
|                         |                                            | flowing,\             |
|                         |                                            | and blind his eye:    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Grímnir*               |                                            | 'Grímnir hails thee,\ |
|                         |                                            | glorious Völsung!\    |
|                         |                                            | Far hence hath flown\ |
|                         |                                            | the fate of Sigurd.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | [29](#calibre_link-119){#calibre_link-194} | Where Sigmund drew\   |
|                         |                                            | sword of Grímnir,\    |
|                         |                                            | Gram shall shine      |
|                         |                                            | not.\                 |
|                         |                                            | Go thou, Völsung!\    |
|                         |                                            | Now king thou art\    |
|                         |                                            | of kings begotten,\   |
|                         |                                            | a bride calls thee\   |
|                         |                                            | over billowing seas.' |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 30                                         | His fleet went forth\ |
|                         |                                            | with flaming sails;\  |
|                         |                                            | goldladen ships\      |
|                         |                                            | came glad to shore.\  |
|                         |                                            | Steeds went           |
|                         |                                            | striding,\            |
|                         |                                            | stonefire glinted,\   |
|                         |                                            | horns were sounded;\  |
|                         |                                            | home rode Sigurd.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 31                                         | A feast they          |
|                         |                                            | fashioned,\           |
|                         |                                            | far proclaimed it,\   |
|                         |                                            | their highroofed      |
|                         |                                            | halls\                |
|                         |                                            | hung with splendour;\ |
|                         |                                            | boards and beakers,\  |
|                         |                                            | benches, gilded;\     |
|                         |                                            | mead poured and ale\  |
|                         |                                            | from morn to eve.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 32                                         | A king sat Sigurd:\   |
|                         |                                            | carven silver,\       |
|                         |                                            | raiment gleaming,\    |
|                         |                                            | rings and goblets,\   |
|                         |                                            | dear things dealt     |
|                         |                                            | he,\                  |
|                         |                                            | doughty-handed,\      |
|                         |                                            | his friends           |
|                         |                                            | enriching,\           |
|                         |                                            | fame upraising.       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 33                                         | (There spake          |
|                         |                                            | Grímhild\             |
|                         |                                            | to Gjúki's ear:)      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Grímhild*              |                                            | 'How long shall last\ |
|                         |                                            | league unbounden?\    |
|                         |                                            | Here is worthiest     |
|                         |                                            | lord\                 |
|                         |                                            | of world's renown!\   |
|                         |                                            | Were a daughter       |
|                         |                                            | offered,\             |
|                         |                                            | he would dwell for    |
|                         |                                            | ever,\                |
|                         |                                            | our strength in       |
|                         |                                            | strife,\              |
|                         |                                            | standing bulwark.'    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Gjúki*                 | 34                                         | 'The gifts of kings\  |
|                         |                                            | are gold and silver;\ |
|                         |                                            | their daughters fair\ |
|                         |                                            | are dearly wooed!'    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Grímhild*              |                                            | 'Gifts oft are given\ |
|                         |                                            | to greedy hand;\      |
|                         |                                            | wives oft are wooed\  |
|                         |                                            | by worthless men!'    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 35                                         | Sigurd sat silent;\   |
|                         |                                            | the singing heard     |
|                         |                                            | not\                  |
|                         |                                            | but in heart          |
|                         |                                            | Brynhild\             |
|                         |                                            | bright with           |
|                         |                                            | splendour:\           |
|                         |                                            | 'A queen was I once,\ |
|                         |                                            | and a king shall      |
|                         |                                            | wed.'\                |
|                         |                                            | Soon, thought he,     |
|                         |                                            | soon\                 |
|                         |                                            | I will seek my own.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 36                                         | Grímhild went forth\  |
|                         |                                            | to guarded bower;\    |
|                         |                                            | deep horn she filled\ |
|                         |                                            | that was darkly       |
|                         |                                            | written.\             |
|                         |                                            | She drink of power\   |
|                         |                                            | dreadly blended;\     |
|                         |                                            | it had strength of    |
|                         |                                            | stone,\               |
|                         |                                            | it was stained with   |
|                         |                                            | blood.                |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| *Grímhild*              | 37                                         | 'Hail, guest and      |
|                         |                                            | king!\                |
|                         |                                            | Good go with thee!\   |
|                         |                                            | Drink now deeply\     |
|                         |                                            | dear love's token!\   |
|                         |                                            | A father hast thou    |
|                         |                                            | found,\               |
|                         |                                            | and fond mother,\     |
|                         |                                            | brothers sit nigh     |
|                         |                                            | thee.\                |
|                         |                                            | O bravest, hail!'     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 38                                         | Deep drank Sigurd,\   |
|                         |                                            | drained it laughing,\ |
|                         |                                            | then sat unsmiling,\  |
|                         |                                            | the singing heard     |
|                         |                                            | not.                  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         |                                            | In came Gudrún\       |
|                         |                                            | golden-lovely,\       |
|                         |                                            | as moon uprising\     |
|                         |                                            | marvellous shining.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | 39                                         | In came Gudrún\       |
|                         |                                            | gleaming-robéd,\      |
|                         |                                            | as flower unfolded\   |
|                         |                                            | fair at morning.\     |
|                         |                                            | Sigurd wondered,\     |
|                         |                                            | silent gazing;\       |
|                         |                                            | his mind was          |
|                         |                                            | glamoured,\           |
|                         |                                            | mood confounded.      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                    |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
:::

::: {#calibre_link-15 .calibre2}
# [VIII](#calibre_link-120){.calibre5} {#viii .cn}

# [SVIKIN BRYNHILDR](#calibre_link-120) {#svikin-brynhildr .ct1}

## (Brynhild Betrayed) {#brynhild-betrayed .sub2}

+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 1                                          | Brynhild abode\                                |
|                         |                                            | a blossomed summer,\                           |
|                         |                                            | homing harvest,\                               |
|                         |                                            | hoary winter.\                                 |
|                         |                                            | A year followed year;\                         |
|                         |                                            | yearning seized her:\                          |
|                         |                                            | the king came not;\                            |
|                         |                                            | cold weighed her heart.                        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 2                                          | Of her wealth and splendour\                   |
|                         |                                            | wide spread the word;\                         |
|                         |                                            | kings came riding,\                            |
|                         |                                            | her courts thronging.\                         |
|                         |                                            | Her mood was troubled,\                        |
|                         |                                            | her mind darkened;\                            |
|                         |                                            | fell greeting found they,\                     |
|                         |                                            | and few returned.                              |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 3                                          | One armed and mantled\                         |
|                         |                                            | as ancient king\                               |
|                         |                                            | wild steed there rode\                         |
|                         |                                            | than wind fleeter.\                            |
|                         |                                            | Spear upholding\                               |
|                         |                                            | spiked with lightning\                         |
|                         |                                            | her hall he entered,\                          |
|                         |                                            | hailed her darkly:                             |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *King*                  | 4                                          | 'Bond unbroken\                                |
|                         |                                            | shall be bounden oath,\                        |
|                         |                                            | dreed and endured\                             |
|                         |                                            | be doom appointed.\                            |
|                         |                                            | Brynhild full soon\                            |
|                         |                                            | shall bridal drink;\                           |
|                         |                                            | choosing not the slain,\                       |
|                         |                                            | shall choose the living.                       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 5                                          | Brynhild must drink\                           |
|                         |                                            | the bridal feast,\                             |
|                         |                                            | ere winters two\                               |
|                         |                                            | o'er the world be passed.\                     |
|                         |                                            | A queen thou wert,\                            |
|                         |                                            | a king shalt wed:\                             |
|                         |                                            | Ódin dooms it;\                                |
|                         |                                            | Ódin hearken!'                                 |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 6                                          | Fire forth blossomed,\                         |
|                         |                                            | flames were kindled,\                          |
|                         |                                            | high up-leaping\                               |
|                         |                                            | hissed and wavered.\                           |
|                         |                                            | In hall standing\                              |
|                         |                                            | hedged with lightning,\                        |
|                         |                                            | 'one only', thought she\                       |
|                         |                                            | 'can enter now!'                               |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                                             |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 7                                          | In Gjúki's house\                              |
|                         |                                            | glad the singing.\                             |
|                         |                                            | A feast they fashioned,\                       |
|                         |                                            | far men sought it.\                            |
|                         |                                            | To blissful Gudrún\                            |
|                         |                                            | the bridal drank\                              |
|                         |                                            | there golden Sigurd\                           |
|                         |                                            | glorious shining.                              |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 8                                          | Morning woke with mirth,\                      |
|                         |                                            | merry came evening;\                           |
|                         |                                            | harp-strings were plucked\                     |
|                         |                                            | by hands of cunning;\                          |
|                         |                                            | mead poured and ale,\                          |
|                         |                                            | men were joyful,\                              |
|                         |                                            | of peerless kings\                             |
|                         |                                            | praise uplifting.                              |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 9                                          | Oaths swore Sigurd\                            |
|                         |                                            | for ever lasting,\                             |
|                         |                                            | a bond of brotherhood\                         |
|                         |                                            | in blood mingled,\                             |
|                         |                                            | help in venture,\                              |
|                         |                                            | in hate and battle,\                           |
|                         |                                            | in need and desire,\                           |
|                         |                                            | nowhere failing.                               |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 10                                         | Gunnar and Högni\                              |
|                         |                                            | gladly swore it,\                              |
|                         |                                            | as Grímhild counselled\                        |
|                         |                                            | grey with wisdom.\                             |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar and Högni\                              |
|                         |                                            | good they deemed it;\                          |
|                         |                                            | glad was Gudrún\                               |
|                         |                                            | gleaming-lovely.                               |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 11                                         | Gudrún walked in joy,\                         |
|                         |                                            | gladness round her;\                           |
|                         |                                            | mornings came with mirth,\                     |
|                         |                                            | mirth at sleeping.\                            |
|                         |                                            | Sigurd dwelt as king\                          |
|                         |                                            | sweet days and nights;\                        |
|                         |                                            | high hope he had,\                             |
|                         |                                            | yet in heart a shadow.                         |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                                             |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 12                                         | Wide went the word\                            |
|                         |                                            | of woman mighty,\                              |
|                         |                                            | of Brynhild queen\                             |
|                         |                                            | bright in splendour.\                          |
|                         |                                            | Grímhild hearkened,\                           |
|                         |                                            | grimly pondered,\                              |
|                         |                                            | of Gunnar thinking\                            |
|                         |                                            | and of Gjúki's power.                          |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *Grímhild*              | 13                                         | 'Hail, Gjúki's son!\                           |
|                         |                                            | Good go with thee!\                            |
|                         |                                            | Fair flowers thy state,\                       |
|                         |                                            | thy fame riseth.\                              |
|                         |                                            | Who could woo as he wills,\                    |
|                         |                                            | a wife yet lacketh,\                           |
|                         |                                            | though his might few match,\                   |
|                         |                                            | or might of friends.'                          |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *Gunnar*                | 14                                         | 'Lo! Gjúkings' mother\                         |
|                         |                                            | grey in counsel,\                              |
|                         |                                            | what wife shall Gunnar\                        |
|                         |                                            | woo or look for?\                              |
|                         |                                            | Fairest must be woman,\                        |
|                         |                                            | of fame mightiest,\                            |
|                         |                                            | that Gunnar seeketh\                           |
|                         |                                            | his gold dealing.'                             |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *Grímhild*              | 15                                         | 'Of the one fairest\                           |
|                         |                                            | fame is rumoured:\                             |
|                         |                                            | Brynhild the queen\                            |
|                         |                                            | bright in splendour.\                          |
|                         |                                            | Wide walks the word\                           |
|                         |                                            | of her wealth and might;\                      |
|                         |                                            | though high nor humble\                        |
|                         |                                            | her halls enter.'                              |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *Gunnar*                | 16                                         | 'Proud and peerless\                           |
|                         |                                            | in peril woven,\                               |
|                         |                                            | a queen would she be,\                         |
|                         |                                            | our courts' glory!\                            |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar Gjúki's son\                            |
|                         |                                            | glory seeking\                                 |
|                         |                                            | at thy rede shall ride\                        |
|                         |                                            | to her realm afar.'                            |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *Grímhild*              | 17                                         | 'The son of Sigmund\                           |
|                         |                                            | thy sister holds,\                             |
|                         |                                            | Sigurd the mighty\                             |
|                         |                                            | is thy sworn brother.\                         |
|                         |                                            | At right hand in aid\                          |
|                         |                                            | he shall ride with thee;\                      |
|                         |                                            | counsels potent\                               |
|                         |                                            | shall my cunning find you.'                    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                                             |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 18                                         | Gunnar rode Goti,\                             |
|                         |                                            | on Grani Sigurd,\                              |
|                         |                                            | Högni Hölkvir,\                                |
|                         |                                            | horse night-swarthy.\                          |
|                         |                                            | Steeds were striding,\                         |
|                         |                                            | stonefire glinting,\                           |
|                         |                                            | high wind rushing\                             |
|                         |                                            | over helm and mane.                            |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 19                                         | Over fell and lowland\                         |
|                         |                                            | and forest gloomy,\                            |
|                         |                                            | over rocks and rivers\                         |
|                         |                                            | their roads led them.\                         |
|                         |                                            | Golden gables\                                 |
|                         |                                            | gleaming saw they;\                            |
|                         |                                            | a light was lifted\                            |
|                         |                                            | o'er the land afar.                            |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 20                                         | Fire forth blossomed,\                         |
|                         |                                            | flames up-leaping,\                            |
|                         |                                            | trees of lightning\                            |
|                         |                                            | twisted branching.\                            |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar smote Goti:\                            |
|                         |                                            | the ground spurning\                           |
|                         |                                            | he reared him backward,\                       |
|                         |                                            | nor rowel heeded.                              |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 21                                         | Sigurd unsmiling\                              |
|                         |                                            | silent waited,\                                |
|                         |                                            | in his shrouded heart\                         |
|                         |                                            | a shadow deepened:                             |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *Sigurd*                |                                            | 'For what waits Gunnar,\                       |
|                         |                                            | Gjúking fearless?\                             |
|                         |                                            | Here the queen dwelleth\                       |
|                         |                                            | that our quest seeketh!'                       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *Gunnar*                | 22                                         | 'A boon grant me,\                             |
|                         |                                            | O blood-brother!\                              |
|                         |                                            | Goti will not bear me,\                        |
|                         |                                            | now Grani lend me!'\                           |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar smote Grani:\                           |
|                         |                                            | on the ground moveless\                        |
|                         |                                            | grey-hewn he stood\                            |
|                         |                                            | as of graven stone.                            |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 23                                         | Gunnar rode not\                               |
|                         |                                            | the glittering flame.\                         |
|                         |                                            | Oaths swore Sigurd,\                           |
|                         |                                            | all fulfilled them.\                           |
|                         |                                            | In hope or hate\                               |
|                         |                                            | help unfailing,\                               |
|                         |                                            | he Grímhild's counsel\                         |
|                         |                                            | grim refused not.                              |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 24                                         | Counsels potent\                               |
|                         |                                            | had her cunning furnished\                     |
|                         |                                            | of chill enchantment\                          |
|                         |                                            | and changing spell.\                           |
|                         |                                            | In Gunnar's likeness\                          |
|                         |                                            | on Grani leaped he;\                           |
|                         |                                            | gold spurs glinted,\                           |
|                         |                                            | Gram was brandished.                           |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 25                                         | The earth shivered;\                           |
|                         |                                            | angry roaring\                                 |
|                         |                                            | fire flaming-tongued\                          |
|                         |                                            | flashed heavenward.\                           |
|                         |                                            | With sword smitten\                            |
|                         |                                            | snorting leaped he,\                           |
|                         |                                            | Grani greyfell;\                               |
|                         |                                            | the ground trembled.                           |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 26                                         | The fire flickered;\                           |
|                         |                                            | flame wavered,\                                |
|                         |                                            | sank to silence\                               |
|                         |                                            | slaked and fading.\                            |
|                         |                                            | Swart lay the shadow\                          |
|                         |                                            | of Sigurd riding\                              |
|                         |                                            | in helm of terror\                             |
|                         |                                            | high and looming.                              |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 27                                         | Sigurd stood there\                            |
|                         |                                            | on sword leaning;\                             |
|                         |                                            | Brynhild waited\                               |
|                         |                                            | a blade holding.\                              |
|                         |                                            | There helméd maiden\                           |
|                         |                                            | of helméd king\                                |
|                         |                                            | name demanded:\                                |
|                         |                                            | night fell round them.                         |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 28                                         | 'Gunnar Gjúki's son\                           |
|                         |                                            | greets and hails thee.\                        |
|                         |                                            | As my queen shalt thou ride\                   |
|                         |                                            | my quest fulfilling.'\                         |
|                         |                                            | As on swaying seas\                            |
|                         |                                            | a swan glimmering\                             |
|                         |                                            | sat she sore troubled\                         |
|                         |                                            | seeking counsel:                               |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *Brynhild*              | [29](#calibre_link-121){#calibre_link-353} | 'What shall I answer\                          |
|                         |                                            | in hour o'ershadowed,\                         |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar, Gunnar,\                               |
|                         |                                            | with gleaming eyes?'                           |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *Sigurd*                |                                            | 'Redgolden rings,\                             |
|                         |                                            | Rhineland treasure,\                           |
|                         |                                            | mighty brideprice\                             |
|                         |                                            | shall be meted thee!'                          |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *Brynhild*              | [30](#calibre_link-122){#calibre_link-271} | 'Gunnar, speak not\                            |
|                         |                                            | of golden rings!\                              |
|                         |                                            | Swords were me dearer\                         |
|                         |                                            | to slay my loves.\                             |
|                         |                                            | Art thou all men's master,\                    |
|                         |                                            | all surpassing? --\                            |
|                         |                                            | to only such\                                  |
|                         |                                            | will I answer give.'                           |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 31                                         | 'Yea, swords hast thou reddened,\              |
|                         |                                            | swords yet shalt wield;\                       |
|                         |                                            | and oaths hast thou sworn,\                    |
|                         |                                            | and oaths shalt keep.\                         |
|                         |                                            | Thy wall is ridden,\                           |
|                         |                                            | thy wavering fire:\                            |
|                         |                                            | thou art doomed him to wed\                    |
|                         |                                            | who dared to pass.'                            |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 32                                         | In a bed them laid\                            |
|                         |                                            | Brynhild, Sigurd;\                             |
|                         |                                            | a sword them sundered\                         |
|                         |                                            | set there naked.\                              |
|                         |                                            | Gram lay between\                              |
|                         |                                            | gleaming sheathless,\                          |
|                         |                                            | fate lay between\                              |
|                         |                                            | forged unyielding.                             |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                         | 33                                         | Dawn came on earth,\                           |
|                         |                                            | day grew round them.\                          |
|                         |                                            | [From](#calibre_link-123){#calibre_link-263}   |
|                         |                                            | sleeping finger\                               |
|                         |                                            | he slipped her                                 |
|                         |                                            | [ring](#calibre_link-124){#calibre_link-264},\ |
|                         |                                            | and Andvari's gold,\                           |
|                         |                                            | old, enchanted,\                               |
|                         |                                            | on Brynhild's hand\                            |
|                         |                                            | bound in token.                                |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *Sigurd*                | 34                                         | 'Wake thou! wake thou!\                        |
|                         |                                            | Wide is daylight.\                             |
|                         |                                            | I ride to my realm\                            |
|                         |                                            | to array the feast.'                           |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *Brynhild*              |                                            | 'Gunnar, Gunnar,\                              |
|                         |                                            | with gleaming eyes,\                           |
|                         |                                            | on day appointed\                              |
|                         |                                            | I shall drink with thee.'                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                                             |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
:::

::: {#calibre_link-16 .calibre2}
# [IX](#calibre_link-125){.calibre5} {#ix .cn}

# [DEILD](#calibre_link-125) {#deild .ct1}

## (Strife) {#strife .sub2}

  ----------------------- -------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------
                          1                                            On day appointed\
                                                                       dawn rose redly,\
                                                                       sun sprang fiery\
                                                                       southward hasting.\
                                                                       Bridal to Brynhild\
                                                                       blissful drank he,\
                                                                       Gunnar Gjúki's son,\
                                                                       gold unsparing.

                          2                                            All surpassing,\
                                                                       proud and ardent,\
                                                                       Brynhild sat there,\
                                                                       a bride and queen.\
                                                                       All men's master,\
                                                                       all surpassing,\
                                                                       in came Sigurd\
                                                                       as sun rising.

                          3                                            By [Gudrún's](#calibre_link-126){#calibre_link-268}
                                                                       side,\
                                                                       Gjúki's daughter,\
                                                                       she saw him seated --\
                                                                       a silence fell.\
                                                                       As stone graven\
                                                                       stared she palely,\
                                                                       as cold and still\
                                                                       as carven stone.

                          [4](#calibre_link-127){#calibre_link-240}    [From](#calibre_link-128){#calibre_link-269} shrouded
                                                                       heart\
                                                                       the shadows parted;\
                                                                       oaths were remembered\
                                                                       all unfulfilled.\
                                                                       As stone carven,\
                                                                       stern, unbending,\
                                                                       he sat unsmiling\
                                                                       no sign making.

                          5                                            Clamour rose again,\
                                                                       clear the singing.\
                                                                       Men were joyful --\
                                                                       mirth they deemed it.\
                                                                       In that hall beheld they\
                                                                       heroes mightiest,\
                                                                       and kings and queens\
                                                                       crowned in splendour.

                                                                       \*            

                          6                                            Forth rode Sigurd,\
                                                                       the forest seeking,\
                                                                       to hunt the hart;\
                                                                       horns were sounded.\
                                                                       To the Rhine-river,\
                                                                       to running water,\
                                                                       queens went comely\
                                                                       with combs of gold.

                          7                                            Their locks they loosened.\
                                                                       Long one waded\
                                                                       to deeper pools\
                                                                       darkly swirling:

  *Brynhild*                                                           'The water that hath washed\
                                                                       thy wan tresses\
                                                                       shall not flow unfitting\
                                                                       over fairer brow!'

  *Gudrún*                8                                            'More queenly I,\
                                                                       more kingly wed! --\
                                                                       fame all surpasses\
                                                                       he that Fáfnir slew!'

  *Brynhild*                                                           'Worth all surpasses\
                                                                       who my wavering fire,\
                                                                       flaming lightning\
                                                                       fearless vanquished!'

                          9                                            (Grim laughed
                                                                       [Gudrún](#calibre_link-129){#calibre_link-245}\
                                                                       Grímhild's daughter:)

  *Gudrún*                                                             'True spake the tongue\
                                                                       of truth unwitting!\
                                                                       Thy wavering fire\
                                                                       wildly flaming\
                                                                       he rode unrecking\
                                                                       who that ring gave thee --\
                                                                       did Gunnar get it\
                                                                       on Gnitaheiði?

                          10                                           [Andvari's](#calibre_link-130){#calibre_link-246}
                                                                       ring,\
                                                                       old, enchanted,\
                                                                       is on Brynhild's hand\
                                                                       bound in token.\
                                                                       [Did](#calibre_link-131){#calibre_link-265} Gunnar
                                                                       give me\
                                                                       the gleaming ring\
                                                                       from thy hand he drew,\
                                                                       now here on
                                                                       [mine](#calibre_link-132){#calibre_link-266}!'

                          11                                           Coldhued as death\
                                                                       the queen was stricken,\
                                                                       strode swift from stream\
                                                                       as stone silent;\
                                                                       from Rhine-river,\
                                                                       from running water,\
                                                                       her bower sought she\
                                                                       brooding darkly.

                          12                                           Dim fell evening,\
                                                                       dusk was starless;\
                                                                       her mind was as night\
                                                                       as she mourned alone;\
                                                                       alone, lightless,\
                                                                       made lamentation:

  *Brynhild*                                                           'Fell! fell the fates\
                                                                       that forged our days!

                          13                                           Mine own must I have\
                                                                       or anguish suffer,\
                                                                       or suffer anguish\
                                                                       Sigurd losing.\
                                                                       Yet he is Gudrún's\
                                                                       and Gunnar's I:\
                                                                       foul wrought the fates\
                                                                       that framed my life!'

                          14                                           Daylong lay she\
                                                                       drinking nor eating,\
                                                                       as in dead slumber\
                                                                       or dreadful thought.\
                                                                       Her maidens marvelled --\
                                                                       she minded not,\
                                                                       Gunnar sought her;\
                                                                       grim she heard him.

                          15                                           Then spake Brynhild\
                                                                       from bitter pondering:

  *Brynhild*                                                           'Whence came the gold\
                                                                       here gleaming pale?\
                                                                       Who holds the ring\
                                                                       from my hand taken?'\
                                                                       Nought spake Gunnar,\
                                                                       no word answered.

  *Brynhild*              16                                           'King men call thee!\
                                                                       A coward rather,\
                                                                       from fire flinching,\
                                                                       fearful, quaking!\
                                                                       From witch-woman's\
                                                                       womb thou camest.\
                                                                       Woe to Grímhild,\
                                                                       woe's contriver!'

  *Gunnar*                17                                           'Vile words to use,\
                                                                       thou Valkyrie,\
                                                                       thou slayer of men,\
                                                                       and sword-hearted!'

  *Brynhild*                                                           'If sword I had,\
                                                                       I would slay thee now,\
                                                                       for thy secret treason,\
                                                                       for thy sundered oaths!

                          18                                           Him only loved I\
                                                                       who all surpassed;\
                                                                       an oath uttered,\
                                                                       him only to wed,\
                                                                       him only to wed\
                                                                       who mine ardent fire\
                                                                       vanquished valorous;\
                                                                       I am vow-breaker.

                          19                                           I am oath-breaker,\
                                                                       dishonoured, humbled;\
                                                                       I am love-bereaved\
                                                                       and life-curséd.\
                                                                       In thy halls shalt thou hear\
                                                                       never happy voices,\
                                                                       no queen in thy courts\
                                                                       shall comely walk.'

                          20                                           Long there lay she\
                                                                       in lamentation;\
                                                                       afar heard folk\
                                                                       her fell mourning.\
                                                                       Gudrún she spurned,\
                                                                       Gunnar scorning,\
                                                                       and Högni mocking;\
                                                                       hate was kindled.

                                                                       \*            

                          21                                           From the hunt rode Sigurd\
                                                                       home returning,\
                                                                       found halls unlit\
                                                                       and hearts darkened.\
                                                                       They brought him to seek her\
                                                                       for sorrow's healing;\
                                                                       his mood was loath,\
                                                                       on the morrow went he.

                                                                       *(He draws back the coverlet\
                                                                       from Brynhild and wakes her,\
                                                                       as before he had done.)*

  *Sigurd*                22                                           'Hail, O sunlight\
                                                                       and sun's rising!\
                                                                       Sleep no longer\
                                                                       and sorrow cast thou!'

  *Brynhild*                                                           'I slept on mountain,\
                                                                       I sleep no more!\
                                                                       Accursed be thy words,\
                                                                       cruel forswearer!'

  *Sigurd*                23                                           'What grief ails thee\
                                                                       amid good liking,\
                                                                       who to glorious Gunnar\
                                                                       wert gladly wed?'

  *Brynhild*                                                           'Gladly! gladly!\
                                                                       Grim thou mockest me.\
                                                                       Him only I loved,\
                                                                       who all surpassed.'

  *Sigurd*                24                                           'Yet glory no less\
                                                                       hath Gjúki's son,\
                                                                       my blood-brother,\
                                                                       best renownéd.\
                                                                       Well he loves thee,\
                                                                       lord unfearing --\
                                                                       look now and learn\
                                                                       light yet shineth!'

  *Brynhild*              25                                           'Nay, Fáfnir Sigurd\
                                                                       fearless conquered;\
                                                                       my wavering fire\
                                                                       he waded twice;\
                                                                       twice he waded\
                                                                       tongues of lightning:\
                                                                       so great glory\
                                                                       never Gunnar earned.'

  *Sigurd*                [26](#calibre_link-133){#calibre_link-383}   'That twice he waded,\
                                                                       who told thee so?\
                                                                       Sigurd hath not said it --\
                                                                       why saist thou this?'

  *Brynhild*                                                           'Gloom was round us.\
                                                                       Thy gleaming eyes,\
                                                                       thine eyes gleaming\
                                                                       anguish gave me.

                          27                                           Veils of darkness\
                                                                       they vanquished me.\
                                                                       I am life-curséd\
                                                                       and love-bereaved.\
                                                                       Yet I curse thee too,\
                                                                       cruel forswearer,\
                                                                       who rendered to another\
                                                                       the ring taken.

                          28                                           Gudrún I curse\
                                                                       for cruel reproach\
                                                                       of bed broken\
                                                                       and body yielded.\
                                                                       Thy glory alone\
                                                                       seems good to thee;\
                                                                       of all women the worst\
                                                                       thou weenest me.'

  *Sigurd*                29                                           'Woe worth the words\
                                                                       by women spoken!\
                                                                       Woe worth the while\
                                                                       this work began!\
                                                                       Webs enwound me\
                                                                       woven dreadly,\
                                                                       my mind shadowing,\
                                                                       my mood darkening.

                          30                                           Long I loved thee,\
                                                                       long desiring.\
                                                                       Thee only would I hold,\
                                                                       now all I know.\
                                                                       My mood mastering,\
                                                                       my mind wielding,\
                                                                       I sat unsmiling,\
                                                                       no sign making.

                          31                                           This solace sought I,\
                                                                       that I saw thee still,\
                                                                       the one hall walking\
                                                                       though wife of other.'

  *Brynhild*                                                           'Too late! too late,\
                                                                       love thou speakest!\
                                                                       To allay this evil\
                                                                       there leech is none.'

  *Sigurd*                32                                           'Is hope all fallen,\
                                                                       is healing vain?\
                                                                       Must fate fierce-hearted\
                                                                       thus find its end?'

  *Brynhild*                                                           'This hope only,\
                                                                       this heart's comfort --\
                                                                       that Sigurd forsworn\
                                                                       a sword should bite!'

  *Sigurd*                33                                           'Swords lightly sleep,\
                                                                       soon may I feel them!\
                                                                       Then would Brynhild die --\
                                                                       bitter would she deem it.'

  *Brynhild*                                                           'Well fall the words\
                                                                       from woe's maker!\
                                                                       Little light in life\
                                                                       hath he left to me.'

  *Sigurd*                34                                           'Yet Gunnar would I slay,\
                                                                       Gudrún forsake,\
                                                                       from death thee to keep,\
                                                                       our doom o'ercoming!'

  *Brynhild*                                                           'I am wife of one,\
                                                                       I wed no other.\
                                                                       No lord will I love,\
                                                                       and least Sigurd!'

                                                                       \*            

                          35                                           Forth went Sigurd\
                                                                       filled with anguish,\
                                                                       his heart was swollen\
                                                                       in heaving breast.\
                                                                       Mail-rings clutched him,\
                                                                       marred his breathing,\
                                                                       to his flesh cutting\
                                                                       fiercely straining.

                          36                                           There stood Gudrún\
                                                                       gleaming-lovely:

  *Gudrún*                                                             'Sleeps yet Brynhild,\
                                                                       sickness bearing?'

  *Sigurd*                                                             'Brynhild sleeps not,\
                                                                       brooding darkly.\
                                                                       She broodeth darkly\
                                                                       our bale and doom.'

                          37                                           Gudrún wanly\
                                                                       grasped him weeping:

  *Gudrún*                                                             'What doth Brynhild brood,\
                                                                       what bale purpose?'

  *Sigurd*                                                             'Thou shouldst know it,\
                                                                       needless asking.\
                                                                       Woe worth the words\
                                                                       by women spoken!'

                          38                                           (Then spake Gunnar\
                                                                       gloomy-hearted:)

  *Gunnar*                                                             'What hope of healing\
                                                                       harm's amending?\
                                                                       Shall we gold offer,\
                                                                       gold and silver?'

  *Sigurd*                                                             'Gold and silver\
                                                                       let Gunnar offer!\
                                                                       Her lord alone\
                                                                       her leech must be.'

                          39                                           Then Gunnar offered\
                                                                       gold and silver,\
                                                                       gold and silver\
                                                                       gleaming-hoarded.

  *Brynhild*                                                           'Gunnar, speak not\
                                                                       of gold and silver;\
                                                                       swords were me dearer\
                                                                       to slay my life.

                          40                                           All men's master,\
                                                                       all surpassing,\
                                                                       such only ever\
                                                                       shall earn my love.\
                                                                       Than thy liege lower\
                                                                       thou art less become,\
                                                                       a Völsung's squire,\
                                                                       a vassal's servant!

                          41                                           From thy bed parting,\
                                                                       at thy board humbled\
                                                                       I will leave thee alone\
                                                                       to laughter of men,\
                                                                       if life thou allowest\
                                                                       to liege forsworn,\
                                                                       if thou slay not Sigurd,\
                                                                       thy sister's lord.'

  *Gunnar*                42                                           'Fell-hearted thou,\
                                                                       and foe of peace!\
                                                                       I oaths have sworn\
                                                                       for ever lasting,\
                                                                       bonds of brotherhood\
                                                                       in blood mingled;\
                                                                       though Brynhild bid it,\
                                                                       I may break them not.'

  *Brynhild*              43                                           '[Oaths](#calibre_link-134){#calibre_link-285} too I
                                                                       swore\
                                                                       for ever lasting --\
                                                                       light thou heldest them!\
                                                                       I am love-betrayed.\
                                                                       Sigurd thou sent me,\
                                                                       thy sworn brother.\
                                                                       My bed he entered,\
                                                                       by my body laid him,\
                                                                       betrayed thy trust,\
                                                                       betraying me.

                          44                                           To Gudrún he told it,\
                                                                       Gudrún knoweth.\
                                                                       In shame am I shrouded,\
                                                                       and shamed art thou!'\
                                                                       Gunnar came forth\
                                                                       grievous-hearted,\
                                                                       daylong he sat,\
                                                                       deeply brooding.

                          45                                           From mood to mood\
                                                                       his mind wandered,\
                                                                       from shame to shame\
                                                                       shorn of friendship.\
                                                                       Högni called he\
                                                                       to hidden counsel,\
                                                                       his true brother,\
                                                                       whom he trusted well.

  *Gunnar*                [46](#calibre_link-135){#calibre_link-252}   '[Evil](#calibre_link-136){#calibre_link-286} wrought
                                                                       Sigurd:\
                                                                       oaths he swore me,\
                                                                       oaths he swore me,\
                                                                       all belied them;\
                                                                       betrayed my trust,\
                                                                       whom I trusted most,\
                                                                       truth forswearing,\
                                                                       whom most true I deemed.'

  *Högni*                 47                                           'Brynhild beguiles thee\
                                                                       baleful-hearted,\
                                                                       woe devising\
                                                                       to woe stings thee;\
                                                                       loathing Gudrún,\
                                                                       her love grudging,\
                                                                       thy love loathing,\
                                                                       she lies to thee.'

  *Gunnar*                48                                           'Brynhild, Brynhild,\
                                                                       I better hold her\
                                                                       than all women,\
                                                                       than all treasure.\
                                                                       I will life sooner leave\
                                                                       than lose her now,\
                                                                       than live lonely\
                                                                       for laughter of men.

                          [49](#calibre_link-137){#calibre_link-287}   Let us slay Sigurd --\
                                                                       forsworn is he!\
                                                                       Let us lords be alone\
                                                                       of our lands again!\
                                                                       Let us slay Sigurd,\
                                                                       this sorrow ending,\
                                                                       and masters make us\
                                                                       of his mighty hoard!'

  *Högni*                 50                                           'Woe worth the words\
                                                                       by women spoken!\
                                                                       Lords unassailed\
                                                                       our league made us.\
                                                                       The might of Sigurd\
                                                                       we shall mourn later,\
                                                                       and the sister-sons\
                                                                       this sire had got us.'

                          51                                           To Gotthorm turning,\
                                                                       Grímhild's offspring,\
                                                                       greyhearted lord,\
                                                                       Gunnar hailed him:

  *Gunnar*                                                             'No oaths thou sworest,\
                                                                       no oaths heedest.\
                                                                       With his blood unblended\
                                                                       his blood now spill!'

                          52                                           Gold he promised him\
                                                                       and great lordship;\
                                                                       his bastard blood\
                                                                       burned with hunger.\
                                                                       Snake's flesh they took,\
                                                                       seethed it darkly,\
                                                                       wolf-meat gave him,\
                                                                       wine enchanted.

                          53                                           Drunk with madness,\
                                                                       dire and wolvish,\
                                                                       he grinned and gnashed\
                                                                       his grinding teeth.\
                                                                       Of guile unworthy,\
                                                                       no guile dreaming,\
                                                                       yet doom foreboding,\
                                                                       drear went Sigurd.

                          54                                           To the forest fared he,\
                                                                       falcon loosing,\
                                                                       with hounds hunting,\
                                                                       for harm's solace.\
                                                                       Gotthorm rode there,\
                                                                       and Grani marked he,\
                                                                       assailing Sigurd,\
                                                                       with searing words.

  *Gotthorm*              55                                           'O werewolf's son\
                                                                       and war-captive,\
                                                                       what huntest here\
                                                                       where hart roameth --\
                                                                       thou wooer of women\
                                                                       and wife-marrer,\
                                                                       who wouldst lord all alone\
                                                                       our lands and queens!'

                          56                                           Sword touched Sigurd\
                                                                       swart-red flushing;\
                                                                       white blanched the knuckles\
                                                                       on hilt clenching:

  *Sigurd*                                                             'Thou drunken dog,\
                                                                       doom hangs nigh thee!\
                                                                       Now slink to kennel!\
                                                                       Sleep may mend thee.'

                          57                                           Gotthorm he left\
                                                                       to grind his teeth;\
                                                                       back rode Sigurd\
                                                                       foreboding ill.\
                                                                       Night fell starless,\
                                                                       none were waking;\
                                                                       asleep was Gudrún\
                                                                       by Sigurd dreaming.

                          58                                           Dawn came wanly:\
                                                                       drunk with hatred\
                                                                       there Gotthorm stalked\
                                                                       as glowering wolf.\
                                                                       Sword leaped naked,\
                                                                       sleeping stabbed him,\
                                                                       pierced through to pillow,\
                                                                       pinned in anguish.

                          [59](#calibre_link-138){#calibre_link-354}   Forth sprang the wolf\
                                                                       by fear blinded\
                                                                       of awful eyes\
                                                                       that opened wide.\
                                                                       Gram was brandished,\
                                                                       gleaming handled,\
                                                                       hissing hurled aloft\
                                                                       at hasting beast.

                          60                                           At the door he tumbled\
                                                                       dreadly crying;\
                                                                       there hell took him\
                                                                       hewn asunder.\
                                                                       Forth crashed the head,\
                                                                       feet fell backward;\
                                                                       blood ran darkly\
                                                                       on bower threshold.

                          61                                           In sweet embrace\
                                                                       to sleep she went,\
                                                                       to grief unending\
                                                                       Gudrún wakened,\
                                                                       to her bliss drowning\
                                                                       in blood flowing.\
                                                                       in flowing blood\
                                                                       of fairest lord.

                          62                                           Breast white and bare\
                                                                       she beat so sore\
                                                                       that Sigurd raised him\
                                                                       from soaking pillow:

  *Sigurd*                                                             'My wife, weep not\
                                                                       for woe foredoomed!\
                                                                       Brothers remain to thee --\
                                                                       blame them lightly!

                          63                                           Brynhild wrought this:\
                                                                       best she loved me,\
                                                                       worst she dealt me,\
                                                                       worst belied me.\
                                                                       I Gunnar never\
                                                                       grieved nor injured;\
                                                                       oaths I swore him,\
                                                                       all fulfilled them!'

                          64                                           Dead fell Sigurd;\
                                                                       dreadly Gudrún\
                                                                       cried in anguish,\
                                                                       called him vainly.\
                                                                       Swords rang on wall,\
                                                                       and sleepers shivered;\
                                                                       geese screamed shrill\
                                                                       in green meadow.

                          65                                           Then laughed Brynhild\
                                                                       in her bed listening\
                                                                       with whole heart once --\
                                                                       the house shuddered --\
                                                                       Gudrún hearing\
                                                                       in grief's torment.\
                                                                       Gunnar answered\
                                                                       grimly speaking:

  *Gunnar*                66                                           'Little thou laughest\
                                                                       for delight of soul,\
                                                                       O fell-hearted!\
                                                                       Fey I deem thee.\
                                                                       Thy colour blancheth,\
                                                                       cold thy cheeks are;\
                                                                       cold thy counsels\
                                                                       and accursed thy redes.'

  *Brynhild*              67                                           'Cursed are the Niflungs,\
                                                                       cruel forswearers.\
                                                                       Oaths swore Sigurd,\
                                                                       all fulfilled them.\
                                                                       Ye all shall find\
                                                                       evil fortune,\
                                                                       while all men's honour\
                                                                       he for ever holdeth.

                          68                                           Bonds of brotherhood\
                                                                       in blood mingled\
                                                                       with murder kept ye;\
                                                                       he remembered them.\
                                                                       [A](#calibre_link-139){#calibre_link-288} sword lay
                                                                       naked\
                                                                       set between us,\
                                                                       Gram lay grimly\
                                                                       gleaming
                                                                       [sheathless](#calibre_link-140){#calibre_link-289}.

                          69                                           Now life no longer\
                                                                       will I live with you;\
                                                                       of love ye robbed me\
                                                                       with lying counsels.\
                                                                       Shorn I leave you,\
                                                                       shame enduring,\
                                                                       of faith and friendship,\
                                                                       of fame on earth.'

                          70                                           In arms he took her,\
                                                                       anguished begged her\
                                                                       her hand to stay,\
                                                                       hope to look for.\
                                                                       She thrust them from her\
                                                                       who thronged round her,\
                                                                       longing only\
                                                                       for her last journey.

                          71                                           (Högni only\
                                                                       withheld her not:)

  *Högni*                                                              'Little would I hinder\
                                                                       her last journey,\
                                                                       so she bide in that land\
                                                                       never born again.\
                                                                       Crooked came she forth\
                                                                       from curséd womb\
                                                                       to man's evil\
                                                                       and our mighty woe.'

                                                                       \*            

                          72                                           Gold corslet she took,\
                                                                       gleaming hauberk,\
                                                                       helm set on head,\
                                                                       in hand a sword.\
                                                                       On the sword she cast her,\
                                                                       sank down wounded:\
                                                                       thus Brynhild ended\
                                                                       her bright splendour.

  *Brynhild*              73                                           'A boon I beg thee,\
                                                                       this boon at last!\
                                                                       Pile high a pyre\
                                                                       on the plain builded;\
                                                                       shields hang round it\
                                                                       and shining cloths,\
                                                                       blood pour over it\
                                                                       for us brightly shed!

                          74                                           A hawk at each hand,\
                                                                       a hound at feet,\
                                                                       there harnessed set ye\
                                                                       our horses slain.\
                                                                       At his side lay me,\
                                                                       sword between us,\
                                                                       naked gleaming\
                                                                       as on night of yore.

                          75                                           Burn there Brynhild\
                                                                       in the blazing fire\
                                                                       who in flames awoke\
                                                                       to fell sorrow.\
                                                                       In flames send forth\
                                                                       that fairest lord\
                                                                       now as sun setting\
                                                                       who as sun did rise!'

                          76                                           Flames were kindled,\
                                                                       fume was swirling,\
                                                                       a roaring fire\
                                                                       ringed with weeping.\
                                                                       Thus Sigurd passed,\
                                                                       seed of Völsung,\
                                                                       there Brynhild burned:\
                                                                       bliss was ended.

                                                                       \*            

                          77                                           On the hell-way hastened\
                                                                       the helméd queen,\
                                                                       never born again\
                                                                       from bleak regions.\
                                                                       In Valhöllu\
                                                                       Völsungs feasted:\
                                                                       'Son's son welcome,\
                                                                       seed of Ódin!'

                          78                                           Thus soon came Sigurd\
                                                                       the sword bearing\
                                                                       to glad Valhöll\
                                                                       greeting Ódin.\
                                                                       There feasts he long\
                                                                       at his father's side,\
                                                                       for War waiting,\
                                                                       the World's chosen.

                          79                                           When Heimdall's horn\
                                                                       is heard ringing\
                                                                       and the Blazing Bridge\
                                                                       bends neath horsemen,\
                                                                       Brynhild shall arm him\
                                                                       with belt and sword,\
                                                                       a beaker bear him\
                                                                       brimmed with glory.

                          80                                           In the day of Doom\
                                                                       he shall deathless stand\
                                                                       who death tasted\
                                                                       and dies no more,\
                                                                       the serpent-slayer,\
                                                                       seed of Ódin:\
                                                                       not all shall end,\
                                                                       nor Earth perish.

                          81                                           On his head the Helm,\
                                                                       in his hand lightning,\
                                                                       afire his spirit,\
                                                                       in his face splendour.\
                                                                       When war passeth\
                                                                       in world rebuilt,\
                                                                       bliss shall they drink\
                                                                       who the bitter tasted.

                          [82](#calibre_link-141){#calibre_link-340}   Thus passed Sigurd,\
                                                                       seed of Völsung,\
                                                                       hero mightiest,\
                                                                       hope of Ódin.\
                                                                       But woe of Gudrún\
                                                                       through this world lasteth,\
                                                                       to the end of days\
                                                                       all shall hear her.

                                                                       \*            
  ----------------------- -------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------
:::

::: {#calibre_link-17 .calibre2}
[COMMENTARY\
on\
[VÖLSUNGAKVIÐA EN NÝJA]{.small}](#calibre_link-142){.calibre5}

![art](images/000005.jpg){.calibre1}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-143 .calibre2}
# COMMENTARY on VÖLSUNGAKVIÐA EN NÝJA {#commentary-on-völsungakviða-en-nýja .ct}

The subtitle *Sigurðarkviða en mesta* means 'The Longest Lay of Sigurd':
see p.[234](#calibre_link-144){#calibre_link-258}.

Throughout the commentary the poem *Völsungakviða en N*ý*ja* is referred
to as 'the Lay' or occasionally 'the Lay of the Völsungs', and the
*Völsunga Saga* as 'the Saga'. The name 'Edda' always refers to the
'Elder Edda' or 'Poetic Edda'; the work of Snorri Sturluson is named the
'Prose Edda'.

The nine sections of the poem following the Upphaf are referred to by
Roman numerals and the stanzas by Arabic numerals: thus 'VII.6' refers
to stanza 6 in the section 'Gudrún'. Notes are related to stanzas, not
lines; and a general note on the section precedes notes to individual
stanzas.

# [UPPHAF](#calibre_link-145){#calibre_link-360} {#upphaf-1 .fm1}

[This prelude](#calibre_link-146){#calibre_link-303} to the Lay of the
Völsungs echoes and reflects the most famous poem of the Edda, the
*Völuspá*, in which the *Völva,* the wise woman or sibyl, recounts the
origin of the world, the age of the youthful Gods, and the primeval war;
prophesies the Ragnarök, the Doom of the Gods; and after it the renewal
of the Earth, rising again out of deep waters (see the third part of my
father's poem *The Prophecy of the Sibyl*, given in Appendix B at the
end of this book).

But the images of the *Völuspá* are here ordered to an entirely original
theme: for the sibyl declares (stanzas 13--15) that the fate of the
world and the outcome of the Last Battle will depend on the presence of
'one deathless who death hath tasted and dies no more'; and this is
Sigurd, 'the serpent-slayer, seed of Ódin', who is 'the World's chosen'
for whom the mailclad warriors wait in Valhöll (stanza 20). As is made
explicit in my father's interpretative note (iv) given on
p.[53](#calibre_link-147){#calibre_link-76}--[54](#calibre_link-148){#calibre_link-79},
it is Ódin's hope that Sigurd will on the Last Day become the slayer of
the greatest serpent of all, *Miðgarðsormr* (see note to stanza 12
below), and that through Sigurd 'a new world will be made
[possible](#calibre_link-149){#calibre_link-361}'.

'This motive of the special function of Sigurd is an invention of the
present poet', my father observed in the same brief text. An association
with his own mythology seems to me at least extremely probable: in that
Túrin Turambar, slayer of the great dragon Glaurung, was also reserved
for a special destiny, for at the Last Battle he would himself strike
down Morgoth, the Dark Lord, with his black sword. This mysterious
conception appeared in the old Tale of Turambar (1919 or earlier), and
reappeared as a prophecy in the *Silmarillion* texts of the 1930s: so in
the *Quenta Noldorinwa,* 'it shall be the black sword of Túrin that
deals unto Melko \[Morgoth\] his death and final end; and so shall the
children of Húrin and all Men be avenged.' Very remarkably a form of
this conception is found in a brief essay of my father's from near the
end of his life, in which he wrote that Andreth the Wise-woman of the
House of Bëor had prophesied that 'Túrin in the Last Battle should
return from the Dead, and before he left the Circles of the World for
ever should challenge the Great Dragon of Morgoth, Ancalagon the Black,
and deal him the death-stroke.' The extraordinary transformation of
Túrin is seen also in an entry in *The Annals of Aman,* where it is said
that the great constellation of Menelmakar, the Swordsman of the Sky
(Orion), 'was a sign of Túrin Turambar, who should come into the world,
and a foreshadowing of the Last Battle that shall be at the [end of
Days](#calibre_link-150){#calibre_link-304}.'^[\*](#calibre_link-151)^[]{#calibre_link-380}

Beyond this, in the absence (so far as I know) of any other writing of
my father's bearing on his enigmatic conception of Sigurd, I think that
speculation on its larger significance would fall outside the editorial
limits that I have set for myself in this book.

[My father's](#calibre_link-152){#calibre_link-180} Ódin does indeed
retain his ancient character of gathering his 'chosen' to Valhöll to be
his champions at the Ragnarök, and in the Lay of the Völsungs he appears
against Sigmund, Sigurd's father, and disarms him in his last fight, so
that he is slain (IV.8--11). In Norse legend a belief is expressed that
Ódin, faithless, ambiguous, and sinister, desiring strife among kinsmen,
turning against his favourites at the last and felling those whom he has
favoured, has reason for his conduct: he needs his own, needs his
favourites against the day of the
[Ragnarök](#calibre_link-153){#calibre_link-281} (see the note to
IX.[77--78)](#calibre_link-154){#calibre_link-279}.

But from the extraordinary complex of ideas that surround Ódin in
Northern antiquity -- suggesting layer upon layer of shifting belief and
symbolism -- a God is glimpsed in my father's work who has retained
little of the subtle, sinister, and enigmatic deity of ancient writings:
the god of war, lord of the Valkyries; exciter of madness; the initiate,
the lord of the gallows, the self-sacrificed, the master of obscene
magic, the inspiration of poetry; the shape-changer, the old one-eyed
man, the faithless friend, and on the Last Day the victim of the Wolf.
'Weighed with wisdom woe foreknowing' (*Upphaf* 18), and seen by my
father, referring to his own poem and to his treatment of the old
legend, as symbolizing prudence and wisdom beside the malice and folly
of Loki, Ódin seems more like Manwë of his own mythology; and he calls
them both 'Lord of Gods and
[Men](#calibre_link-155){#calibre_link-181}'.

[I]{.small}    On this stanza see
p.[246](#calibre_link-156){#calibre_link-302}. It echoes the third
stanza of the *Völuspá*; and citing the Norse verse in a lecture my
father followed it with this first stanza of the *Upphaf*, with some
differences: 'shivering waves', 'unraised heaven'.

[II]{.small}    It is told by Snorri in the Prose Edda that Heimdal
*(Heimdallr)* was the warden or sentinel of the Gods (Æsir), dwelling
beside Bifröst ('the quaking path'), the rainbow bridge between Ásgard,
the realm of the Æsir, and Midgard, the world of Men (see note to 12),
which he guards against the rock-giants; but at the Ragnarök (the Doom
of the Gods) Bifröst will be crossed by the hosts coming from the fiery
land of Múspell, and will break beneath them. The red part of the bow is
blazing fire. Heimdal's horn is the Gjallarhorn, whose blast is heard
over all the worlds; and he will blow it at the Ragnarök.

      The Ash is Yggdrasill, the World Tree, whose branches stretched
out over earth and heaven. The Wolf is Fenrir (named in stanza 13), whom
the Gods chained; but at the Ragnarök Fenrir will break his chains and
devour Ódin.

12  Surt *(Surtr)*: the great demon of fire, at the Ragnarök coming out
of Múspell, the land of fire, against the Gods.

      The 'slumbering Serpent' is *Miðsgarðsormr,* the Serpent of
Midgard, who lay coiled through all the seas encompassing Midgard, the
world of Men. The Norse name *Miðgarðr* corresponds to Old English
*Middan-geard, Middan-eard,* which lie behind the later form
*Middle-earth.*

      The 'shadowy ship' is Naglfar, made of dead men's nails.

13  Frey *(Freyr):* the chief god of fertility, of peace and plenty, in
Norway and Sweden; Freyja (stanza 17) was his sister.

      The 'deep Dragon' is the Serpent of Midgard: see note on stanza
12.

# I ANDVARA-GULL (Andvari's Gold) {#i-andvara-gull-andvaris-gold .fm}

[For the story](#calibre_link-157){#calibre_link-55} in §I of the Lay of
the Völsungs the sources are the Eddaic poem known as *Reginsmál,* the
Lay of Regin, which is indeed less a poem than fragments of old verse
pieced together with prose; a passage in Snorri Sturluson's version of
the Völsung legend in the Prose Edda; and the *Völsunga Saga.* [The few
verses](#calibre_link-158){#calibre_link-183} in *Reginsmál* that bear
on this part of the narrative (dialogue between Loki and Andvari, and
between Loki and Hreidmar after the gold had been paid over) are here
and there a model for the Lay, but only lines 5--6 in stanza 8 are a
translation *(Andvari ek heiti, Óinn hét minn faðir).*

Apart from this, *Andvara-gull* in the Lay is a new poem. It is very
allusive, and deliberately so, and I give here in abbreviated form the
course of the story as it is known from the prose narratives: for the
most part the two versions differ little.

It is told that three of the Æsir, Ódin, Hœnir, and Loki, went out into
the world, and they came to a waterfall known as the Falls of Andvari,
Andvari being the name of a dwarf who fished there in the form of a pike
(Snorri says nothing of Andvari at this point). At that place there was
an otter that had caught a salmon, and was eating it on the river bank;
but Loki hurled a stone at the otter and killed it. Then the Æsir took
up the salmon and the otter and went on their way until they came to the
house of a certain Hreidmar. Snorri describes him as a farmer, a man of
substance, greatly skilled in magic; in the Saga he is simply an
important and wealthy man; whereas in the headnote to this section of
the Lay he is 'a demon'.

The Æsir asked Hreidmar for lodging for the night, saying that they had
enough food with them, and they showed Hreidmar their catch; but the
otter was Hreidmar's son Otr, who took the form of an otter when he was
fishing (the name *Otr* and the Norse word *otr* 'otter' being of course
the same). Then Hreidmar called out to his other sons, Fáfnir and Regin,
and they laid hands on the Æsir and bound them, demanding that they
should ransom themselves by filling the otter-skin with gold, and also
covering it on the outside with gold so that no part of it could be
seen.

Here the prose versions separate.
[According](#calibre_link-159){#calibre_link-356} to Snorri (who had not
previously mentioned Andvari) Ódin now sent Loki to Svartálfaheim, the
Land of the Dark Elves; it was there that he found the dwarf Andvari who
was 'as a fish in the water', and Loki caught him in his hands. In the
Saga, on the other hand, Loki's errand was to seek out
[Rán](#calibre_link-160){#calibre_link-168}, the wife of the sea-god
Ægir, and get from her the net with which she drew down men drowning in
the sea; and with that net he captured the dwarf Andvari, who was
fishing in his falls in the form of a pike. This is the story that my
father followed (stanza 7).

Andvari ransomed himself with his hoard of gold, attempting to keep back
a single little gold ring; but Loki saw it and took it from him (stanza
9). In Snorri's account only, Andvari begged to keep the ring because
with it he could multiply wealth for himself, but Loki said that he
should not have one penny left.

Andvari declared that the ring would be the death of any who possessed
it, or any of the gold. According to Snorri, 'Loki said that this seemed
very well to him, and he said that this condition should hold good,
provided that he himself declared it in the ears of those who should
receive the ring.' Then Loki returned to Hreidmar's house, and when Ódin
saw the ring he desired it, and took it away from the treasure. The
otter-skin was filled and covered with the gold of Andvari, but Hreidmar
looking at it very closely saw a whisker, and demanded that they should
cover that also. Then Ódin drew out Andvari's ring (*Andvaranaut*, the
possession of Andvari) and covered the hair. But when Ódin had taken up
his spear, and Loki his shoes, and they no longer had any need to fear,
Loki declared that the curse of Andvari should be fulfilled. And now it
has been told (Snorri concludes) why gold is called 'Otter's ransom'
*(otrgjöld)* or 'forced payment of the Æsir' *(nauðgjald ásanna)*: see
p.[36](#calibre_link-161){#calibre_link-54}.

[An important difference](#calibre_link-162){#calibre_link-184} between
the two prose versions is that Snorri began his account of the Völsung
legend with 'Andvari's Gold', whereas in the Saga this story is
introduced much later, and becomes a story told by Regin (son of
Hreidmar) to Sigurd before his attack on the dragon. But although [my
father followed](#calibre_link-163){#calibre_link-185} Snorri in this,
he nonetheless followed the Saga in giving a brief retelling of
'Andvari's Gold' by Regin to Sigurd in the fifth section of the poem,
with a number of verse-lines repeated from their
[first](#calibre_link-164){#calibre_link-56} occurrence (see
V.[7](#calibre_link-165){#calibre_link-97}--[11](#calibre_link-166){#calibre_link-99}).

1    Of all the Northern divinities *Loki* is the most enigmatic;
ancient Norse literature is full of references to him and stories about
him, and it is not possible to characterize him in a short space. But
since Loki only appears here in these poems, and in my father's words
concerning him given on p.[54](#calibre_link-167){#calibre_link-78}, it
seems both suitable and sufficient to quote Snorri Sturluson's
description in the Prose Edda:

'Also counted among the Æsir is Loki, whom some call the mischief-maker
of the Æsir, the first father of lies, and the blemish of all gods and
men. Loki is handsome and fair of face but evil in his disposition and
fickle in his conduct. He excels all others in that cleverness which is
called cunning, and he has wiles for every circumstance. Over and over
again he has brought the gods into great trouble, but often got them out
of it by his guile.'

In this stanza he is called 'lightfooted Loki', and in Snorri's version
of the story of Andvari's Gold it is said, as already noted, that after
the payment of the ransom to Hreidmar Ódin took up his spear 'and Loki
his shoes'. Elsewhere Snorri wrote of 'those shoes with which Loki ran
through air and over water'.

Of the god *Hoenir* no more is said in the Lay than that while Loki went
on the left side of Ódin, Hœnir went on his right. In my father's
somewhat mysterious interpretation given on p.54 (iv) he calls the
companion of Ódin who walks on his right hand 'a nameless shadow', but
this must surely be Hœnir, or at least derived from him. However, if
there is no end to what is told of Loki in the Norse mythological
narratives, very little can now be said of Hœnir; and to my
understanding, there is nothing in the vestiges that remain that casts
light on the 'nameless shadow' that walks beside Ódin.

6    Ásgard is the realm of the Gods (Æsir).

7    Rán: the wife of the sea-god Ægir; see
p.[189](#calibre_link-168){#calibre_link-160}.

8    'I bid thee': I offer thee.

13--15   In these concluding stanzas the references to the hope of Ódin,
and Ódin's choice, have of course no counterparts in the Norse texts.

# II SIGNÝ {#ii-signý-1 .fm}

This is a rendering in verse of elements of the narrative of the earlier
chapters of the *Völsunga Saga.* No old poetry recounting or referring
to this story exists apart from a single half-stanza (see the note to
stanzas 37--39), but this section of the Lay of the Völsungs can be seen
as an imagination of it. It is a selection of moments of dramatic force,
and many elements of the prose Saga are omitted; in particular the most
savage features of the story are eliminated (see notes to stanzas
30--32, 37--39).

The *Gauts* of the headnote to this section are the *Gautar* of Old
Norse, dwelling in *Gautland,* a region of what is now southern Sweden,
south of the great lakes. The name *Gautar* is historically identical
with the Old English *Geatas*, who were Beowulf's people.

1--2   These two stanzas are an extreme reduction of the opening
chapters of the Saga which tell of Völsung's immediate ancestry in a
prosaic fashion: my father clearly found this unsuited to his purpose.

2    'child of longing': Rerir's wife was for long barren.

4    In the Saga the tree in the midst of King Völsung's hall is named
the Barnstock, and is said to have been an apple-tree.

7    'Birds sang blithely': the birds were sitting in the boughs of the
great tree that upheld the hall; so again in stanza 11, and see
III.[2](#calibre_link-169){#calibre_link-92}.

10  King Siggeir and many other guests came to the wedding feast held in
King Völsung's hall.

[12--13](#calibre_link-170){#calibre_link-176}   In the Saga the old man
is described in terms that make it plain that he was Ódin, but he is not
named. Here in the Lay he is *Grímnir* 'the Masked', a name of Ódin that
does not appear at all in the Saga but is derived from the Eddaic poem
*Grímnismál.*

The 'standing stem' in 13 line 3 is the trunk of the Barnstock, into
which Ódin thrust the sword.

14  'Gaut and Völsung': Völsung's children and race are often called
*Völsungar*, Völsungs, as in the name of the Saga, and in the head-note
to this section.

16  This was the beginning of hatred and the motive for Siggeir's attack
on Völsung and his sons when they came to Gautland as his guests
(21--23); Siggeir was enraged at Sigmund's answer, but (in the words of
the Saga) 'he was a very wily man, and he behaved as if he were
indifferent'.

'bade': offered (so also 'I bid thee' in I.8); 'boon': request.

17--22   It is told in the Saga that on the day following the night of
the wedding feast ('last night I lay / where loath me was', 19) Siggeir
left very abruptly and returned with Signý to Gautland, having invited
Völsung and his sons to come as his guests to Gautland three months
later (21). Signý met them when they landed to warn them of what Siggeir
had prepared for them (22), but (according to the Saga) Völsung would
not listen to Signý's entreaty that he return at once to his own land,
nor to her request that she should be allowed to stay with her own
people and not return to Siggeir.

20  'toft': homestead.

29  In the Saga the sons of Völsung were set in stocks in the forest to
await the old she-wolf who came each night. Signý, on the tenth day,
sent her trusted servant to Sigmund, who alone survived, to smear honey
over his face and to put some in his mouth. When the wolf came she
licked his face and thrust her tongue into his mouth; at which he bit
into it. Then the wolf started back violently, pressing her feet against
the stocks in which Sigmund was set, so that they were split open; but
he held on to the wolf's tongue so that it was torn out by the roots,
and she died. 'Some men say,' according to the Saga, 'that the wolf was
King Siggeir's mother, who had changed herself into this shape by
witchcraft.'

      While in the Saga the stocks are an important element in the story
at this point, in the Lay there is no suggestion of stocks, but only of
fetters and shackles; the wolf is 'torn and tongueless', but 'by the
tree riven'. See the note on stanzas 30-32.

30--32   This passage is very greatly condensed, and elements in the
Saga essential to the narrative are passed over. Thus in the Saga, Signý
found Sigmund in the woods, and it is explicit that they decided that he
should make a house for himself under the ground, where Signý would
provide for his needs. There is nothing in the Saga to explain Signý's
words in the Lay 'Dwarvish master, thy doors open!' In the opening prose
passage of this section (p.[72](#calibre_link-171){#calibre_link-87}) it
is said that 'Sigmund dwelt in a cave in the guise of a dwarvish smith.'

      In this connection it is curious, if nothing more, to observe that
in William Morris' poem *The Story of Sigurd the Volsung* Sigmund's
dwelling is explicitly 'a stony cave' that was once 'a house of the
Dwarfs'. It is also said in that poem (see the note to stanza 29) that
by Siggeir's orders the men who led the sons of Völsung into the forest
cut down the greatest oak-tree that they could find and bound them to it
'with bonds of iron'; and when the wolf came for Sigmund he 'burst his
bonds' and slew it with his hands.

      Signý had two sons by Siggeir, and when the elder was ten years
old she sent him out to Sigmund in the forest to be a help to him should
he attempt to avenge Völsung; but the boy, told by Sigmund to make the
bread while he himself went out for firewood, was frightened to touch
the bag of flour because there was something alive in it. When Sigmund
told Signý about this she told him to kill the boy, since he had no
heart; and Sigmund did so. The next year Signý sent her second son by
Siggeir out into the woods, and things went in the same way.

      After that Signý changed shapes with a sorceress, and the
sorceress slept with Siggeir for three nights in Signý's form, while
Signý slept with her brother. The son born to them was named Sinfjötli.

33  On lines 5--6 of this stanza see the note to 35--36.

      'bast': flexible bark, used for making baskets, and for tying.

[33--34](#calibre_link-172){#calibre_link-177}   In the Saga Sigmund
subjected Sinfjötli to the same test as Siggeir's sons, and when he came
back to the underground house Sinfjötli had baked the bread, but he said
that he thought that there had been something alive in the flour when he
started kneading it. Sigmund laughed, and said that Sinfjötli should not
eat the bread he had baked, 'for you have kneaded in a great venomous
snake.' There is no mention in the Saga of Sinfjötli's bringing
Sigmund's sword (see note to 37--39).

35--36   A long passage is devoted in the Saga to the ferocious exploits
of Sigmund and Sinfjötli in the forest, where they became werewolves;
and it is an important point that Sigmund thought that Sinfjötli was the
son of Signý and Siggeir (cf. 33 'Fair one, thy father / thy face gave
not'), possessing the energy and daring of the Völsungs but the evil
heart of his father.

37--39   In the Saga Sigmund and Sinfjötli entered Siggeir's hall and
hid themselves behind ale barrels in the outer room; but the two young
children of Siggeir and Signý were playing with golden toys, bowling
them across the floor of the hall and running along with them, and a
gold ring rolled into the room where Sigmund and Sinfjötli sat. One of
the children, chasing the ring, 'saw where two tall, grim men were
sitting, with overhanging helms and shining mailcoats'; and he ran back
and told his father.

      Signý, hearing this, took the children into the outer room and
urged Sigmund and Sinfjötli to kill them, since they had betrayed their
hiding-place. Sigmund said that he would not kill her children even if
they had given him away, but the terrible Sinfjötli made light of it,
slew both children, and hurled their bodies into the hall. When Sigmund
and Sinfjötli had at last been captured Siggeir had a great burial-mound
made of stones and turf; and in the midst of the mound there was set a
huge stone slab so that when they were put into it they were separated
and could not pass the slab, but could hear each other. But before the
mound was covered over Signý threw down a bundle of straw to Sinfjötli,
in which was meat. In the darkness of the mound Sinfjötli discovered
that Sigmund's sword was thrust into the meat, and with the sword they
were able to saw through the stone slab.

I have said that there is no old poetry treating this story save for one
half-stanza, and those verses are cited by the author of the Saga at
this point:

ristu af magni

mikla hellu,

Sigmundr, hjörvi,

ok Sinfjötli.

'They cut with strength the great slab, Sigmund and Sinfjötli, with the
sword'.

      When they got out of the mound it was night, and everyone was
asleep; and bringing up wood they set fire to the hall.

40--41   It was now, when Sigmund told Signý to come forth, that in the
Saga she revealed the truth about Sinfjötli -- this is no doubt implied
in stanza 41 of the Lay, 'Son Sinfjötli, Sigmund father!' In her last
words, according to the Saga, before she went back into the fire, she
declared that she had worked so mightily to achieve vengeance for
Völsung that it was impossible for her now to live longer.

# [III](#calibre_link-173){#calibre_link-179} DAUÐI SINFJÖTLA (The Death of Sinfjötli) {#iii-dauði-sinfjötla-the-death-of-sinfjötli .fm}

There intervenes now in the Saga, after the deaths of Signý and Siggeir,
the history of Helgi Hundingsbani, an originally independent figure who
had been connected to the Völsung legend by making him the son of
Sigmund and Borghild (only referred to as 'the Queen' in this section of
the Lay). In this the Saga follows the 'Helgi lays' of the Edda; but in
his poem my father entirely eliminated this accretion, and Helgi is not
mentioned.

The sources for this section of the Lay are the Saga and a short prose
passage in the Edda entitled *Frá dauða Sinfjötla* (Of Sinfjötli's
death): the compiler of the Codex Regius of the Edda evidently wrote
this, in the absence of any verses, in order to conclude the histories
of Sigmund and Sinfjötli. There are no important differences between the
Lay and the old narratives.

1--2   In the Saga Sigmund, returning to his own land, drove out a
usurper who had established himself there.

3    'Grímnir's gift': see
II.[12](#calibre_link-174){#calibre_link-88}--[13](#calibre_link-175){#calibre_link-90}
and [note](#calibre_link-176){#calibre_link-170}.

4    In *Frá dauða Sinfjötla* and in the Saga Sigmund's queen is named
Borghild; in the Lay she is given no name (perhaps because my father
regarded the name Borghild as not original in the legend, but entering
with the 'Helgi' connection). It is not said in the sources that she was
taken in war.

6    In both sources Sinfjötli slew Borghild's brother, not her father;
they were suitors for the same woman. In the Saga it is told that
Borghild wished to have Sinfjötli driven out of the land, and though
Sigmund would not allow this he offered her great riches in atonement;
it was at the funeral-feast for her brother that Sinfjötli was murdered.

7    It is told in the Saga, at the time of the bread-making incident,
when Sinfjötli kneaded in a poisonous snake (see note to
II.[33--34](#calibre_link-177){#calibre_link-172}), that Sigmund could
not be harmed by poison within or without, whereas Sinfjötli could only
withstand poison externally; the same is said in *Frá dauða Sinfjötla*
and in the Prose Edda.

9--10   In both sources Sigmund said to Sinfjötli, when Borghild offered
him drink for the third time: *Láttu grön sía, sonr* ('Strain it through
your beard, my son'). Sigmund was very drunk by then, says the Saga,
'and that is why he said it'.

12  The boatman was Ódin (the verses describing him here are repeated in
varied form in IV.8). This is not said in the old sources. In those
texts the boatman offered to ferry Sigmund across the fjord, but the
boat was too small to take both Sigmund and the body of Sinfjötli, so
the body was taken first. Sigmund walked along the fjord, but the boat
vanished. The Saga tells that Borghild was banished, and died not long
after.

[13](#calibre_link-178){#calibre_link-278}  *in Valhöllu*: the Norse
dative inflexion is retained for metrical reasons.

# IV FŒDDR SIGURÐR (Sigurd born) {#iv-fœddr-sigurðr-sigurd-born .fm}

After the expulsion of Borghild Sigmund took another wife very much
younger than himself (IV.2), and she was the mother of Sigurd. In the
Saga and in *Fra dauða Sinfjötla* her name was Hjördis, the daughter of
King Eylimi; whereas in the Lay she is Sigrlinn. This difference depends
on the view that a transference of names took place: that originally in
the Norse legends Hjördis was the mother of Helgi (see the note to
[III](#calibre_link-179){#calibre_link-173}), while Sigrlinn was
Sigmund's wife and Sigurd's mother. After this transference Sigrlinn
became the mother of Helgi (and so appears in the Eddaic poem
*Helgakviða Hjörvarðssonar*, the Lay of Helgi son of Hjörvarð) and
Hjördis became the mother of Sigurd. In the German poem
*Nibelungenlied*, written about the beginning of the thirteenth century,
Sieglind (Sigrlinn) was King Siegmund's queen, the mother of Siegfried
(Sigurd).

The narrative in this section of the Lay has been changed and reduced
from that in the Saga (to which there is no poetry corresponding in the
Edda). In the Saga, King Lyngvi was a rival to Sigmund for the hand of
Hjördis, but Hjördis rejected him; and it was Lyngvi, not the seven
suitors, 'sons of kings', of the Lay (stanzas 3 and 5), who came with
great force against Sigmund in his own land.

Hjördis accompanied only by a bondwoman was sent into the forest and
remained there during the fierce battle. In the Saga as in the Lay
(stanzas 8--9) Ódin appeared, and Sigmund's sword ('Grímnir's gift', 5)
broke against the upraised spear of the god, and he was slain (on the
significance of Ódin's intervention see the note on the section
*Upphaf,*
pp.[185](#calibre_link-180){#calibre_link-152}--[86](#calibre_link-181){#calibre_link-155}).

As in the Lay, in the Saga Hjördis (Sigrlinn) found Sigmund where he lay
mortally wounded on the battlefield, and he spoke to her, saying that
there was no hope of healing and he did not wish for it, since Ódin had
claimed him (stanza 11); he spoke also of Sigurd, her son unborn, and
told her to keep the shards of the sword, which should be made anew.

Immediately upon Sigmund's death, a further fleet came in to the shore,
commanded, it is said in the Saga, by Alf son of King Hjálprek of
Denmark (stanza 14 of the Lay, where the newcomers are not named).
Seeing this Hjördis ordered her bondwoman to exchange clothes with her,
and to declare that she was the king's daughter. When Alf returned with
the women, still disguised, to his own country the truth of the
subterfuge emerged. Alf promised to marry Hjördis after her child was
born, and so it came about that Sigurd was brought up in King Hjálprek's
household. In the Lay the curious story of the disguising of Sigrlinn
(Hjördis) is reduced to the words 'The bride of Sigmund / as a bondwoman
/ over sounding seas / sadly journeyed'.

11  'wanhope': despair.

[13](#calibre_link-182){#calibre_link-195}  In the Saga Sigmund named
the sword that should be made from the shards *Gramr*; this appears in
the next section of the Lay, V.18.

# V REGIN {#v-regin .fm}

The sources of the story in this section of the Lay are not only the
*Völsunga Saga* but also poems of the Edda on which the Saga drew: the
conclusion of *Reginsmál* (see the note to section I,
p.[188](#calibre_link-183){#calibre_link-158}), and *Fáfnismál*; the
story is also briefly told by Snorri Sturluson in the Prose Edda,
whereby he explains why 'gold' is called in poetry 'the abode of Fáfnir'
and 'Grani's burden'.

There is little, in strictly narrative terms, in this part of the Lay
that is not found in these sources, and in places (notably in the
dialogue between Sigurd and Regin after Fáfnir's death) the tenor of the
verses of *Fáfnismál* is followed; but only here and there do they
correspond at all closely.

The legend of 'Andvari's gold' as told in section I of the Lay does not
extend beyond the departure of the Æsir from Hreidmar's house after the
payment of the ransom for his son Otr. In the note to that section
(p.[190](#calibre_link-184){#calibre_link-162}) I have noticed that
Snorri Sturluson in his version of the Völsung legend began with
'Andvari's gold', whereas in the Saga it is not introduced until much
later, and enters as a story told by Regin himself, son of Hreidmar, to
Sigurd before his attack on the dragon. In this section of the Lay we
reach that point.

After telling that Sigurd grew up in the house of King Hjálprek the Saga
says no more than that Regin became his fosterfather, and that he taught
Sigurd many accomplishments, including a knowledge of runes and many
languages (see stanza 2). Snorri, on the other hand, continues the story
of Hreidmar and the gold of Andvari beyond the point where my father
left it at the end of section I of the Lay.

'What more is to be said of the gold?' Snorri wrote, and then told this
story. Hreidmar took the gold, but his other sons Fáfnir and Regin
claimed for themselves some part of the blood-money paid for their
brother. Hreidmar would give them nothing ('Redgolden rings I will rule
alone', I.15); and Fáfnir and Regin slew their father. Then Regin
demanded that Fáfnir should share the treasure with him equally, but
Fáfnir replied that there was small chance of that, since he had killed
his father for the sake of it; and he told Regin to be gone, or else he
would suffer the same fate as their father.

Then Fáfnir took the helm which Hreidmar had owned, and set it upon his
head -- the helm which is called *œgishjálmr*, Helm of Terror: all
living things fear it. Then Fáfnir going up onto Gnitaheiði made himself
a lair; and he turned himself into a dragon, and laid himself down upon
the gold (as Glaurung did in Nargothrond). But Regin fled away, and came
to King Hjálprek, and became his smith; Sigurd was his fosterson.

Having already told the story of the origin of the hoard, Snorri
continued now with the story of Regin's dealings with Sigurd and the
slaying of Fáfnir. With that story this section of the Lay is concerned;
but before reaching it, as noted earlier (see
pp.[190](#calibre_link-185){#calibre_link-163}--[91](#calibre_link-56){#calibre_link-384}),
my father followed the Saga in introducing here the story of Andvari's
gold (or, in the case of the Lay, reintroducing it) as a story told by
Regin in answer to Sigurd's demanding why he egged him on to slay
Fáfnir. In this second appearance of the story in the Lay verse-lines
are repeated or nearly repeated in a characteristic way (compare
I.[2](#calibre_link-186){#calibre_link-83}--[6](#calibre_link-187){#calibre_link-84},
[9](#calibre_link-188){#calibre_link-85} with
V.[7](#calibre_link-189){#calibre_link-98}--[11](#calibre_link-190){#calibre_link-100}),
but the Æsir are excluded, and Loki is replaced by a nameless 'robber
roving ruthless-handed' (8). In V.12--14, however, Regin's tale now
brings in the slaying of Hreidmar (by Fáfnir -- that Regin had a part in
it is not mentioned, either in the Saga or in the Lay), the strife
between the sons, and the transformation of Fáfnir into a dragon 'on
Gnitaheiði'.

[An important element](#calibre_link-191){#calibre_link-230} in the
story as told in the Saga is entirely absent from this section of the
Lay. After the making of the sword Gram and the acquisition of the horse
Grani, Sigurd declared to Regin that he would not attack Fáfnir until he
had avenged his father; and setting out with a great host and fleet
provided by King Hjálprek he achieved this in a bloody battle in which
he slew King [Lyngvi](#calibre_link-192){#calibre_link-231}. But a form
of the story of Sigurd's revenge appears in the Lay at a later point in
the narrative
(VII.[24](#calibre_link-193){#calibre_link-118}--[29](#calibre_link-194){#calibre_link-119}).

14  Gnitaheiði: this name in Old Norse is *Gnitaheiðr*, of which the
second element is Old Norse *heiðr* 'heath', and it is variously
anglicized as 'Gnitaheid', 'Gnitaheith', or 'Gnitaheath'. In my father's
poems it appears several times but always in the combination 'on
Gnitaheiði'. This may be a retention of the dative case, or it may be a
use of the modern Icelandic form of the word, which is *heiði.*

17--18   It was Sigurd who broke the two swords by striking them on an
anvil; whereupon, according to the Saga, he went to his mother and asked
whether it were true that Sigmund had entrusted to her the fragments of
his sword, and she gave them to him. On the name Gram (*Gramr*) see the
note to IV.[13](#calibre_link-195){#calibre_link-182}.

20  Both Snorri Sturluson and the Saga know of Sigurd's testing of the
sharpness of Gram by its cutting of the tuft of wool when it drifted in
the water onto the sword's edge; but only in the Lay is the river called
the Rhine (*Rín* in Norse).

'sheer': clear.

21  'Now rede me': Now give me counsel.

22--24   Only in the Saga is this story found of how Sigurd came to
possess his grey horse Grani (very frequently named in poems of the
Edda). The old man is once again Ódin (with the description here compare
II.[12](#calibre_link-196){#calibre_link-89},
III.[12](#calibre_link-197){#calibre_link-93},
IV.[8](#calibre_link-198){#calibre_link-95}).

      The name *Busiltarn* is derived from the Saga; the Norse form is
*Busiltjörn*, which was the form first written by my father in the
manuscript of the Lay, later corrected in pencil. The English word
*tarn*, a small lake, is derived from the Norse word; but in the Saga
the Busiltarn is said to be a river, as it clearly is also in the Lay.

      *Sleipnir* was the name of Ódin's eight-legged horse.

25  Gand: Regin's horse is not named elsewhere, but this must be the Old
Norse word *gandr* (contained in 'Gandalf'). Its original or primary
meaning is uncertain, but it has reference to sorcery and magic, both
beings and things, and especially to the staff used in witchcraft; it is
also use of wolves. The word *gandreið* is used of the witches'
nocturnal ride.

      In a lecture on the text of *Fáfnismál* my father remarked on the
huge height of the cliff from which Fáfnir drank as a good detail in the
Saga absent from the poem, since Sigurd thus 'first got a notion of what
he was in for.'

26  'long there lurked he': i.e. Sigurd. In the prose preamble to
*Fáfnismál* in the Codex Regius, as also in the Saga and in Snorri
Sturluson's brief account, Sigurd dug a pit in the path which the dragon
took when he crawled to the water (the 'hollow' of stanzas 26--27, 29,
which is not said to have been made by Sigurd); in the Saga an old man
(Ódin) came to Sigurd while he was digging it and advised him to dig
other trenches to carry off the dragon's blood. On this matter my father
noted in a lecture:

[Ódin](#calibre_link-199){#calibre_link-59} and his advice, however, do
not appear very intelligible, and the intrusion of Ódin has perhaps been
imitated from other places (e.g. the choosing of Grani). The several
pits do not seem of much use, for in any case Sigurd has got to be in
*one*, and it is only in the one in which he is (immediately under the
wound) that the blood is likely to pour down. The Saga version is due to
harping on Ódin, and to an appreciation that the inherited plot did not
paint Sigurd's dragon-slaying (which is later referred to as his great
title to fame) in the best light. It could not be altered in manner, and
therefore the dragon and his poisonousness must be magnified; but it is
not successfully done.

His view was that the original significance of the pit was to enable
Sigurd to escape the blast of flame which passed over his head (cf. 27,
lines
[1](#calibre_link-200){#calibre_link-103}--[3](#calibre_link-201){#calibre_link-104}).

30  In *Fáfnismál*, repeated in the Saga, Sigurd, in answer to Fáfnir's
question, replies that he is called *göfugt dýr,* that is 'noble beast';
and a prose note at this point in the Codex Regius explains that 'Sigurd
concealed his name, because it was believed in ancient times that the
word of a dying man might have great power if he cursed his foe by his
name.' My father observed that this note was 'doubtless perfectly
correct for the original writer of the poem, whose audience were
probably sufficiently of the "ancient times" not to need the
explanation!' He said also that 'the mysterious words *göfugt dýr* are
probably meant to be obscure, even nonsensical', though they might be 'a
riddling way of saying "man".'

33  'glamoured': enchanted.

34  Sigurd's words in this stanza refer to the *œgishjálmr* 'Helm of
Terror' which Heidmar possessed and which Fáfnir took to wear himself:
see p.205, and stanza [14](#calibre_link-202){#calibre_link-101}. At the
words 'hell now seize him!' Fáfnir died.

36--41   My father declared the 'undermeaning' of Regin's 'dark words'
in his preamble to this section of the Lay; and in notes for a lecture
(written in pencil at great speed and now not entirely legible) he
discussed in detail the relationship in this episode between the Saga
and [*Fáfnismál,*](#calibre_link-203){#calibre_link-215} seeking to
determine not only how the writer of the Saga compressed and modified
the verses but why he did so. I give here, with some slight editing, a
part of this discussion, since it well illustrates his critical
treatment of such problems in the Edda.

      He begins with a summary of the dialogue of Regin and Sigurd after
the death of Fáfnir in the Saga (I give references to the stanzas and
lines of the Lay in brackets).

      After the death of Fáfnir Regin came to Sigurd and said: 'You have
won a great victory: your glory from it will be eternal' \[35, 1--4\].
Then Regin is suddenly or affects to be suddenly stricken with disquiet
-- 'he looks upon the ground for a long while' and says with great
emotion 'it is my brother you have killed and I cannot be accounted
innocent of this' \[36, 5--8\]. Sigurd dries his sword on the grass, and
simply replies 'you were a long way off at the time when I tested the
sword' (implying therefore 'innocent enough!') \[37, 1--4\].

      Regin counters with the fact that he made the sword \[37, 5\];
Sigurd counters with 'brave heart is better than sharp sword in battle'
\[38, 3--4\].

      Regin does not rebut this, but repeats again 'with great emotion'
almost his exact words 'You slew my brother, &c.' Then Regin cut out the
dragon's heart, drank the dragon's blood, and asked Sigurd as a sole
boon (no sort of reason for which is given) to roast the heart for him.

      The repetition by Regin of the words 'You killed my brother and I
can hardly be accounted innocent' is *not* a feature of *Fáfnismál.*
Does it serve an artistic purpose -- or is it just accidental, due to
some confusion in the saga-writer's source, or in the handing down of
the saga? It is probably intentional, and perhaps not bad. The
saga-writer has constructed a picture of Regin, already plotting
Sigurd's removal, and trying as it were to justify himself to himself.
Scornfully relieved of any share of responsibility by Sigurd, he
contents himself with mere repetition -- he adheres to his remorse, and
to his 'You slew my brother' ( i.e. his vengeance).

      After such words Sigurd should have needed no *igður* \[the birds
whose voices he could understand, see
[41](#calibre_link-204){#calibre_link-105},
[8](#calibre_link-205){#calibre_link-106} and
[43](#calibre_link-206){#calibre_link-107},
[1](#calibre_link-207){#calibre_link-108}--[3](#calibre_link-208){#calibre_link-109}\].
That the brother of one you had slain was unsafe was learnt almost at
the mother's knee, certainly on the father's lap, in Scandinavia --
especially when he went out of his way to point it out to you.

      There is a curious absence of explanation of the reason why Sigurd
must roast the heart. The real reason is of course that Sigurd must cook
the heart so as to hear the birds. *Fáfnismál* supplies a not
overwhelming but sufficient reason -- *ek mun sofa ganga* \[I shall go
to sleep\] (we may presume, after the potent draught of dragon's blood)
\[39, 5--8, and 40\]. Whether there ever was a better reason --
connected with this remnant of very ancient belief, the eating of flesh
and drinking of blood (of foes especially) to obtain their wisdom and
power \[40, 5--8; 46, 1--4\] we perhaps can no longer
[say](#calibre_link-209){#calibre_link-60}.

      It may be noted that Snorri Sturluson says that Regin expressly
proposed to Sigurd as terms of reconciliation for the slaying of Fáfnir,
that he roast the heart for him.

39  Ridil: Old Norse *Riðill*, Regin's sword; Snorri names it *Refill.*

[42--44](#calibre_link-210){#calibre_link-67}   In *Fáfnismál* there are
seven stanzas ascribed (in a prose linking-passage) to the words of the
birds (of a kind called *igður*, of uncertain meaning) chattering in the
thicket, whose voices Sigurd could at once understand after the blood
from the dragon's heart touched his tongue; but these stanzas are in two
different metres. The poem *Fáfnismál* is not in the verse-form
*fornyrðislag* in which the greater number of the poems of the Edda are
written, but in [*ljóðaháttr.*](#calibre_link-211){#calibre_link-218} In
this metre the stanza falls into two halves of three lines each, of
which the third line in each half usually has three stressed elements
and double (or treble) alliteration within itself. Only three of the
'bird-verses' are in *ljóðaháttr*, the others being in *fornyrðislag*;
and my father argued forcefully and in detail that the *fornyrðislag*
verses come from another poem (see further the note to 49--54).

      The three *ljóðaháttr* verses, he held, are spoken by two birds,
with two main motives selected : gold, fear of treachery, and gold
repeated. This is the basis for these three stanzas in the Lay (though
the suggestion in 42, 5--6 that Sigurd should eat Fáfnir's heart himself
is introduced from one of the other verses); but -- rather oddly -- they
are cast in *ljóðaháttr*, thus apparently marking them out as intrusive,
since the Lay is in *fornyrðislag*.

      To illustrate the form as it appears in Old Norse I give here the
first of the three *ljóðaháttr* verses with a close translation:

Höfði skemra      láti hann inn hára þul

Fara til heljar heðan!

Öllu gulli      þá kná hann einn ráða,

fjölð, því er und Fáfni lá.

      (Shorter by a head, / let him send the grey-haired wizard / hence
to hell! All the gold / then can he possess alone, / the wealth, that
under Fáfnir [lay](#calibre_link-212){#calibre_link-68}.)

[46--48](#calibre_link-213){#calibre_link-217}   [In the
Saga](#calibre_link-214){#calibre_link-241} Sigurd ate some only of the
dragon's heart, and some he set aside. The purpose of this is seen later
in the saga, where it is told that at some time after the wedding of
Sigurd and Gudrún 'Sigurd gave Gudrún some of Fáfnir's heart to eat, and
thereafter she was far more grim than before, and wiser also.' This
element is excluded from the Lay; my father considered it 'a late piece
of machinery to explain Gudrún's tangled psychology.'

      These verses derive from a prose passage in *Fáfnismál*, closely
similar to that in the Saga, which tells that after the death of Regin
Sigurd rode on Grani following the tracks of Fáfnir to his lair, which
was standing open. The doors and door-posts were of iron, as were all
the beams of the house, which was dug down into the earth (46). Sigurd
found there a vast store of gold and filled two great chests with it; he
took the Helm of Terror and a golden mailcoat and many other precious
things, and he loaded them onto Grani; but the horse would not move
until Sigurd leaped upon his back.

49  'their wit he knew not': this very unusual use of the word 'wit'
seems in the context to be equivalent to 'meaning', 'signification'.

49--54   In *Fáfnismàl*, after Sigurd has slain Regin and eaten the
dragon's heart he hears the *igður* again; and these five verses are
again in *fornyrðislag* (see the note to
[42--44](#calibre_link-215){#calibre_link-203}). There is no indication
of how many birds spoke, but the first two verses concern Gudrún, and
the last three concern a Valkyrie on the mount of Hindarfell, surrounded
by fire, sleeping: Ódin stabbed her with the thorn, for she had felled a
warrior against his command. See the note on 54 below.

      My father held that these verses, like the previous 'bird-verses'
in *fornyrðislag,* came from a poem 'which enlarged on the situation,
and probably attempted through the bird-tradition to tell more of the
tale'- a trace of a poem that attempted 'to compress a great deal of the
story into one situation.' While accepting that 'it is useless to
discuss which bird says what', he thought the guess that one bird speaks
the verses concerning Gudrún and a second those about the Valkyrie 'as
good as any'.

      In the Lay he did however retain this second group of
'bird-verses' (or more accurately, composed verses that echo their
meaning), and gave them to a raven (those about the Valkyrie) and a
finch (those about Gudrún), and interlaced them. But he displaced them
to *follow* Sigurd's entry into Fáfnir's lair and his loading Grani with
the treasure that he found there, so that these birds are speaking of
things that may lie ahead for Sigurd as he rides away from Gnitaheiði;
whereas in *Fáfnismál* the prose passage cited in the note to 46--48
follows the second group of 'bird-verses'.

[54](#calibre_link-216){#calibre_link-280}  'her power wielding, /
victory swaying as Valkyrie'. In northern legend and poetry the course
and outcome of battles was governed by Valkyries, demonic warrior-women
sent out as emissaries of Ódin.

      The word *Valkyrja* means 'chooser of the slain': it is given to
them to determine who is to die, and to award victory. Perhaps the most
striking example of this conception is found in the *Hákonarmál,* a poem
composed in the tenth century on the death of King Hákon the Good of
Norway, son of King Harald Fairhair. The poem opens thus:

Göndul and Skögul Gautatýr sent

to choose who of kings of Yngvi's race

should go to Ódin and dwell in Valhöll.

Göndul and Skögul are Valkyries; Gautatýr is a name of Ódin. In the poem
King Hákon is pictured sitting on the ground with his shield rent and
his mailshirt gashed, listening to the words of the Valkyries.

Then said Göndul, as she leant on the shaft of her spear,

'Now will the might of the Gods grow greater,

since they have summoned Hákon with a great host

      to their dwellings.'

The king heard what the Valkyries were saying

as they sat on their horses, thoughtful their

      countenance,

with helms on their heads and their shields held

      before them.

Then Hákon speaks to the Valkyrie named Skögul:

'Why have you decided the battle thus, Geirskögul?

We have deserved victory of the Gods.'

'We have brought it about,' said Skögul, 'that you

      have held the field, and your foes have fled

      away.

Now we must ride to the green homes of the Gods, to tell to Ódin that a
mighty king is coming to him.'

# VI BRYNHILDR {#vi-brynhildr .fm}

In the note to V. [46--48](#calibre_link-217){#calibre_link-213} I have
given the content of the prose passage provided in the Codex Regius
describing how Sigurd entered Fáfnir's lair and took from it the great
treasure of gold, which he loaded in chests on his horse Grani. This
passage is treated in editions of the Edda as the conclusion of the poem
*Fáfnismál*; but in fact it continues without break or new title into
the story of Sigurd's encounter with the Valkyrie asleep on Hindarfell,
and this part is treated as the prose introduction to a strange work to
which the name *Sigrdrífumál* is given.

This latter part of the prose passage, which is found in closely similar
form in the Saga, tells that Sigurd rode up onto Hindarfell
(*Hindarfjall* ) and turned south. On the mountain he saw a great light,
as of a fire burning, and it lit up the sky; and when he came to it
there stood a shield-wall (*skjaldborg*), and above it a banner. Sigurd
went in to the *skjaldborg*, and saw a man there lying asleep, with all
his armour and weapons. First he took the helmet from his head; and then
he saw that it was a woman. The hauberk was so tight that it seemed to
have grown into the flesh. Then with his sword Gram he cut the hauberk
from the neck and along both sleeves, and he took the hauberk off her;
and she woke, and sat up, and saw Sigurd.

It will be seen that stanzas 2--4 of the Lay follow the content of this
prose passage quite closely, with the 'wall of woven shields', the
standard, and 'her corslet fast as on flesh growing'; but the leaping of
the flames by Grani is an addition in the Lay, taken from Sigurd's
second visit to Brynhild, when he came to her in Gunnar's shape. On the
occasion of his first coming to her the sources say no more than that he
'went in' to the *skjaldborg.* This word, which is found both in the
Saga and in the prose passage in the Edda, is often interpreted to mean
here a tower, or a fortress, but my father referred in other writing to
Brynhild having 'surrounded herself with a wall of flame'.

With the Valkyrie's first words to Sigurd the verses of the so-called
*Sigrdrífumál* begin:

Hvat beit brynju?

Hvi brá ek svefni?

Hverr feldi af mér

fölvar nauðir?

What bit the mail?

How am I roused from sleep?

Who has cast down from me

the pale bonds?

Then in this opening verse Sigurd replied that the son of Sigmund with
the sword of Sigurd had cut her free. This verse is in *fornyrðislag*,
but the poem that follows is in *ljóðaháttr* (see note to
V.[42--44](#calibre_link-218){#calibre_link-211}), with a few stanzas in
*fornyrðislag*. The Valkyrie celebrates her awakening in verse that is
echoed in the Lay in stanzas 5--6, and then says:

Long did I sleep,    long was I cast in sleep,

long are the ills of men!

Ódin ordained it    that I could not break

the runes of slumber.

There follows then in the Codex Regius manuscript another prose passage
beginning 'She named herself Sigrdrífa, and she was a Valkyrie'; she
told Sigurd that two kings had fought, that Ódin had promised victory to
one of them, but the Valkyrie had felled him in the battle. In
retribution for this 'Ódin stabbed her with the sleep-thorn' (as in the
words of the Raven in V.[52](#calibre_link-219){#calibre_link-111}), and
said that never again should she win victory in battle, but that she
should wed. 'And I said to Ódin that in return I made a vow that I would
marry no man who knew fear' (the same words are used in the Saga). In
the version of Snorri Sturluson she vowed to wed none but the man who
should dare to ride through the fire that surrounded her dwelling. In
her oath in the Lay (VI.[8](#calibre_link-220){#calibre_link-114}) the
original text had 'world's renown': I have adopted the late change to
'chosen' and capitalized the 'w'.

The name Sigrdríf or Sigrdrífa of the sleeping Valkyrie has given rise
to a great deal of speculative discussion. In the last of the five
'bird-verses' that constitute the end of *Fáfnismál* (and which are
represented in the Lay by stanzas
V.[50](#calibre_link-221){#calibre_link-110}--[54](#calibre_link-222){#calibre_link-112})
there is a reference to 'the sleep of Sigrdríf', and in the prose
passage just cited she is twice named Sigrdrífa. It has been supposed
that this name is unreal, a misunderstanding on the part of the compiler
of the Codex Regius, who took the word in the *Fáfnismál* verse to be a
proper name, whereas it is in fact a descriptive term of a Valkyrie,
perhaps meaning 'giver of victory', used of Brynhild. In the Saga the
Valkyrie on Hindarfell is called Brynhild; while Snorri Sturluson says
that she named herself Hildr (which means 'battle'), but adds that 'she
is called Brynhild, and she was a Valkyrie'.

On the other hand, it has been held that 'Sigrdrífa' and 'Brynhild' were
originally two distinct beings who came later to be identified; and thus
'Sigrdrífa' becomes an element in the most intractable problem of the
Norse Völsung legend, the treatment in the sources of Brynhild in two
altogether distinct and incompatible ways. The Lay itself provides no
evidence of my father's view of the name 'Sigrdrífa', which does not
occur in it. See further the Note on Brynhild,
p.[243](#calibre_link-223){#calibre_link-291}.

The prose passage in the Codex Regius ends, after the Valkyrie's words
to Sigurd concerning her vow, by his asking her 'to teach him wisdom',
and there follows a stanza in which Brynhild brings him ale brewed with
good spells and *gamanrúna*, which may be translated as 'joyful runes'
or 'gladness runes'. On this is founded stanza 12 in the Lay: the last
lines of this, 'rimmed with runes of running laughter', suggest that my
father was thinking of runes graven on the cup.

Of the *Sigrdrífumál* he remarked: 'This poem, more than almost any
other in the Edda, is a composite thing of more or less accidental
growth, and not as one poet left it'; and following the verse about the
bringing of ale there is a long series of verses concerned with
rune-lore (the magical use of runes, for example victory-runes,
speech-runes, wave-runes, birth-runes, and the places on which they
should be carved). 'It does not need much persuasion', he said, to
'convince one that all this stuff is *accretion.* It has no connection
with Sigurd's later life. Its cause is *gamanrúna*. It is very
interesting and important, but it does not concern the Völsungs.'

It is remarkable that the author of the *Völsunga Saga* included all
these verses of runic lore, as verses, in his text. My father saw in
this a good example of the saga-writer's method: '[Nearly
all](#calibre_link-224){#calibre_link-61} of this has no point or
significance for the tale, is probably a late addition, is not fit for
prose; here was a chance if anywhere for omission, if the compiler had
been inspired with a truly artistic purpose.'

There is naturally no vestige of these verses in the Lay. In the Eddaic
poem the Valkyrie now gave to Sigurd a series of eleven counsels. This
element appears, though in greatly reduced form, in the Lay (stanzas
15--16); my father believed them to be, unlike the rune-lore verses,
part of the original poem, since they can for the most part be related
to Sigurd's story.

No more is to be learned from the *Sigrdrífumál* about the first meeting
of Sigurd and the Valkyrie beyond her counsels to him, for no more of
the poem is preserved: it is here that the '[great
lacuna](#calibre_link-225){#calibre_link-250}' of the Poetic Edda
begins. This is the calamitous loss from the Codex Regius of a whole
gathering, probably of eight leaves (see
p.[28](#calibre_link-226){#calibre_link-41}): my father guessed that
those leaves contained perhaps 200--300 stanzas. For this vitally
important part of the Völsung legend there is no Eddaic poetry, except
for four *fornyrðislag* stanzas quoted in the *Völsunga Saga*; and thus
from this point the sources are the Saga and the very brief version in
Snorri Sturluson's Prose Edda. The lacuna ends, in terms of the Lay, at
stanza 46 in its last section.

My father believed that the troth-plighting of Sigurd and Brynhild
(stanza 19), which is found in the Saga immediately after a prose
paraphrase of the counsels, derived from the lost conclusion of the
*Sigrdrífumál.*

20--23   The Saga, after the words 'and this they swore to each other
with oaths', continues at once 'Now Sigurd rides away'. The conclusion
of this section of the Lay, referred to in the prose preamble that
precedes it ('They depart together, but the pride of Brynhild causes her
to bid Sigurd depart and come back to her only when he has won all men's
honour, and a kingdom'), is a development altogether peculiar to the
Lay.

# VII GUÐRÚN {#vii-guðrún .fm}

When in the Lay Sigurd parted from Brynhild his journey took him by
intention to the land of the Gjúkings, as is seen from the words (VI.23)
'green ran the roads / that Grani strode' together with those of the
Finch (V.51) 'Green run the roads / to Gjúki's land'. So it is also in
Snorri's greatly condensed account.

In the Saga, on the other hand, he rode from Hindarfell until he came to
the house of a great lord named Heimir. He was married to Brynhild's
sister Bekkhild, who stayed at home and did fine needlework, whereas
Brynhild wore helmet and hauberk and went to battle (hence their names,
Norse *bekkr* 'bench', of the long seats in an old Scandinavian hall,
and *brynja* 'hauberk, coat of mail'). Sigurd stayed in that house for a
long time in high honour.

[We](#calibre_link-227){#calibre_link-242} are then told that Brynhild
was Heimir's foster-daughter, and that she had come back to his house
and was living apart and working on a tapestry that showed the deeds of
Sigurd, the slaying of the dragon, and the taking of the treasure. One
day Sigurd's hawk flew up to a high tower and settled by a window.
Sigurd climbed up after it, and saw within a woman of great beauty
working on a tapestry of his deeds, and he knew that it was Brynhild.

On the next day he went to her, and at the end of a strange conversation
she said to him: 'It is not fated that we should dwell together; I am a
shield-maiden and I wear a helmet among the warrior-kings. To them I
give aid in battle; and battle is not hateful to me.' But when Sigurd
said that if this were so 'the pain that lies therein is harder to bear
than a sharp sword' Brynhild replied that she would muster men for
battle, 'but you will wed Gudrún, Gjúki's daughter.' 'No king's daughter
shall beguile me,' said Sigurd; 'I am not double-hearted; and I swear by
the gods that I shall have you or no woman else.' Then Brynhild spoke in
the same way; and [Sigurd](#calibre_link-228){#calibre_link-243} gave
her a gold ring, *ok svörðu nú eiða af nýju,* 'and they renewed their
oaths'. Then Sigurd left her, and the chapter in the Saga ends.

Brynhild is here the daughter of King Budli (*Buðli*) and the sister of
Atli (Attila), and Snorri says the same.

Of this extraordinary development in the story of Sigurd and Brynhild
there is no trace in the Lay; but I postpone discussion of the treatment
of this part of the legend by the author of the Saga to the end of my
commentary on the Lay (Note on Brynhild,
p.[241](#calibre_link-229){#calibre_link-282}).

The Saga now turns to the kingdom of Gjúki, which lay 'south of the
Rhine', to his wife Grímhild (described as a sorceress, and of a grim
disposition), his three sons Gunnar, Högni, and Gotthorm, and his
daughter Gudrún (*Guðrún*). It is told that one day Gudrún spoke to one
of her waiting-women and told her that she was downcast because of a
dream.

With Gudrún's dream the Lay takes up at the beginning of section VII,
but my father treated this episode very differently from the form it has
in the Saga. In the latter, Gudrún dreamt that she had in her hand a
marvellous hawk with golden feathers: she cared for nothing more than
that hawk, and she would rather lose all her wealth than lose it. The
woman interpreted the dream to mean that some king's son would come to
ask for Gudrún; he would be a fine man and she would greatly love him.
Then Gudrún said: 'It grieves me that I do not know who he is; but let
us go to seek Brynhild, for she will know.'

And so they did. Gudrún and her attendants came to Brynhild's hall,
which was all adorned with gold and stood on a hill. There Gudrún
related to Brynhild her dream: but not the dream that she had spoken
about before, for now she told of the great stag with golden hair which
appears in the Lay. But in his poem (VII.1--5) my father combined and
interwove the two episodes, rejecting the dream of the hawk; and the
interpreter of Gudrún's dream(s) is neither the waiting-woman nor
Brynhild, but Grímhild, her mother. The dream of the stag in the Lay
(VII.2--4) derives in content from the Saga, but there is an important
difference. In the Saga Gudrún says to Brynhild that it was 'you' who
shot down the stag at her feet, and it was 'you' who gave her a wolf-cub
which spattered her with her brothers' blood; whereas in the Lay it is
'a woman wildly / on the wind riding' who brought down the golden hart,
and it was an unidentified 'they' who gave her the wolf.

In the Saga, when Gudrún has recounted her dream, Brynhild says to her:
'I will explain it as it will come to pass. Sigurd, whom I chose to be
my husband, will come to you. Grímhild will give him mead that is
drugged, which will bring great affliction to us all. You will have him,
but you will soon lose him; then you will be wedded to King Atli. You
will lose your brothers, and then you will slay Atli.' Then Gudrún
expressed her sense of 'overwhelming sorrow' to know such things, and
returned to her father's house.

It may be that this episode was derived by the writer of the Saga from a
poem in which the substance of the story was told prophetically, as is
seen elsewhere in the Edda; but as a simple element in the narrative,
recording Brynhild's power of foretelling, it is grotesque. As my father
observed, 'Foreknowledge is a dangerous element in a tale.' In the Lay
he of course got rid in its entirety of Gudrún's visit to Brynhild, and
Grímhild offers no interpretation of the dream, but tries to calm her
with soothing words about the weather (as does the waiting-woman in the
Saga) and the idea that 'dreams oft token / the dark by light, / good by
evil'. Gone too are Brynhild's sister Bekkhild; Atli son of Budli
likewise disappears as Brynhild's brother. Where Brynhild dwelt after
she parted from Sigurd we are not told: 'to her land she turned / lonely
shining', 'to her land she came, / long the waiting' (VI.23). At the
beginning of VIII she is seen in her courts of 'wealth and splendour',
awaiting Sigurd (1--2).

In the Saga, as in the Lay, Sigurd now arrives at King Gjúki's halls,
riding on Grani with his treasure. He was received with honour; and he
rode abroad with Gunnar and Högni and was foremost among them. Grímhild
observed how deeply he loved Brynhild, and how much he spoke of her, but
she thought how fine a thing it would be if he, with his great qualities
and his vast riches, should marry Gudrún and remain among them. She
prepared therefore a potion and gave it to Sigurd to drink; and with
that drink he lost all memory of Brynhild.

In the Lay, at the feast held on his arrival, a new element enters in
the songs sung to the harp by Gunnar (of war between the Goths and the
Huns, 14--15), and by Sigurd (of Fáfnir and the golden hoard, and of
Brynhild on Hindarfell, 16--18); and there is an account of a campaign
led by Sigurd to the old land of the Völsungs in vengeance for the death
of Sigmund (24--29). In the Saga this took place far earlier, and was
carried out with the aid of King Hjálprek (see
pp.[205](#calibre_link-230){#calibre_link-191}--[6](#calibre_link-231){#calibre_link-192}),
whereas in the Lay he was aided by the Gjúkings. Ódin appears here in
the Lay as he does in the Saga, but his rôle is altogether different. In
the Saga (deriving from verses of *Reginsmál*) the ships were caught in
a great storm, but Ódin stood on a headland and called to them, and when
they took him on board the storm abated. In the Lay (28--29) he appears
at the end of the fighting, accosting Sigurd at the old house of
Völsung, now roofless and the great tree that upheld it dead, to warn
him that his fate does not lie in the land of his ancestors; but Ódin
says 'Now king thou art / of kings begotten, / a bride calls thee / over
billowing seas', and after his return Sigurd recalls the words of
Brynhild, 'a queen was I once, / and a king shall wed' (VI.22, VII.35).

8    'Niflung land, Niflung lord', and 12 'Niflungs': on the name
*Niflungar* Snorri Sturluson was specific: *Gjúkingar, þeir eru ok
kallaðir Niflungar,* ' the Gjúkings, who are also called Niflungs'. In
this commentary, conceived fairly strictly as an elucidation of the
treatment of the Norse Völsung legend in my father's Lay, it is
unnecessary to enter even cursorily into the deep matter of origins that
lies behind the name Niflungs (German *Nibelungen,* Nibelungs); but
something is said of this in Appendix A,
pp.[356](#calibre_link-232){#calibre_link-355}--[63](#calibre_link-233){#calibre_link-358}.

[14](#calibre_link-234){#calibre_link-320}  [Mirkwood](#calibre_link-235){#calibre_link-366}:
Not occurring in the Saga, the Norse name *Myrkviðr,* Anglicized as
'Mirkwood', was used of a dark boundary-forest, separating peoples, and
is found in poems of the Edda in different applications; but it seems
probable that in its origin it represented a memory in heroic legend of
the great forest that divided the land of the Goths from the land of the
Huns far off in the south and east. This is what the name means in the
Eddaic poem *Atlakviða*, the Lay of Atli (Attila), whence its appearance
here in the Lay.

      Danpar: Like Mirkwood, this name is not found in the Saga, but
occurs in *Atlakviða* and elsewhere in Old Norse poetry (see further the
note to stanza 86 in the Lay of Gudrún). It is a survival of the Gothic
name of the Russian river
[Dnieper](#calibre_link-236){#calibre_link-367}.

[15](#calibre_link-237){#calibre_link-321}  '[Borgund
lords](#calibre_link-238){#calibre_link-344}': [This
expression](#calibre_link-239){#calibre_link-332} occurs again in stanza
20. My father derived it from the notable words in a verse of the
*Atlakviða*, where Gunnar is called *vin Borgunda,* lord of the
Burgundians. Nowhere else in Norse is Gunnar recognised as a Burgundian,
nor is the word found as the name of a people; but very remarkably the
same expression is found in one of the fragments of the Old English poem
*Waldere*, where Guðhere is called *wine Burgenda.* Both the Old Norse
*Gunnarr* and the Old English *Guðhere* are descended from the name of
the historical Burgundian king Gundahari, who was killed by the Huns in
the year 437. For an account of the historical origins of the Gjúkings
see Appendix A.

      Budli's brother: in the Saga the killing of the brother of King
Budli, father of Atli and Brynhild, by the Gjúkings is mentioned at a
later point in the narrative.

28  'and blind his eye': Ódin had only one eye: according to the myth
that he gave up one of his eyes as a pledge in order to gain a drink
from the spring of Mímir, the water of wisdom at the root of the Tree of
the World.

38  It is not said in the Lay as it is in the Saga that after drinking
Grímhild's potion Sigurd lost all memory of Brynhild: 'he drained it
laughing, / then sat unsmiling'; but the meaning is clear from
IX.[4](#calibre_link-240){#calibre_link-127}.

39  'glamoured': a word used in V.33 and 47: 'enchanted', in the sense
of being brought under a spell.

# VIII SVIKIN BRYNHILDR (Brynhild Betrayed) {#viii-svikin-brynhildr-brynhild-betrayed .fm}

In the Saga the wedding of Sigurd to Gudrún follows, and the swearing of
brotherhood between Sigurd and the sons of Gjúki (stanzas 7--10 in the
Lay); it is said that by this time he had dwelt among the Gjúkings for
two and a half years. After they were wedded Sigurd gave Gudrún some of
Fáfnir's heart to eat: see the note to
V.[46--48](#calibre_link-241){#calibre_link-214}. They had a son named
Sigmund.

The coming of Ódin to Brynhild among the suitor kings (2--5) is peculiar
to the Lay. It seems (stanza 6) that it was only after his coming that
the fire rose about her hall, and that Brynhild conceived it as a
barrier against all comers save Sigurd. The description of the fire in
the Lay resembles that in VI.2, when on Hindarfell Sigurd saw Brynhild's
fire as a 'fence of lightning' that 'high to heavenward / hissed and
wavered'.

In the Saga there follows Grímhild's counselling of Gunnar to woo
Brynhild (stanzas 12--17 in the Lay); and Sigurd is said to have been as
eager for the match as were Gjúki and his sons. But they rode first to
King Budli, Brynhild's father, to gain his assent before they went to
the hall of Heimir, Brynhild's fosterfather (see
p.[223](#calibre_link-242){#calibre_link-227}). Heimir said that her
hall was not far off, and that he thought that she would only marry the
man who would ride through the fire that blazed about it. In the Lay
Budli and Heimir are of course eliminated.

The story in the Saga of the refusal of Gunnar's horse to enter the
fire, the loan of Grani, the refusal of Grani to bear Gunnar, and the
shape-changing taught them by Grímhild, is followed in the Lay; the Saga
here quotes two stanzas from an unknown poem concerning the sudden
roaring of the fire and the trembling of the earth as Sigurd entered it,
and its sinking down again (followed in stanzas 25--26 in the Lay).

The substance of the dialogue between Sigurd and Brynhild (28--31) is
mostly derived from the Saga: her doubt as to how to answer, his promise
of a great bride-price, her demand that he slay all who had been her
suitors (stanza 30, lines 3--4), and his reminder of her oath. It is
strongly implied in stanza 31 that Brynhild had vowed to wed none but
the man who dared to pass through the fire, and at this point in the
Saga Sigurd explicitly reminds her that she has sworn to go with the man
who should do so. With this is to be compared Brynhild's words to Sigurd
on Hindarfell (VI.8):

An oath I uttered

for ever lasting,

to wed but one,

the World's chosen.

We must understand that in Brynhild's thought the one who rides the fire
must be 'the World's chosen', and that is Sigurd; but it is Gunnar, and
she is 'sore troubled', and in her doubt likened to a swan 'on swaying
seas'.

In the Saga Sigurd in Gunnar's form remained three nights with Brynhild,
and they slept in the same bed; but he laid the sword Gram between them,
and when she asked him why he did so, he replied that it was fated that
he should hold his bridal thus, or else get his death.

An important distinction between the Saga and the Lay lies in what is
said of the exchange of rings. In the Saga it was told (see
p.[223](#calibre_link-243){#calibre_link-228}) that at their meeting in
Heimir's halls 'Sigurd gave her a gold ring', though nothing more is
said of it, and now it is said that at his departure '[he took from
her](#calibre_link-244){#calibre_link-261} the ring Andvaranaut that he
had given her, and gave her another ring from Fáfnir's hoard'. In the
Lay (33), on the other hand, he took from her while she slept the ring
that she wore on her finger and put Andvaranaut in its place. In this
the Lay follows Snorri's account: 'in the morning he gave Brynhild as
bridal gift the same gold ring which Loki had taken from Andvari, and
took another ring from her hand for remembrance'. See further
IX.[9](#calibre_link-245){#calibre_link-129}--[10](#calibre_link-246){#calibre_link-130}
and [note](#calibre_link-247){#calibre_link-260}.

After this, in the Saga, Sigurd [rode
back](#calibre_link-248){#calibre_link-290} through the fire, and he and
Gunnar changed into their own semblances; but Brynhild went back to her
fosterfather Heimir and told him what had happened, and of her doubt:
'He rode through my flickering fire . . . and he said that he was named
Gunnar; but I said that only Sigurd would do that, to whom I swore faith
on the mountain.' Heimir said that things must rest as they were; and
she said 'Áslaug, Sigurd's daughter and mine, shall be brought up here
with you'. My father regarded the introduction of Áslaug as a 'grievous
damage' to the story (and see
p.[242](#calibre_link-249){#calibre_link-284}, (6)). It was
unquestionably an invention made in order to link together Sigurd and
Brynhild and the most celebrated viking of legend, Ragnar Loðbrók: in
the largely fabulous *Ragnars Saga* Áslaug is said to be one of his
wives and the mother of several of his numerous viking sons.

4 'dreed' : submitted to, endured.

'choosing not the slain': a reference to Brynhild as Valkyrie.

17  In line 6 'thee' refers to Gunnar; in line 8 'you' is plural and
refers to Gunnar and Sigurd.

20  'rowel': a spiked revolving disc at the end of a spur.

29  'meted': allotted, apportioned.

# IX DEILD (Strife) {#ix-deild-strife .fm}

As I have said (p.[221](#calibre_link-250){#calibre_link-225}), the
great lacuna in the Codex Regius caused the loss of all ancient Norse
poetry for the central part of the legend of Sigurd. The manuscript does
not take up again until near the end of a lay of Sigurd which is known
as the *Brot (af Sigurðarkviðu),* the 'Fragment' (of a lay of Sigurd).
Only some 20 stanzas of this poem are preserved, and these come late in
the development of the tragedy, after 'the quarrel of the queens', as
they washed their hair in the waters of the Rhine. My father noted that
it can be seen from what is left of the *Brot* that there has been lost
the greater part of 'an old and very vigorous poem -- for example the
supreme vigour and economical force of

*Mér hefir Sigurðr*

*selda eiða,*

*eiða selda,*

*alla logna . . .*'

[These words](#calibre_link-251){#calibre_link-272} of Gunnar's come
almost at the beginning of the preserved part of the *Brot*, and are
closely echoed in the Lay,
IX.[46](#calibre_link-252){#calibre_link-135}.

What was contained in the pages removed from the Codex Regius has been
much discussed. An important factor is the existence in the manuscript
of a poem named *Sigurðarkviða en skamma,* 'the Short Lay of Sigurd';
but this is 71 stanzas long -- almost the longest of all the heroic lays
of the Edda. This title must have been used in contrast to something
else, very probably in the same collection. My father's view of the
matter was closely argued but tentatively expressed; as he said, 'one
must remember that all this sort of thing (like the dating of individual
poems, on which each scholar with equal certitude seems to give a
different opinion) is very "guessy" and dubious.' [He
thought](#calibre_link-253){#calibre_link-283} it possible that there
were three Sigurd lays: [*Sigurðarkviða en
skamma,*](#calibre_link-254){#calibre_link-294} preserved in the Codex
Regius; [*Sigurðarkviða en
meiri,*](#calibre_link-255){#calibre_link-270} 'the Greater
([Longer](#calibre_link-256){#calibre_link-374}) Lay of Sigurd', which
is [totally lost](#calibre_link-257){#calibre_link-299}; and 'an
ancient, terse, poem, concentrated chiefly on the Brynhild tragedy', of
which the conclusion is preserved in the *Brot.*
([To](#calibre_link-258){#calibre_link-144} his own poem he gave an
[alternative title](#calibre_link-259){#calibre_link-30}, written under
the primary title on the first page of the manuscript of the Lay,
*Sigurðarkviða en mesta,* 'the Longest Lay of Sigurd', for in it the
whole history is told.)

However this may be, for almost all the narrative from Sigurd's coming
to the court of the Burgundians (Niflungs, Gjúkings) to the beginning of
the *Brot* (Gunnar's declaration to Högni that Sigurd had broken his
oaths) we are largely dependent on the *Völsunga Saga,* for Snorri tells
the story with great brevity, and the preserved Sigurd lay,
*Sigurðarkviða en skamma*, is chiefly concerned with the deaths of
Sigurd and Brynhild. In my father's view, it can be assumed that in so
far as the relevant chapters of the Saga had an Eddaic basis they
depended on poetry very closely similar to that carried away in the
lacuna of the Codex Regius.

Thus, to recapitulate, Eddaic poetry concerning the deaths of Sigurd and
Brynhild is preserved, most importantly, in *Sigurðarkviða en skamma,*
and in the conclusion (the *Brot* or Fragment) of another Sigurd lay.
They were used, of course, by the writer of the Saga, and my father wove
his version from these sources independently.

3--4   At the end of the feast of the bridal of Gunnar and Brynhild,
according to the Saga, Sigurd remembered all his oaths to Brynhild, but
he made no sign. There is no suggestion in the Saga of what is implied
in stanza 3.

6--11   The quarrel between Brynhild and Gudrún when they washed their
hair in the river follows the story as told by Snorri Sturluson and in
the Saga, except in the matter of the rings that revealed the truth to
Brynhild: see the note to 9--10. A long dialogue between Brynhild and
Gudrún which follows in the Saga is eliminated in the Lay.

[9--10](#calibre_link-260){#calibre_link-247} As I have noted earlier
(p.[231](#calibre_link-261){#calibre_link-244}), in the Saga Sigurd in
Gunnar's form took the ring Andvaranaut from Brynhild and gave her
another from Fáfnir's hoard, whereas in the Lay, following Snorri
Sturluson, this is reversed. So here, in Snorri's words: 'Gudrún
laughed, and said: "You think that it was Gunnar who rode through the
flickering fire? But I think that he who slept with you was the one who
gave me this gold ring; but the gold ring which you wear on your hand
and which you received as a wedding gift is called Andvaranaut; and I do
not think that Gunnar got it on Gnitaheiði."' On Gnitaheiði see
V.[14](#calibre_link-262){#calibre_link-102}.

12--20   Brynhild's withdrawal to her bedchamber in black silence, lying
like one dead, and her words with Gunnar when he came to her, derive in
a general way from the Saga; but the long reproach that in the Saga she
casts at him differs greatly from the equivalent passage in the Lay
(stanzas 15--19). In the Saga she began, when at last prevailed upon by
Gunnar to speak, by asking him: 'What have you done with the ring I gave
you, which king Budli gave me at our last parting, when you Gjúkings
came to him and vowed to harry and burn unless you gained me?' Then she
said that Budli had given her two choices, to wed as he wished, or to
lose all her wealth and his favour; and seeing that she could not strive
with him she promised to wed the one who would ride through her fire on
the horse Grani with Fáfnir's hoard. This further confusion arising from
the 'doubled' view of Brynhild is once again eliminated in the Lay, as
are other details of the story in the Saga: the fettering of Brynhild by
Högni after her threat to kill Gunnar, and her tearing of her tapestry
apart.

20  Lines 3--4: In the Saga Brynhild ordered the door of her chamber to
be set open so that her lamentations could be heard far off.

21--34   The dialogue between Sigurd and Brynhild derives most of its
elements from that in the Saga, but in the Lay it is much more
compressed and coherent. In the Saga Brynhild does not curse Gudrún, and
Sigurd does not say that he would even be willing to kill Gunnar.

26  In the Saga Brynhild said that she wondered at the man who came into
her hall, and she thought that she recognised Sigurd's eyes, but she
could not see clearly because 'her fortune was veiled'.

27  Lines 7--8: see VIII.33 lines
[3](#calibre_link-263){#calibre_link-123}--[4](#calibre_link-264){#calibre_link-124}
and IX.10 lines
[5](#calibre_link-265){#calibre_link-131}--[8](#calibre_link-266){#calibre_link-132}.

[29](#calibre_link-267){#calibre_link-333}  Lines 1, 3: 'Woe worth': A
curse upon; 'Woe worth the while': A curse upon the time. Again in
stanzas 37, 50.

30  Lines 7--8: 'I sat unsmiling, no sign making': see
IX.[3](#calibre_link-268){#calibre_link-126}--[4](#calibre_link-269){#calibre_link-128}.

35  Here in the Saga the writer quoted a verse from a poem that he
called *Sigurðarkviða*, in which it is said that Sigurd's grief was so
great that the links of his mailshirt snapped. Of this verse my father
remarked that he did not believe it to come from the same hand as the
*Brot,* and so attributed it to the otherwise wholly lost
*'Sigurðarkviða en meiri'* (see
p.[234](#calibre_link-270){#calibre_link-255}). In the Lay the
extravagant idea is characteristically reduced.

39--40   Stanzas 39 lines 5--8 and 40 lines 1--4 echo
VIII.[30](#calibre_link-271){#calibre_link-122}.

39--50   Elements in the arrangement of dialogue are altered in the Lay,
and the development set in a clearer light and sharper focus. Brynhild's
lie to Gunnar, that Sigurd had possessed her (43), leads to his words to
Högni (46): 'oaths he swore me, all belied them', which are almost the
first words of the *Brot* (see
p.[233](#calibre_link-272){#calibre_link-251}).

[51--64](#calibre_link-273){#calibre_link-293}   [There](#calibre_link-274){#calibre_link-324}
were two distinct versions of the story of the murder of Sigurd, each
represented in poems of the Edda. In the *Brot* he was slain out of
doors, and Högni had a part in it (despite his perception that Brynhild
had lied to Gunnar, which is seen in a verse of the *Brot* that is
echoed in stanza 47 of the Lay); but in *Sigurðarkviða en skamma* and
other poems he was slain by Gotthorm in his bed (see further
pp.[243](#calibre_link-275){#calibre_link-292}--[44](#calibre_link-276){#calibre_link-295}).
The compiler of the Codex Regius put in a prose note about this at the
end of the *Brot*:

In this poem is told of the death of Sigurd, and here the story is that
they slew him out of doors; but some say that they slew him within
doors, in his bed, sleeping. But German men say that they slew him out
in the forest; and so also it is told in *Guðrúnarkviða en forna* (the
Old Lay of Gudrún) that Sigurd and the sons of Gjúki had ridden to the
council place when he was slain. But all are agreed in this, that they
broke their troth to him, and fell upon him when he was lying down and
unprepared.

      [The Saga](#calibre_link-277){#calibre_link-296} follows the story
of his death as he slept in the house, and the Lay likewise adopts this
version, but introduces (54--57) a brief episode in which Gotthorm
encountered Sigurd as he hunted in the forest, and hailed him abusively
-- perhaps to give colour to what is said in the Saga, and repeated in
stanzas 52--3 -- that the diet of wolf and snake on which he was fed
made him exceedingly bold and fierce.

51  Grímhild's offspring: the author of the Saga regarded Gotthorm
(*Gottormr*) as a full brother of Gunnar and Högni, and had Gunnar say
that they should persuade Gotthorm to do the deed, because he was young
and had sworn no oath. My father here followed a tradition, found in the
poem *Hyndluljóð*, that Gotthorm was the half-brother of Gunnar and
Högni, being 'Grímhild's offspring'; Snorri Sturluson, also, says that
Gotthorm was Gjúki's stepson.

58--59   In the Saga, Gotthorm went twice to Sigurd's chamber in the
morning, but Sigurd looked at him, and Gotthorm dared not attack him on
account of his piercing gaze; when he came the third time Sigurd was
asleep.

67--69   These stanzas echo the concluding verses of the *Brot*, which
does not extend to the death of Brynhild.

73  In the Saga, following *Sigurðarkviða en skamma,* Brynhild dying
foretold all the later history of Gudrún; this has no place in the Lay.

77  Lines 5--7 are an exact repetition of lines 3--5 in III.13, where
the 'son's son' is Sinfjötli, except that the reading there is
*Völsung*, not *Völsungs.* The plural form here is clear, but may
nonetheless be erroneous. On the form *Valhöllu* see the
[note](#calibre_link-278){#calibre_link-178} to III.13.

77--82   The concluding passage is of course peculiar to the Lay. With
stanzas 79--81 cf. *Upphaf*, the opening section of the Lay, stanzas 11,
14--15.

[77--78](#calibre_link-279){#calibre_link-154}   In a fragmentary poem
of the tenth century on the death of the ferocious Eirik Blood-axe, son
of King Harold Fairhair and brother of Hákon the Good (see the note on
V.[54](#calibre_link-280){#calibre_link-216}) there is a remarkable
image of the coming of an 'Ódin hero' to Valhöll. The poem opens with
Ódin declaring that he has had a dream in which he was preparing Valhöll
to receive a company of the slain. There is a great noise of many men
approaching the hall, and Ódin calls on the dead heroes Sigmund and
Sinfjötli to rise up quickly and go to meet the dead king who is coming,
saying that he believes it to be Eirik.

      Sigmund says to Ódin: 'Why do you hope for Eirik, rather than for
other kings?' And the god replies: 'Because he has reddened his sword in
many lands.'

      Then Sigmund asks: 'Why have you robbed him of victory, when you
knew him to be brave?' And Ódin answers: 'Because it cannot be clearly
known. . .' -- and then (at any rate as the text stands) he breaks off,
and concludes: 'The grey wolf is gazing at the dwellings of the Gods'
(see the commentary on the *Upphaf* ('Beginning'),
pp.[185--86](#calibre_link-281){#calibre_link-153}.

### Note on Brynhild {#note-on-brynhild .fm2}

[In what follows](#calibre_link-282){#calibre_link-229} I set out, with
minor editing, the content of some notes of my father's, written very
rapidly in soft pencil and difficult to read, on his interpretation of
the tangled and contradictory narratives that constitute the tragedy of
Sigurd and Brynhild, Gunnar and Gudrún. I will repeat here what I have
said in my Foreword, that there is nothing in these or any other notes
for his lectures on Old Norse literature that bears on the question of
whether he had written, or intended to write, poems on the subject of
the Völsung legend; but that views expressed in the lectures may
illuminate, naturally enough, his treatment of the sources in his Lays.

In my commentary on the last part of the Lay I referred
(p.[234](#calibre_link-283){#calibre_link-253}) to my father's belief
that the fragment of a Sigurd lay known as the *Brot,* with which the
Codex Regius takes up again after the lacuna, is the conclusion of 'an
ancient, terse, poem, concentrated chiefly on the Brynhild tragedy'. For
this poem he used in his notes the title *Sigurðarkviða en forna*, 'the
Old Lay of Sigurd'. In notes for a lecture on the content of the lacuna
he suggested (following the great scholar Andreas Heusler) that the poem
probably began with Sigurd's coming to the halls of Gjúki, and his
reception; his oath of brotherhood with the king's sons; and his wedding
with Gudrún: all this probably brief and *without reference to Sigurd's
previous knowledge of Brynhild*. He proposed that the chief elements of
the conception of Brynhild in that poem were these.

(1)  A semi-magical personage, ultimately derived from a Valkyrie
legend.

(2)  She surrounded herself with a wall of flame, and vowed only to wed
the hero who rode it -- intending it to be Sigurd.

(3)  The wall of flame *is* ridden by Sigurd, but under the appearance
of Gunnar. The oath holds her. She comforts herself with the thought of
Gunnar's deed.

(4)  Her comfort fails and her pride is mortally wounded when she
discovers that it was Sigurd after all who rode the flame: in addition
she has been tricked into breaking her oath to wed the actual rider.

(5)  Her vengeance takes this form: she cannot have Sigurd now, and
therefore she will destroy him (and so mortally wound Gudrún, the
natural object of her hate); but she will by this very act avenge
herself on Gunnar by involving him in a dreadful oath-breaking -- so
that after all is over, Sigurd dead, and she about to follow, she can
turn and say, 'Sigurd is pure of all such vileness, you Gunnar alone are
shamed' \[this is the end of the *Brot,* echoed in stanzas IX.67--69 in
the Lay\].

[(6)](#calibre_link-284){#calibre_link-249}  To do this she *lies*
terribly against Sigurd and herself. She accuses him of broken faith
when he lay in her bed after the riding of the flame. This was her only
means of getting Gunnar to slay him \[see stanzas IX.
[43](#calibre_link-285){#calibre_link-134},
[46](#calibre_link-286){#calibre_link-136}, and
[49](#calibre_link-287){#calibre_link-137} of the Lay\]. Later she
reveals the truth \[stanza 68, lines
[5](#calibre_link-288){#calibre_link-139}--[8](#calibre_link-289){#calibre_link-140}\].

That is why Áslaug is such a fatal addition in the Saga, even if she was
begotten upon the mountain-top, not at the second riding of the flame
(see p.[232](#calibre_link-290){#calibre_link-248}).

I think that we should accept (he wrote) such a conception for the poem,
of which the twenty stanzas of the *Brot* are all that are left, and for
one of the oldest lines of tradition. The resolution of the
Brynhild-Valkyrie difficulty does not lie in the assumption that one was
mortal (Brynhild) and the other a Valkyrie from an older 'myth', which
later became confused. The solution, I think, is that the Valkyrie is
the one essential part of the whole story, which is always present.
\[[In a separate note](#calibre_link-291){#calibre_link-223} my father
wrote: 'Brynhild cannot be a "human" character mythicized (or confused
with a Valkyrie Sigrdrífa). She is a Valkyrie humanized.'\]

But she was treated in at least two different ways. There was the
mountain-top awakening of the Ódin-enchanted Valkyrie (perhaps the more
specifically Scandinavian conception and therefore the later, since the
story was not originally Scandinavian). There was also the proud
princess tricked by her own stratagem (when Sigurd rode the fire but in
the form of Gunnar) -- the more southern one. That the lost poem that
ends in the *Brot* represented this older 'more southern version' is
probably borne out by the important point in which it does agree with
the non-Scandinavian versions, namely that Sigurd was murdered out of
doors in a wood and that Högni had a part in it (in the *Brot* itself
Gudrún is shown standing at the doors of the hall as the brothers ride
back).

[It](#calibre_link-292){#calibre_link-275} is significant that the
compiler of the Codex Regius entered a note about this since it clearly
puzzled him and his contemporaries (see p.238, note to stanzas
[51--64](#calibre_link-293){#calibre_link-273}). He notes that the Old
Lay of Gudrún says the same -- in this case, that Sigurd was slain at
the Thing (the council place); and he is aware that this is the
'southern' version (*þyðvestur menn*, German men). The other story, the
slaying of Sigurd in bed in Gudrún's arms, in keeping with the Norse
tendency to the personal, and to the concentration of action in time and
place, is represented in *Sigurðarkviða en skamma*, the extant Sigurd
lay (see p.[234](#calibre_link-294){#calibre_link-254}), and this is the
version followed (without comment) in the Saga, and in the
[Lay](#calibre_link-295){#calibre_link-276} (see
p.[238](#calibre_link-296){#calibre_link-277}).

[My father](#calibre_link-297){#calibre_link-62} did not discuss in
these notes the development, in incompatible ways, seen in the *Völsunga
Saga*, of the story of Sigurd and Brynhild in the Norse tradition. But
his opinion on the cardinal question seems clear from a passing
observation elsewhere that, in his view, the drink of forgetfulness
given to Sigurd was '[invented](#calibre_link-298){#calibre_link-326} by
the author of the lost *Sigurðarkviða en meiri* \[see
p.[234](#calibre_link-299){#calibre_link-257}\] to account for the
difficulties raised by the previous betrothal of Sigurd and Brynhild.'

In conclusion, he wrote: There is nothing left for us now, therefore,
but to express surprise that the author of the Saga, who could so
decisively and unhesitatingly adopt one of the conflicting accounts of
the murder, could not adopt a single view of Brynhild. Since the
adoption of a single view of the murder must be due to artistic
preference, one is perhaps only being just to the author of the Saga in
assuming that the vagueness and uncertainty of Brynhild's position was
not pure bungling on his part. He wanted a complex of conflicting
motives and emotions for the central tragedy -- to have these he was
content to leave the previous relations of Brynhild and Sigurd confused.
He had to, since each theory contributed to her motives.

In the Saga Brynhild's passion of rage and grief is in part due to pride
-- she has not wedded the supreme hero (and hates Gudrún on that
account); but also, she has been wedded by a trick (and hates Gunnar and
Sigurd on that account). Her oath has been broken and she hates herself.
She really loves Sigurd alone: her heart's desire is frustrated, and she
would kill what she loves rather than let a rival share it. Her
betrothal to Sigurd has been broken by both of them -- both by fate and
by magic. She is wroth with Sigurd (and herself) on this account -- and
will not in any case endure her marriage to Gunnar longer. Behind all
hangs Ódin, and his doom, and the vanity of her vows -- he doomed her to
wed. Inextricably interwoven is the curse on the gold.

Truly complicated! And though in building up largely a product of
accident, its retention is due perhaps to taste. We may accept this,
even if we are still on safe ground in affirming that a better artist
could have retained all that was necessary of the two divergent
Brynhild-heroines and not made them so obscure and indeed contradictory
and [unintelligible](#calibre_link-300){#calibre_link-63}.

## Earlier Workings of *Völsungakviða en nýja* {#earlier-workings-of-völsungakviða-en-nýja .fm2}

[The earlier manuscript](#calibre_link-301){#calibre_link-64} material
of the *Upphaf* is not easy to interpret. There are two versions, which
are readily placed in sequence: these I will call for ease of reference
text A and text B. The first, or text A, with the title *Upphaf*, has
almost as many stanzas as the final form, but not all in the same order,
and the wording constantly differing, if for the most part only
slightly. The [opening stanza](#calibre_link-302){#calibre_link-156} is
among those that underwent the most change to reach the final form:

Ere the years there yawned

yearless ages,

without sand or sea

silent, empty;

Earth was not moulded

nor arched Heaven:

an abyss gaping

without blade of grass.

Stanza 4 ('Unmarred their mirth. . .') was not present. Stanza 13 (in
text A stanza 12) reads:

The wolf for Óðinn

at the world's ending (\> waits unsleeping),

for Frey the fair

flames of Surtur;

the doom of Thór

the Dragon beareth:

all shall be ended

and Earth perish.

Though not so marked in the manuscript, the words of the Sibyl clearly
end here, and stanzas 14--15, in which the Sibyl speaks of the rôle of
Sigurd at the Ragnarök, are here absent. Then follow in A stanzas 16--20
of the final text, the conclusion of the *Upphaf*, in which the Gods
prepare for the Last Battle according to the prophecy, and ending with
the words 'for one they waited, / the World's chosen'. In A at this
point the meaning of those words is not explained. But in this version
it is the stanzas 14--15 of the final form, absent here from the
prophecy of the Sibyl, that form the conclusion of the *Upphaf*. The
first reads:

In Day of Doom

he should deathless stand

to die no more

who had death tasted,

the serpent-slayer.

seed of Óðinn,

the walls defending,

the World's chosen.

And the concluding stanza in text A is virtually the same as stanza 15
in the final form. Thus the prophecy concerning Sigurd is present in A,
but not as the words of the Sibyl.

The second text B is not titled *Upphaf* but *The Elder Edda* (the
reason for this will appear in a moment). It is far closer to the final
form in the detail of its wording, indeed it only differs here and
there. That it was developed from text A is clear from the pencilled
corrections made to A that appear in B as written. But it is much
shorter than A. The opening stanza is absent (the poem begins 'The Great
Gods once / began their toil') -- but stanza 1 in the final form ('Of
old was an age / when was emptiness . . .') is scribbled in pencil in
the margin. Stanza 4 ('Unmarred their mirth. . .') is also absent, as it
is in A; but most curiously, the whole of the prophecy of the Sibyl
(stanzas 10--15) is missing. The B-text has thus only 12 stanzas. The
last verse begins 'The guests are many'; and the last lines of the verse
read, not 'for one they waited, / the World's chosen', as in A and the
final text, but 'long awaiting / the last battle'. Thus the motive of
Sigurd as (in Ódin's hope) the saviour at the Ragnarök is absent.

This truncated version of *Upphaf* is the opening of a paper read to, or
perhaps more probably designed to be read to, a society, presumptively
at Oxford. The first words following the poem were:

And that is, I think, all I have to say (of my own) concerning the
*Elder Edda.* There is the ancient measure and strophe in which most of
it is written -- in which our own poetry was once composed, and in which
it still can be if one will learn the craft (not an easy one) -- there
is the background of the imagination of its poets; and though this is
not a translation of an Eddaic poem it is just like one, and all its
elements may be found in that book, most of them in the very first poem
of all which deals directly with this very theme.

Only the opening paragraphs of the paper are preserved, either because
they were written on the same page as the last stanza of the poem and
the rest was discarded, or because the paper never went beyond this
point, at any rate in this form.

There is no indication of date. There is also no way of knowing for
certain why my father reduced the poem in this way; but a perhaps
plausible explanation offers itself. The earlier text A had introduced
his very strange and distinctive conception of 'the special function of
Sigurd', 'an invention of the present poet', in his words (see
Commentary,
pp.[183](#calibre_link-303){#calibre_link-146}--[85](#calibre_link-304){#calibre_link-150}).
He now had the idea of introducing his paper with a brief recital of a
piece of his own 'Norse' poetry; but to use his *Upphaf* for this
purpose would require the omission of all the verses that bore upon the
idea of 'the World's chosen', the 'special function of Sigurd' -- the
imposition of a new significance on the myth.

Did he see this brief work, when he wrote it, as the prelude to a long
poem on the legend of Sigurd? It seems impossible to say (the title
*Upphaf* does not necessarily imply this: it may refer to the content of
the poem, as I incline to suppose).

The other surviving earlier texts mentioned on p.40, section I of
*Völsungakviða en nýja*, 'Andvari's Gold', and the first nine stanzas of
section II, 'Signý', stand to the final form as does text A of the
*Upphaf*, in that there is constant difference in detail of vocabulary
and [phrasing](#calibre_link-305){#calibre_link-65}.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-18 .calibre2}
[GUÐRÚNARKVIÐA EN NÝJA\
eða\
[DRÁP NIFLUNGA]{.small}](#calibre_link-306){.calibre5}

![art](images/000006.jpg){.calibre1}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-19 .calibre2}
# [GUÐRÚNARKVIÐA EN NÝJA](#calibre_link-307) {#guðrúnarkviða-en-nýja .ct}

+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 1                                          | Smoke had faded,\       |
|                         |                                            | sunk was burning;\      |
|                         |                                            | windblown ashes\        |
|                         |                                            | were wafted cold.\      |
|                         |                                            | As sun setting\         |
|                         |                                            | had Sigurd passed;\     |
|                         |                                            | and Brynhild burned\    |
|                         |                                            | as blazing fire.        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 2                                          | Their bliss was over,\  |
|                         |                                            | their bale ended;\      |
|                         |                                            | but Gudrún's grief\     |
|                         |                                            | ever grew the more.\    |
|                         |                                            | Life she hated,\        |
|                         |                                            | but life took not,\     |
|                         |                                            | witless wandering\      |
|                         |                                            | in woods alone.         |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 3                                          | Atli ariseth\           |
|                         |                                            | armies wielding;\       |
|                         |                                            | on the marches of the   |
|                         |                                            | East\                   |
|                         |                                            | his might waxeth.\      |
|                         |                                            | Goths he tramples,\     |
|                         |                                            | gold despoiling,\       |
|                         |                                            | his horsemen countless\ |
|                         |                                            | hasten westward.        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 4                                          | He, Budli's son,\       |
|                         |                                            | blades remembers\       |
|                         |                                            | that of Budli's         |
|                         |                                            | brother\                |
|                         |                                            | were the bane of old;\  |
|                         |                                            | he, gold-greedy,\       |
|                         |                                            | grimhearted king,\      |
|                         |                                            | hath heard of the       |
|                         |                                            | hoard\                  |
|                         |                                            | on the Heath that lay.  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 5                                          | Of Fáfnir's treasure\   |
|                         |                                            | fame was rumoured,\     |
|                         |                                            | that Niflungs held\     |
|                         |                                            | in Niflung-land;\       |
|                         |                                            | of Gudrún's beauty\     |
|                         |                                            | gleaming-lovely;\       |
|                         |                                            | of Gjúki aged\          |
|                         |                                            | to his grave passing.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 6                                          | From mighty Mirkwood\   |
|                         |                                            | came message darkly:\   |
|                         |                                            | 'Atli ariseth\          |
|                         |                                            | armies mustering.\      |
|                         |                                            | Hate awakens,\          |
|                         |                                            | hosts are arming;\      |
|                         |                                            | under horses' hooves\   |
|                         |                                            | Hunland trembles!'      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 7                                          | Gunnar spake then\      |
|                         |                                            | gloomy-hearted:         |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gunnar*                |                                            | 'Fierce will the feud   |
|                         |                                            | be,\                    |
|                         |                                            | fell the onslaught!\    |
|                         |                                            | With gold and silver\   |
|                         |                                            | shall his greed be      |
|                         |                                            | stayed,\                |
|                         |                                            | with gold and silver\   |
|                         |                                            | or gleaming swords?'    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 8                                          | Then spake Högni,\      |
|                         |                                            | haughty chieftain:      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Högni*                 |                                            | 'The might of Sigurd\   |
|                         |                                            | we mourn at last!\      |
|                         |                                            | Victory rode ever\      |
|                         |                                            | with the Völsung lord;\ |
|                         |                                            | now alone will war\     |
|                         |                                            | our land defend.'       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 9                                          | Then spake Grímhild\    |
|                         |                                            | grey with wisdom:       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Grímhild*              |                                            | 'Gudrún is fair,\       |
|                         |                                            | gleaming-lovely --\     |
|                         |                                            | let us bind him in      |
|                         |                                            | bonds\                  |
|                         |                                            | as brother wedded,\     |
|                         |                                            | in Hunland's queen\     |
|                         |                                            | our help seeking!'      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 10                                         | Gudrún they sought,\    |
|                         |                                            | grieving found her\     |
|                         |                                            | in woodland house\      |
|                         |                                            | weaving lonely;\        |
|                         |                                            | weaving wondrous\       |
|                         |                                            | webs bright-figured\    |
|                         |                                            | with woe tangled\       |
|                         |                                            | and with works of old.  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 11                                         | Ódin she wrought\       |
|                         |                                            | old, blue-mantled;\     |
|                         |                                            | Loki lightfooted\       |
|                         |                                            | with locks of flame;\   |
|                         |                                            | the falls of Andvari\   |
|                         |                                            | framed of silver,\      |
|                         |                                            | the gold of Andvari\    |
|                         |                                            | she gleaming wove.      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 12                                         | The house of Völsung\   |
|                         |                                            | huge was timbered,\     |
|                         |                                            | the Tree there tossed\  |
|                         |                                            | tangled branches.\      |
|                         |                                            | There Grímnir's gift\   |
|                         |                                            | gleaming brandished\    |
|                         |                                            | Sigmund standing\       |
|                         |                                            | stern unbending.        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 13                                         | The hall of Siggeir\    |
|                         |                                            | high was burning\       |
|                         |                                            | fire-encircled\         |
|                         |                                            | flame-devouréd.\        |
|                         |                                            | Signý stood there\      |
|                         |                                            | Sigmund greeting,\      |
|                         |                                            | fire about her,\        |
|                         |                                            | flame behind her.       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 14                                         | Shields of silver\      |
|                         |                                            | had the ship of         |
|                         |                                            | Sigmund;\               |
|                         |                                            | wild the waves were,\   |
|                         |                                            | wind them twisted.\     |
|                         |                                            | Sailed there slowly\    |
|                         |                                            | Sinfjötli's bier\       |
|                         |                                            | through stormy seas\    |
|                         |                                            | steered by Ódin.        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 15                                         | There Regin wrought\    |
|                         |                                            | by the red embers;\     |
|                         |                                            | there Gram was          |
|                         |                                            | hammered\               |
|                         |                                            | amid gleaming sparks.\  |
|                         |                                            | High loomed the head\   |
|                         |                                            | of helméd dragon;\      |
|                         |                                            | under black belly\      |
|                         |                                            | there was blink of      |
|                         |                                            | gold.                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 16                                         | Long lay the shadow\    |
|                         |                                            | of lone rider\          |
|                         |                                            | golden-harnessed\       |
|                         |                                            | Gram brandishing;\      |
|                         |                                            | sun-bright Sigurd\      |
|                         |                                            | seed of Völsung,\       |
|                         |                                            | on Grani riding\        |
|                         |                                            | into Gjúki's courts.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 17                                         | Golden weregild\        |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar brought her,\    |
|                         |                                            | haughty Högni\          |
|                         |                                            | humbly bent him.\       |
|                         |                                            | Gudrún they hailed,\    |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar and Högni;\      |
|                         |                                            | head she turned not,\   |
|                         |                                            | hate still burned her.  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 18                                         | In came Grímhild\       |
|                         |                                            | guileful-hearted:       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Grímhild*              |                                            | 'Dearest daughter\      |
|                         |                                            | droop no longer!\       |
|                         |                                            | Burnt is Brynhild,\     |
|                         |                                            | bale is ended;\         |
|                         |                                            | life yet shineth,\      |
|                         |                                            | thou art lovely still!' |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 19                                         | Gudrún lifted\          |
|                         |                                            | her grieving eyes,\     |
|                         |                                            | dimmed with weeping,\   |
|                         |                                            | dark with mourning.\    |
|                         |                                            | Dark with wisdom,\      |
|                         |                                            | deep with purpose\      |
|                         |                                            | were Grímhild's eyes\   |
|                         |                                            | gazing through her.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Grímhild*              | 20                                         | 'Atli ariseth,\         |
|                         |                                            | armies wieldeth,\       |
|                         |                                            | king of Eastland's\     |
|                         |                                            | countless peoples.\     |
|                         |                                            | His queen shall rule\   |
|                         |                                            | courts of splendour,\   |
|                         |                                            | over all women else\    |
|                         |                                            | on earth upraised.'     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gudrún*                | 21                                         | 'Of gold were the       |
|                         |                                            | days,\                  |
|                         |                                            | gold and silver,\       |
|                         |                                            | silver and golden,\     |
|                         |                                            | ere Sigurd came.\       |
|                         |                                            | A maid among maids\     |
|                         |                                            | in mirth walked I;\     |
|                         |                                            | only dreams and         |
|                         |                                            | shadows,\               |
|                         |                                            | only dreams vexed me.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 22                                         | A hart I dreamed\       |
|                         |                                            | high and golden:\       |
|                         |                                            | now is sped the shaft\  |
|                         |                                            | and spilled the blood.\ |
|                         |                                            | A wolf thou gavest me\  |
|                         |                                            | for woe's comfort,\     |
|                         |                                            | in my brethren's blood\ |
|                         |                                            | he bathed me red.       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 23                                         | I love them little,\    |
|                         |                                            | I believe them not,\    |
|                         |                                            | but my brethren's       |
|                         |                                            | blood\                  |
|                         |                                            | is no boot for me.\     |
|                         |                                            | How shall husband heal  |
|                         |                                            | me\                     |
|                         |                                            | of harm I bear\         |
|                         |                                            | in hateful Hunland\     |
|                         |                                            | who am hopeless now?'   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Grímhild*              | 24                                         | 'Thy brothers blame     |
|                         |                                            | not!\                   |
|                         |                                            | Brynhild wrought it,\   |
|                         |                                            | thy wrong and sorrow    |
|                         |                                            | --\                     |
|                         |                                            | it rues them sore.\     |
|                         |                                            | And dreams are but      |
|                         |                                            | dreams,\                |
|                         |                                            | or else doom foretell;\ |
|                         |                                            | yet doom must be        |
|                         |                                            | dreed,\                 |
|                         |                                            | though dreams foreshow. |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 25                                         | Hungold is bright,\     |
|                         |                                            | Hunland is wide,\       |
|                         |                                            | Atli mightiest\         |
|                         |                                            | of earthly kings.\      |
|                         |                                            | And gold is healing,\   |
|                         |                                            | though grieve the       |
|                         |                                            | heart;\                 |
|                         |                                            | a queen's bed better\   |
|                         |                                            | than one cold and       |
|                         |                                            | bare!'                  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gudrún*                | 26                                         | 'Why drivest me on\     |
|                         |                                            | with daunting eyes\     |
|                         |                                            | dire of purpose,\       |
|                         |                                            | doom forestalling?\     |
|                         |                                            | To Sigurd thou gavest   |
|                         |                                            | me,\                    |
|                         |                                            | to sorrow it turned;\   |
|                         |                                            | now leave me to rest,\  |
|                         |                                            | leave thy daughter!'    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Grímhild*              | 27                                         | 'No rest for the        |
|                         |                                            | living,\                |
|                         |                                            | no room for tears,\     |
|                         |                                            | who with pride and      |
|                         |                                            | purpose\                |
|                         |                                            | oppose their fate!\     |
|                         |                                            | No rest I grant thee!\  |
|                         |                                            | My redes hearken,\      |
|                         |                                            | or rue for ever\        |
|                         |                                            | thou wert wrought on    |
|                         |                                            | earth!'                 |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 28                                         | Dark hung her eyes\     |
|                         |                                            | daunting Gudrún,\       |
|                         |                                            | deep and dreadful,\     |
|                         |                                            | dire with purpose.\     |
|                         |                                            | For no word she         |
|                         |                                            | waited,\                |
|                         |                                            | wisdom knew she;\       |
|                         |                                            | forth went Grímhild\    |
|                         |                                            | from Gudrún's side.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 29                                         | Of Gudrún's beauty\     |
|                         |                                            | glad was Atli;\         |
|                         |                                            | of gold he dreamed him\ |
|                         |                                            | guarded darkly;\        |
|                         |                                            | of the serpent's hoard\ |
|                         |                                            | that Sigurd left her,\  |
|                         |                                            | of the wife of Sigurd\  |
|                         |                                            | of women fairest.       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 30                                         | Bridal drank he\        |
|                         |                                            | blissful-hearted\       |
|                         |                                            | to Gudrún pale\         |
|                         |                                            | in gleaming robes.\     |
|                         |                                            | Oaths he swore them,\   |
|                         |                                            | to each her brothers,\  |
|                         |                                            | and lasting truce,\     |
|                         |                                            | league of kinship.      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 31                                         | Dark and splendid,\     |
|                         |                                            | dreadly builded,\       |
|                         |                                            | and echoing vast\       |
|                         |                                            | were Atli's halls.\     |
|                         |                                            | Kings sat neath him,\   |
|                         |                                            | countless chieftains,\  |
|                         |                                            | and Hunnish horsemen\   |
|                         |                                            | harnessed grimly.       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 32                                         | High sat Gudrún\        |
|                         |                                            | Hunland's mistress,\    |
|                         |                                            | cold lay Gudrún\        |
|                         |                                            | queen of Hunland.\      |
|                         |                                            | Her lord loved her,\    |
|                         |                                            | lovely was she;\        |
|                         |                                            | laughter she knew not,\ |
|                         |                                            | yet her limbs were      |
|                         |                                            | white.                  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 33                                         | But longer him lasted\  |
|                         |                                            | his lust of gold,\      |
|                         |                                            | the gold he dreamed     |
|                         |                                            | him\                    |
|                         |                                            | guarded darkly.\        |
|                         |                                            | The serpent's treasure\ |
|                         |                                            | they sent it never,\    |
|                         |                                            | the Niflungs kept it\   |
|                         |                                            | in Niflung-land.        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 34                                         | Long he pondered,\      |
|                         |                                            | till lust swayed him;\  |
|                         |                                            | woes were wakened\      |
|                         |                                            | and wars of old.\       |
|                         |                                            | Long nights lying\      |
|                         |                                            | he looked on her;\      |
|                         |                                            | dark nights drowsing\   |
|                         |                                            | he dreamed of gold.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 35                                         | Oaths he had uttered,\  |
|                         |                                            | evil he pondered;\      |
|                         |                                            | but his heart's         |
|                         |                                            | purpose\                |
|                         |                                            | was hidden under.\      |
|                         |                                            | Yet words he muttered\  |
|                         |                                            | in wandering sleep;\    |
|                         |                                            | Gudrún guessed them,\   |
|                         |                                            | gloom foreboding.       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 36                                         | A feast he fashioned,\  |
|                         |                                            | far proclaimed it;\     |
|                         |                                            | to high-builded halls\  |
|                         |                                            | his hosts were bidden;\ |
|                         |                                            | all kith and kindred\   |
|                         |                                            | called to greet him,\   |
|                         |                                            | to dealing of rings,\   |
|                         |                                            | drink and laughter.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | [37](#calibre_link-308){#calibre_link-363} | On valiant horse\       |
|                         |                                            | Vingi swiftly,\         |
|                         |                                            | herald of Hunland,\     |
|                         |                                            | hasted westward.\       |
|                         |                                            | To Gunnar came he,\     |
|                         |                                            | Gjúking mighty,\        |
|                         |                                            | to halls of Rhineland\  |
|                         |                                            | high and golden.        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 38                                         | There drank they deep;\ |
|                         |                                            | dark they eyed him,\    |
|                         |                                            | Hun-speech hearing\     |
|                         |                                            | in their hall ringing.\ |
|                         |                                            | Cold fell his cry\      |
|                         |                                            | calling loudly\         |
|                         |                                            | under helm standing\    |
|                         |                                            | hailing Gunnar.         |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Vingi*                 | 39                                         | 'Atli hath sent me\     |
|                         |                                            | on errand speedy,\      |
|                         |                                            | on horse hasting\       |
|                         |                                            | through hoar forest.\   |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar he greeteth,\    |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar and Högni.\      |
|                         |                                            | Be blithe he bids you,\ |
|                         |                                            | to his boon hearken!    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 40                                         | A feast he fashions,\   |
|                         |                                            | fair he dights it,\     |
|                         |                                            | all kith and kindred\   |
|                         |                                            | calls to meet him.\     |
|                         |                                            | Rings will he deal,\    |
|                         |                                            | raiment costly,\        |
|                         |                                            | saddles silverlaid,\    |
|                         |                                            | and southern purple.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 41                                         | Shields shall ye choose |
|                         |                                            | there\                  |
|                         |                                            | and shirts of mail,\    |
|                         |                                            | spears smooth-shafted\  |
|                         |                                            | and splendid helms.\    |
|                         |                                            | Gifts will he give      |
|                         |                                            | you,\                   |
|                         |                                            | graven silver,\         |
|                         |                                            | gold-hilted swords,\    |
|                         |                                            | and goodly lands.'      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | [42](#calibre_link-309){#calibre_link-327} | His head bowed Gunnar\  |
|                         |                                            | to Högni speaking:      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gunnar*                |                                            | 'What saith Högni?\     |
|                         |                                            | Doth he hear the        |
|                         |                                            | summons?\               |
|                         |                                            | Is not gold that        |
|                         |                                            | glimmered\              |
|                         |                                            | on Gnitaheiði\          |
|                         |                                            | enough for Niflungs?\   |
|                         |                                            | Need we bounty?         |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | [43](#calibre_link-310){#calibre_link-328} | Is there sword in the   |
|                         |                                            | East\                   |
|                         |                                            | that my sword           |
|                         |                                            | matcheth?\              |
|                         |                                            | Are there helms in      |
|                         |                                            | Hunland\                |
|                         |                                            | so high as ours?\       |
|                         |                                            | Are we lieges of Atli,\ |
|                         |                                            | lands receiving\        |
|                         |                                            | from Hun master?\       |
|                         |                                            | Högni answer!'          |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Högni*                 | [44](#calibre_link-311){#calibre_link-364} | 'Of Gudrún I think --\  |
|                         |                                            | grim thoughts awake!\   |
|                         |                                            | A ring she hath sent    |
|                         |                                            | me,\                    |
|                         |                                            | a ring only.\           |
|                         |                                            | Wolf's hair winds it,\  |
|                         |                                            | woven round it,\        |
|                         |                                            | wolves lie in wait\     |
|                         |                                            | at the way's ending.'   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gunnar*                | [45](#calibre_link-312){#calibre_link-71}  | 'Yet runes she sends    |
|                         |                                            | me,\                    |
|                         |                                            | runes of healing,\      |
|                         |                                            | words well-graven\      |
|                         |                                            | on wood to read;\       |
|                         |                                            | fast bids us fare\      |
|                         |                                            | to feast gladly,\       |
|                         |                                            | old woes forgetting\    |
|                         |                                            | and ancient wrong.'     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 46                                         | Gifts gave Gunnar,\     |
|                         |                                            | guerdon kingly;\        |
|                         |                                            | wine bade men bring\    |
|                         |                                            | to weary guest.\        |
|                         |                                            | Deep there drank they\  |
|                         |                                            | to day's ending,\       |
|                         |                                            | doom they recked not;\  |
|                         |                                            | din resounded.          |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 47                                         | In came Grímhild\       |
|                         |                                            | grey with wisdom,\      |
|                         |                                            | the runes she read,\    |
|                         |                                            | the written tokens.\    |
|                         |                                            | Her brows darkened\     |
|                         |                                            | boding evil;\           |
|                         |                                            | to Gunnar spake she\    |
|                         |                                            | grave and slowly.       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Grímhild*              | 48                                         | 'These runes I doubt:\  |
|                         |                                            | they are writ with      |
|                         |                                            | cunning,\               |
|                         |                                            | strangely twisted,\     |
|                         |                                            | stained and darkened.\  |
|                         |                                            | There were others       |
|                         |                                            | under,\                 |
|                         |                                            | now overlaid --\        |
|                         |                                            | if I read them right\   |
|                         |                                            | they were runes of      |
|                         |                                            | ill.'                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 49                                         | Gunnar had drunken,\    |
|                         |                                            | to his guest turned he: |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gunnar*                |                                            | 'Ye Huns have no wine\  |
|                         |                                            | such as here runneth!\  |
|                         |                                            | It irks us to ride\     |
|                         |                                            | to your ale-quaffing;\  |
|                         |                                            | guile fills your horns  |
|                         |                                            | --\                     |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar comes not!'      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 50                                         | Laughing said Vingi:    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Vingi*                 |                                            | 'My lord shall I tell\  |
|                         |                                            | that in courts of       |
|                         |                                            | Gjúki\                  |
|                         |                                            | no kings are left?\     |
|                         |                                            | There rules a queen,\   |
|                         |                                            | a rune-conner;\         |
|                         |                                            | his weighty words\      |
|                         |                                            | a woman judgeth?        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | [51](#calibre_link-313){#calibre_link-329} | I must haste away,\     |
|                         |                                            | so will hide it not,\   |
|                         |                                            | that Atli is old,\      |
|                         |                                            | but Erp is young.\      |
|                         |                                            | Thy sister's son\       |
|                         |                                            | is but seven winters    |
|                         |                                            | --\                     |
|                         |                                            | strong hands he needs\  |
|                         |                                            | to steer his realm.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | [52](#calibre_link-314){#calibre_link-330} | In Gunnar hoped he\     |
|                         |                                            | for guide and help,\    |
|                         |                                            | of his sister's son\    |
|                         |                                            | the safe keeper.\       |
|                         |                                            | He weened ye might      |
|                         |                                            | wield\                  |
|                         |                                            | his wide kingdom --\    |
|                         |                                            | ye are fallen afraid,\  |
|                         |                                            | and fear shadows.'      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 53                                         | Högni him answered\     |
|                         |                                            | hard and scornful:      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Högni*                 |                                            | 'Daring speeches,\      |
|                         |                                            | and drink-begotten!\    |
|                         |                                            | Nor hoar nor weary\     |
|                         |                                            | is here the king,\      |
|                         |                                            | though queens in        |
|                         |                                            | Rhineland\              |
|                         |                                            | be counted wise.        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 54                                         | Yet Atli I heard not\   |
|                         |                                            | too old for guile,\     |
|                         |                                            | war to ponder,\         |
|                         |                                            | or wealth to covet.\    |
|                         |                                            | And fey saith my        |
|                         |                                            | thought:\               |
|                         |                                            | "Far lies the day\      |
|                         |                                            | ere Erp or Eitill\      |
|                         |                                            | after Atli rule!"'      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 55                                         | But loud cried Gunnar\  |
|                         |                                            | laughing scornful,\     |
|                         |                                            | deep had he drunken\    |
|                         |                                            | darkly musing:          |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gunnar*                |                                            | 'Let wolves then wield\ |
|                         |                                            | wealth of Niflungs!\    |
|                         |                                            | Bears shall harbour\    |
|                         |                                            | in barren courtyards.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 56                                         | Winds shall wander\     |
|                         |                                            | where wine we drank,\   |
|                         |                                            | but Gunnar will go\     |
|                         |                                            | Gudrún seeking.\        |
|                         |                                            | We fast shall follow\   |
|                         |                                            | thy feet, Vingi!\       |
|                         |                                            | Our horns shall be      |
|                         |                                            | heard\                  |
|                         |                                            | Hunland rousing.'       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 57                                         | (From heavy heart then\ |
|                         |                                            | Högni answered:)        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Högni*                 |                                            | 'I go with Gunnar,\     |
|                         |                                            | though glad I am not.\  |
|                         |                                            | Oft Grímhild's redes\   |
|                         |                                            | we have grimly heard.\  |
|                         |                                            | We took them ever,\     |
|                         |                                            | though they turned      |
|                         |                                            | awry;\                  |
|                         |                                            | truth now she           |
|                         |                                            | teacheth,\              |
|                         |                                            | and we trust her not.'  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 58                                         | Then vowed Vingi\       |
|                         |                                            | the venom-tonguéd --\   |
|                         |                                            | oaths he recked not,\   |
|                         |                                            | the oft forsworn:       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Vingi*                 |                                            | 'May hell have me\      |
|                         |                                            | and the high gallows,\  |
|                         |                                            | may ravens rend me,\    |
|                         |                                            | if the runes should     |
|                         |                                            | lie!'                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 59                                         | Niflungs rode forth\    |
|                         |                                            | from Niflung-land;\     |
|                         |                                            | fast their journey,\    |
|                         |                                            | few went with them.\    |
|                         |                                            | Grímhild stood there\   |
|                         |                                            | grey and aged,\         |
|                         |                                            | dark eyes were dimmed\  |
|                         |                                            | death foreseeing.       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 60                                         | Their word was spoken,\ |
|                         |                                            | wills were hardened;\   |
|                         |                                            | fate drove them on,\    |
|                         |                                            | fey they parted.\       |
|                         |                                            | None might hinder\      |
|                         |                                            | near them thronging,\   |
|                         |                                            | lords nor wisemen;\     |
|                         |                                            | with a laugh they rode. |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 61                                         | Steeds went striding,\  |
|                         |                                            | stonefire glinted,\     |
|                         |                                            | rocks were ringing,\    |
|                         |                                            | roads resounding.\      |
|                         |                                            | In hoar forests\        |
|                         |                                            | harts were startled,\   |
|                         |                                            | over hill and valley\   |
|                         |                                            | hooves were beating.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 62                                         | Over river rowed they\  |
|                         |                                            | roaring onward;\        |
|                         |                                            | oars were bending\      |
|                         |                                            | urged to breaking.\     |
|                         |                                            | Foam flew from prow,\   |
|                         |                                            | flashed and sparkled;\  |
|                         |                                            | at bank unbound\        |
|                         |                                            | the boats left they.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 63                                         | In the hoar forest\     |
|                         |                                            | horns they sounded\     |
|                         |                                            | Hunland rousing;\       |
|                         |                                            | hooves were beating.\   |
|                         |                                            | Golden harness\         |
|                         |                                            | gleamed and sparkled;\  |
|                         |                                            | steeds came striding\   |
|                         |                                            | stung to madness.       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 64                                         | From hill upon high\    |
|                         |                                            | halls they looked on,\  |
|                         |                                            | walls and watchtowers\  |
|                         |                                            | wondrous-builded.\      |
|                         |                                            | They were               |
|                         |                                            | forest-girdled,\        |
|                         |                                            | fenced with spearmen;\  |
|                         |                                            | horses neighed there,\  |
|                         |                                            | helms were glinting.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 65                                         | There was clamour in    |
|                         |                                            | the courts,\            |
|                         |                                            | cold rang the steel;\   |
|                         |                                            | shafts were shaken,\    |
|                         |                                            | shields them answered.\ |
|                         |                                            | Gates found they        |
|                         |                                            | barred,\                |
|                         |                                            | grim doors of iron:\    |
|                         |                                            | Högni smote them,\      |
|                         |                                            | hewed them fiercely.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 66                                         | (Forth came Vingi\      |
|                         |                                            | the venom-tonguéd:)     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Vingi*                 |                                            | 'Ye need not to knock,\ |
|                         |                                            | for known your coming!\ |
|                         |                                            | The greeting is         |
|                         |                                            | prepared --\            |
|                         |                                            | the gallows waits you.\ |
|                         |                                            | The hungry eagle,\      |
|                         |                                            | the hoary wolf,\        |
|                         |                                            | the ravens are ready\   |
|                         |                                            | to rend your flesh!'    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Högni*                 | 67                                         | 'Heralds were holy --\  |
|                         |                                            | but unhallowed liar,\   |
|                         |                                            | thou shalt hang the     |
|                         |                                            | first,\                 |
|                         |                                            | and hell take thee!'\   |
|                         |                                            | From the oak-branches\  |
|                         |                                            | with arms corded\       |
|                         |                                            | they hung him high\     |
|                         |                                            | in the Huns' faces.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 68                                         | Huns loud clamoured,\   |
|                         |                                            | hate was kindled;\      |
|                         |                                            | forth rushed they       |
|                         |                                            | fell,\                  |
|                         |                                            | fierce the onslaught.\  |
|                         |                                            | In battle blended\      |
|                         |                                            | Budlungs, Niflungs;\    |
|                         |                                            | blades were             |
|                         |                                            | brandished,\            |
|                         |                                            | burst were helmets.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 69                                         | Back they beat them\    |
|                         |                                            | broken-harnessed;\      |
|                         |                                            | to the doors they drove |
|                         |                                            | them --\                |
|                         |                                            | din was in the gates.\  |
|                         |                                            | In leaped Högni,\       |
|                         |                                            | held the gateway,\      |
|                         |                                            | hewed two-handed,\      |
|                         |                                            | hurled them backward.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 70                                         | The few and fearless\   |
|                         |                                            | as a fire entered,\     |
|                         |                                            | as roaring flame,\      |
|                         |                                            | wrath devouring.\       |
|                         |                                            | Wolves sprang behind,\  |
|                         |                                            | the ways were           |
|                         |                                            | reddened,\              |
|                         |                                            | the walls echoed,\      |
|                         |                                            | wailing filled them.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 71                                         | Steep, stone-builded,\  |
|                         |                                            | the stair arose\        |
|                         |                                            | to dark doorways\       |
|                         |                                            | dreadly timbered.\      |
|                         |                                            | There Högni halted,\    |
|                         |                                            | hailed them loudly:     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Högni*                 |                                            | 'Forth, forth! O        |
|                         |                                            | friends,\               |
|                         |                                            | the feast begins!'      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 72                                         | Out came Atli,\         |
|                         |                                            | anger-clouded:          |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Atli*                  |                                            | 'Welcome, my vassals!\  |
|                         |                                            | Ye have well begun it.\ |
|                         |                                            | Death the drink here,\  |
|                         |                                            | doom the ending,\       |
|                         |                                            | ropes here the rings    |
|                         |                                            | --\                     |
|                         |                                            | if ransom fail.         |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 73                                         | That gold give me\      |
|                         |                                            | that is Gudrún's        |
|                         |                                            | right,\                 |
|                         |                                            | that Sigurd conquered,\ |
|                         |                                            | the serpent's           |
|                         |                                            | treasure!'\             |
|                         |                                            | Högni laughed then,\    |
|                         |                                            | on his hilts leaning;\  |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar glowering\       |
|                         |                                            | grimly answered.        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gunnar*                | 74                                         | 'No gold from Gunnar\   |
|                         |                                            | shalt thou get for      |
|                         |                                            | ever!\                  |
|                         |                                            | Life canst thou take\   |
|                         |                                            | at latest end.\         |
|                         |                                            | Dear wilt thou buy it\  |
|                         |                                            | in dread barter\        |
|                         |                                            | of lords and lieges,\   |
|                         |                                            | lives uncounted!'       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Atli*                  | 75                                         | 'Fools the Niflungs,\   |
|                         |                                            | feud-forgetful;\        |
|                         |                                            | foul-stained their      |
|                         |                                            | hands\                  |
|                         |                                            | with friend-murder.\    |
|                         |                                            | Gudrún's husband\       |
|                         |                                            | for Gudrún's wrong\     |
|                         |                                            | a grim vengeance\       |
|                         |                                            | will gladly wreak.'     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gunnar*                | 76                                         | 'Here Gudrún spake      |
|                         |                                            | not!\                   |
|                         |                                            | Golden weregild\        |
|                         |                                            | she looks nor longs for |
|                         |                                            | --\                     |
|                         |                                            | the lust is thine!'     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Högni*                 |                                            | 'For atonement now\     |
|                         |                                            | time is over!\          |
|                         |                                            | Words we need not,\     |
|                         |                                            | war hath entered!'      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 77                                         | Horns they sounded --\  |
|                         |                                            | hall-walls echoed --\   |
|                         |                                            | strode the stairway;\   |
|                         |                                            | stern their onslaught.\ |
|                         |                                            | The stones they         |
|                         |                                            | stained\                |
|                         |                                            | with streaming blood;\  |
|                         |                                            | snaketonguéd arrows\    |
|                         |                                            | sang about them.        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 78                                         | Doors clanged           |
|                         |                                            | backward,\              |
|                         |                                            | din resounded:\         |
|                         |                                            | Hunland's champions\    |
|                         |                                            | hurled upon them.\      |
|                         |                                            | Hard were handstrokes,\ |
|                         |                                            | hewn were corslets,\    |
|                         |                                            | as on hundred anvils\   |
|                         |                                            | were hammers ringing.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 79                                         | In hall sat Gudrún\     |
|                         |                                            | at heart weary,\        |
|                         |                                            | from mood to mood\      |
|                         |                                            | her mind wavered.\      |
|                         |                                            | The din she hearkened,\ |
|                         |                                            | deadly crying,\         |
|                         |                                            | as back were beaten\    |
|                         |                                            | the Borgund-lords.      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gudrún*                | 80                                         | 'Little I love them,\   |
|                         |                                            | long I hated!\          |
|                         |                                            | A wolf they gave me\    |
|                         |                                            | for woe's comfort.\     |
|                         |                                            | Yet the wolf rends      |
|                         |                                            | them,\                  |
|                         |                                            | and woe is me!\         |
|                         |                                            | Woe worth the hour\     |
|                         |                                            | that of womb I came!'   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 81                                         | Her hands she wrung\    |
|                         |                                            | on high standing,\      |
|                         |                                            | loud called she clear\  |
|                         |                                            | to lieges there:        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gudrún*                |                                            | 'If any honour me\      |
|                         |                                            | in these evil halls,\   |
|                         |                                            | let them hold their     |
|                         |                                            | hands\                  |
|                         |                                            | from this hell-labour!  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 82                                         | Who would love          |
|                         |                                            | requite,\               |
|                         |                                            | who would lies disown,\ |
|                         |                                            | who remember misery\    |
|                         |                                            | by these masters        |
|                         |                                            | wrought,\               |
|                         |                                            | arm now! arm now!\      |
|                         |                                            | aid the fearless\       |
|                         |                                            | betrayed and trapped\   |
|                         |                                            | by this troll-people!'  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 83                                         | Atli sat there,\        |
|                         |                                            | anger burned him;\      |
|                         |                                            | yet murmurs mounted,\   |
|                         |                                            | men were rising.\       |
|                         |                                            | Goths were there many:\ |
|                         |                                            | griefs they             |
|                         |                                            | remembered,\            |
|                         |                                            | wars in Mirkwood\       |
|                         |                                            | and wars of old.        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 84                                         | From the hall striding\ |
|                         |                                            | high they shouted,\     |
|                         |                                            | foes turned to friends\ |
|                         |                                            | fiercely greeted:\      |
|                         |                                            | 'Goths and Niflungs\    |
|                         |                                            | our gods helping\       |
|                         |                                            | will hew the Huns\      |
|                         |                                            | to hell's shadow!'      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 85                                         | The few and fearless\   |
|                         |                                            | fiercely answered\      |
|                         |                                            | (their backs were       |
|                         |                                            | driven\                 |
|                         |                                            | to the builded walls):  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Niflungs*              |                                            | 'Friends, come          |
|                         |                                            | welcome!\               |
|                         |                                            | The feast is high.\     |
|                         |                                            | Now songs let us sing\  |
|                         |                                            | of our sires of yore.'  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | [86](#calibre_link-315){#calibre_link-349} | Of the Goths' glory\    |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar sang there;\     |
|                         |                                            | of Iormunrek\           |
|                         |                                            | earth-shadowing king;\  |
|                         |                                            | of Angantýr\            |
|                         |                                            | and old battles,\       |
|                         |                                            | of Dylgja, Dúnheið,\    |
|                         |                                            | and Danpar's walls.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 87                                         | Forth went Högni,\      |
|                         |                                            | hate rekindled,\        |
|                         |                                            | his son Snævar\         |
|                         |                                            | at his side leaping.\   |
|                         |                                            | Hewn was Högni\         |
|                         |                                            | by a Hun chieftain;\    |
|                         |                                            | his shield was shorn\   |
|                         |                                            | in shards falling.      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 88                                         | Snævar they slew        |
|                         |                                            | there,\                 |
|                         |                                            | their swords stabbed    |
|                         |                                            | him;\                   |
|                         |                                            | he left his life\       |
|                         |                                            | laughing grimly.\       |
|                         |                                            | Högni wept not;\        |
|                         |                                            | from his hand the       |
|                         |                                            | shield\                 |
|                         |                                            | stooping lifted;\       |
|                         |                                            | strode then onward.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 89                                         | The stairs they strode\ |
|                         |                                            | streaming redly;\       |
|                         |                                            | at dark doorways\       |
|                         |                                            | they dinned and         |
|                         |                                            | hammered;\              |
|                         |                                            | into halls of Atli\     |
|                         |                                            | hewed a pathway;\       |
|                         |                                            | rushed in roaring,\     |
|                         |                                            | reeking-handed.         |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 90                                         | Gudrún they greeted,\   |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar and Högni:       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gunnar &* *Högni*      |                                            | This feast is           |
|                         |                                            | fashioned\              |
|                         |                                            | fair and seemly!\       |
|                         |                                            | Fell-shapen fates\      |
|                         |                                            | will force us ever\     |
|                         |                                            | as wife to give thee,\  |
|                         |                                            | and a widow make thee!' |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gudrún*                | 91                                         | 'If for wrongs ye       |
|                         |                                            | wrought\                |
|                         |                                            | ruth now moves you,\    |
|                         |                                            | doom forestall not!\    |
|                         |                                            | This deed forego!'      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gunnar &* *Högni*      |                                            | 'At our sister's        |
|                         |                                            | prayer\                 |
|                         |                                            | let him slink away!\    |
|                         |                                            | Woman's robes ward      |
|                         |                                            | him,\                   |
|                         |                                            | not warrior's mail!'    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 92                                         | Forth went Atli,\       |
|                         |                                            | anguish gnawed him;\    |
|                         |                                            | to Gudrún Högni\        |
|                         |                                            | said grim farewell:     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Högni*                 |                                            | 'Thy price is paid,\    |
|                         |                                            | thy prayer granted!\    |
|                         |                                            | At life's forfeit\      |
|                         |                                            | we have loosed our      |
|                         |                                            | foe.'                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 93                                         | Forth sent Atli\        |
|                         |                                            | his errand-riders;\     |
|                         |                                            | Hunland hearkened,\     |
|                         |                                            | hosts were arming.\     |
|                         |                                            | Gallowsfowl to gladden\ |
|                         |                                            | Goths and Niflungs\     |
|                         |                                            | from the hall they      |
|                         |                                            | hurled\                 |
|                         |                                            | the Hunnish corpses.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 94                                         | Daylight grew dim,\     |
|                         |                                            | dark shadows walked\    |
|                         |                                            | in echoing halls\       |
|                         |                                            | that Atli loved.\       |
|                         |                                            | In need most dire\      |
|                         |                                            | the Niflung lords\      |
|                         |                                            | doom awaited;\          |
|                         |                                            | the doors were shut.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 95                                         | Night lapped the world\ |
|                         |                                            | and noiseless town;\    |
|                         |                                            | under ashen moonlight\  |
|                         |                                            | the owls hooted.\       |
|                         |                                            | At guarded doorways\    |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar and Högni\       |
|                         |                                            | silent sat they\        |
|                         |                                            | sleepless waiting.      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 96                                         | First spake Högni:      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Högni*                 |                                            | 'Are these halls        |
|                         |                                            | afire?\                 |
|                         |                                            | Of day untimely\        |
|                         |                                            | doth the dawn           |
|                         |                                            | smoulder?\              |
|                         |                                            | Do dragons in Hunland\  |
|                         |                                            | dreadly flaming\        |
|                         |                                            | wind here their way?\   |
|                         |                                            | Wake, O heroes!'        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 97                                         | Gunnar answered:        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gunnar*                |                                            | 'Guard the doorways!\   |
|                         |                                            | Here dawn nor dragon\   |
|                         |                                            | dreadly burneth;\       |
|                         |                                            | the gabled houses\      |
|                         |                                            | are gloom-shrouded,\    |
|                         |                                            | under ailing moon\      |
|                         |                                            | the earth is shadowed.  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 98                                         | There is tramp of men\  |
|                         |                                            | torches bearing,\       |
|                         |                                            | clink of corslet,\      |
|                         |                                            | clank of armour.\       |
|                         |                                            | There is crying of      |
|                         |                                            | ravens,\                |
|                         |                                            | cold howls the wolf,\   |
|                         |                                            | shields are             |
|                         |                                            | shimmering,\            |
|                         |                                            | shafts uplifted.'       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gunnar &* *Högni*      | 99                                         | 'Wake now, wake now!\   |
|                         |                                            | War is kindled.\        |
|                         |                                            | Now helm to head,\      |
|                         |                                            | to hand the sword.\     |
|                         |                                            | Wake now, warriors,\    |
|                         |                                            | wielding glory!\        |
|                         |                                            | To wide Valhöll\        |
|                         |                                            | ways lie open.'         |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 100                                        | At the dark doorways\   |
|                         |                                            | they dinned and         |
|                         |                                            | hammered;\              |
|                         |                                            | there was clang of      |
|                         |                                            | swords\                 |
|                         |                                            | and crash of axes.\     |
|                         |                                            | The smiths of battle\   |
|                         |                                            | smote the anvils;\      |
|                         |                                            | sparked and splintered\ |
|                         |                                            | spears and helmets.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 101                                        | In they hacked them,\   |
|                         |                                            | out they hurled them,\  |
|                         |                                            | bears assailing,\       |
|                         |                                            | boars defending.\       |
|                         |                                            | Stones and stairways\   |
|                         |                                            | streamed and darkened;\ |
|                         |                                            | day came dimly --\      |
|                         |                                            | the doors were held.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 102                                        | Five days they fought\  |
|                         |                                            | few and dauntless;\     |
|                         |                                            | the doors were riven,\  |
|                         |                                            | dashed asunder.\        |
|                         |                                            | They barred them with   |
|                         |                                            | bodies,\                |
|                         |                                            | bulwarks piling\        |
|                         |                                            | of Huns and Niflungs\   |
|                         |                                            | hewn and cloven.        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 103                                        | (Atli spoke then\       |
|                         |                                            | anguish mourning:)      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Atli*                  |                                            | 'My friends are         |
|                         |                                            | fallen,\                |
|                         |                                            | my foes living,\        |
|                         |                                            | my kith and kindred\    |
|                         |                                            | cloven-breasted.\       |
|                         |                                            | I am wealth-bereaved\   |
|                         |                                            | and wife-curséd,\       |
|                         |                                            | of glory shorn\         |
|                         |                                            | in the grey of years.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 104                                        | Woe and wailing\        |
|                         |                                            | in my wide kingdom!\    |
|                         |                                            | Where I feasted long\   |
|                         |                                            | are fell serpents.\     |
|                         |                                            | The proud pillars\      |
|                         |                                            | are purple-stained\     |
|                         |                                            | in the builded halls\   |
|                         |                                            | that Budli reared.'     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 105                                        | Then Beiti spake there\ |
|                         |                                            | bale devising,\         |
|                         |                                            | the king's counsellor   |
|                         |                                            | --\                     |
|                         |                                            | he was cunning-hearted: |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Beiti*                 |                                            | 'Accursed is become\    |
|                         |                                            | thy carven house!\      |
|                         |                                            | Better loss of little\  |
|                         |                                            | than to lose thy all.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 106                                        | Fire still may tame\    |
|                         |                                            | these fell serpents,\   |
|                         |                                            | thy pillars be the      |
|                         |                                            | pyre\                   |
|                         |                                            | of these proud          |
|                         |                                            | robbers!'\              |
|                         |                                            | For the ruin and wrack\ |
|                         |                                            | wrath seized Atli;\     |
|                         |                                            | that shame he shirked   |
|                         |                                            | not,\                   |
|                         |                                            | shorn of glory.         |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 107                                        | Flame-encircled\        |
|                         |                                            | fearless Niflungs\      |
|                         |                                            | in riven harness\       |
|                         |                                            | redly glinted.\         |
|                         |                                            | Iron-bolted walls,\     |
|                         |                                            | ancient timbers,\       |
|                         |                                            | creaked and             |
|                         |                                            | smouldered,\            |
|                         |                                            | cracked and tumbled.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 108                                        | There hot and smoking\  |
|                         |                                            | fell hissing embers,\   |
|                         |                                            | and plashed and         |
|                         |                                            | sputtered\              |
|                         |                                            | in the pools of gore.\  |
|                         |                                            | Reek was round them,\   |
|                         |                                            | a rolling smoke;\       |
|                         |                                            | dank dripped their      |
|                         |                                            | sweat --\               |
|                         |                                            | the doors were held.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 109                                        | Their shields they      |
|                         |                                            | raised\                 |
|                         |                                            | over shattered          |
|                         |                                            | helmets;\               |
|                         |                                            | they stamped the        |
|                         |                                            | brands\                 |
|                         |                                            | on streaming floors.\   |
|                         |                                            | Blacktongued with       |
|                         |                                            | thirst\                 |
|                         |                                            | blood there drank       |
|                         |                                            | they;\                  |
|                         |                                            | fell one by one\        |
|                         |                                            | on the ways to hell.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 110                                        | Out burst the brethren\ |
|                         |                                            | blackhued, grisly,\     |
|                         |                                            | boars bleeding-tusked\  |
|                         |                                            | at bay at last.\        |
|                         |                                            | The Huns grasped them\  |
|                         |                                            | helmless, shieldless,\  |
|                         |                                            | bare and bleeding,\     |
|                         |                                            | with broken swords.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 111                                        | As hounds affrighted\   |
|                         |                                            | Huns were crying;\      |
|                         |                                            | they were rent and      |
|                         |                                            | riven\                  |
|                         |                                            | by reeking hands.\      |
|                         |                                            | Necks were broken\      |
|                         |                                            | and knees sundered,\    |
|                         |                                            | ere the Borgund king\   |
|                         |                                            | was bound and thrown.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 112                                        | Last fought Högni\      |
|                         |                                            | alone hopeless;\        |
|                         |                                            | his teeth tore them\    |
|                         |                                            | as they tied him down.\ |
|                         |                                            | The dust was bitten,\   |
|                         |                                            | the doom fallen,\       |
|                         |                                            | the Need of the         |
|                         |                                            | Niflungs\               |
|                         |                                            | and their night was     |
|                         |                                            | come.                   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 113                                        | In dank prison\         |
|                         |                                            | dark and evil\          |
|                         |                                            | Högni hurled they;\     |
|                         |                                            | Huns him guarded.\      |
|                         |                                            | But Gunnar bound\       |
|                         |                                            | in Gudrún's bower\      |
|                         |                                            | was flung at the feet\  |
|                         |                                            | of her frenzied lord.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Atli*                  | 114                                        | 'Too long have I        |
|                         |                                            | looked\                 |
|                         |                                            | for this last meeting,\ |
|                         |                                            | Budlung's vengeance\    |
|                         |                                            | on Borgund lord.\       |
|                         |                                            | Here lies at last\      |
|                         |                                            | in lowly dust\          |
|                         |                                            | lordly Gunnar!\         |
|                         |                                            | Gudrún behold!          |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 115                                        | Sigurd remember,\       |
|                         |                                            | and say me now,\        |
|                         |                                            | is it sweet to see him\ |
|                         |                                            | so sore avenged?\       |
|                         |                                            | In my serpent-pit\      |
|                         |                                            | snakes are waiting --\  |
|                         |                                            | they bite more bitter\  |
|                         |                                            | than blades of steel!'  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 116                                        | Gunnar he trampled,\    |
|                         |                                            | Gudrún saw him:         |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gudrún*                |                                            | 'Evil art thou, Atli.\  |
|                         |                                            | May thy end be shame!\  |
|                         |                                            | By Erp and Eitill\      |
|                         |                                            | our own children\       |
|                         |                                            | (sons of the sister\    |
|                         |                                            | of these sad            |
|                         |                                            | captives),\             |
|                         |                                            | from the dust lift      |
|                         |                                            | them!\                  |
|                         |                                            | Their death forego!'    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Atli*                  | 117                                        | 'Let them give me the   |
|                         |                                            | gold,\                  |
|                         |                                            | the gleaming hoard,\    |
|                         |                                            | the serpent's treasure\ |
|                         |                                            | that Sigurd conquered!\ |
|                         |                                            | The gold, the gold\     |
|                         |                                            | that grieves my dreams  |
|                         |                                            | --\                     |
|                         |                                            | if Gunnar will grant    |
|                         |                                            | it,\                    |
|                         |                                            | I will grant him thee!' |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gunnar*                | 118                                        | 'I will give thee the   |
|                         |                                            | gold,\                  |
|                         |                                            | goodly portion,\        |
|                         |                                            | the half yielding\      |
|                         |                                            | which I hold my own.\   |
|                         |                                            | Half hath Högni,\       |
|                         |                                            | my haughty brother;\    |
|                         |                                            | to his latest breath\   |
|                         |                                            | he will loose it not.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 119                                        | Let heart of Högni\     |
|                         |                                            | at my hand be laid\     |
|                         |                                            | from breast bleeding\   |
|                         |                                            | with blades severed;\   |
|                         |                                            | then gold will I give,\ |
|                         |                                            | gold of serpents --\    |
|                         |                                            | all shall Atli\         |
|                         |                                            | eager take it!'         |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gudrún*                | 120                                        | 'Yet Högni no less,\    |
|                         |                                            | mine hapless brother,\  |
|                         |                                            | I did beg from thee\    |
|                         |                                            | by those born of us!'   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Atli*                  |                                            | 'Of his troll's temper\ |
|                         |                                            | yet true were the       |
|                         |                                            | words!\                 |
|                         |                                            | The gold will I gain,\  |
|                         |                                            | though Gudrún weep!'    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 121                                        | Out went Atli,\         |
|                         |                                            | evil he purposed;\      |
|                         |                                            | but wisemen bade him\   |
|                         |                                            | wary counsel.\          |
|                         |                                            | The queen fearing\      |
|                         |                                            | of cunning thought      |
|                         |                                            | they;\                  |
|                         |                                            | a thrall they seized\   |
|                         |                                            | and thrust in prison.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Hjalli the thrall*     | 122                                        | 'Woe worth the wiles\   |
|                         |                                            | and wars of kings,\     |
|                         |                                            | if my life I must lose\ |
|                         |                                            | in their luckless       |
|                         |                                            | feud!\                  |
|                         |                                            | The light of morning,\  |
|                         |                                            | labour daylong,\        |
|                         |                                            | fire at evening,\       |
|                         |                                            | too few my days!'       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Huns*                  | 123                                        | 'Hjalli, swineherd,\    |
|                         |                                            | thy heart give us!'\    |
|                         |                                            | Shrilly shrieked he\    |
|                         |                                            | at the shining knife.\  |
|                         |                                            | They bared his breast,\ |
|                         |                                            | and bitter wailed he;\  |
|                         |                                            | ere the point pricked   |
|                         |                                            | him\                    |
|                         |                                            | he piercing cried.      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 124                                        | Högni heard him,\       |
|                         |                                            | to the Huns spake he:   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Högni*                 |                                            | 'Noisome the            |
|                         |                                            | shrieking!\             |
|                         |                                            | Knives were liever.\    |
|                         |                                            | If hearts ye wish\      |
|                         |                                            | here lies a better.\    |
|                         |                                            | It trembles not. Take   |
|                         |                                            | it!\                    |
|                         |                                            | Your toil were less.'   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 125                                        | The heart then cut      |
|                         |                                            | they\                   |
|                         |                                            | from Hjalli's bosom;\   |
|                         |                                            | to Gunnar bore it\      |
|                         |                                            | on golden dish:         |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Huns*                  |                                            | 'Here lies his heart!\  |
|                         |                                            | Högni is ended.'\       |
|                         |                                            | Loudly laughed he,\     |
|                         |                                            | lord of Niflungs.       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gunnar*                | 126                                        | 'I hapless see here\    |
|                         |                                            | heart of craven.\       |
|                         |                                            | Högni hath not\         |
|                         |                                            | heart that trembles.\   |
|                         |                                            | Quivering lies it;\     |
|                         |                                            | quaked it swifter\      |
|                         |                                            | beating in baseborn\    |
|                         |                                            | breast ignoble.'        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 127                                        | Loudly laughed he\      |
|                         |                                            | at life's ending,\      |
|                         |                                            | when knife was come\    |
|                         |                                            | to Niflung lord.\       |
|                         |                                            | The heart they cut\     |
|                         |                                            | from Högni's bosom;\    |
|                         |                                            | to Gunnar bore it\      |
|                         |                                            | on golden dish.         |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gunnar*                | 128                                        | 'I haughty see here\    |
|                         |                                            | heart undaunted.\       |
|                         |                                            | Högni held it,\         |
|                         |                                            | heart untrembling.\     |
|                         |                                            | Unshaken lies it,\      |
|                         |                                            | so shook it seldom\     |
|                         |                                            | beating in boldest\     |
|                         |                                            | breast of princes.      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 129                                        | Alone now living,\      |
|                         |                                            | Lord of Niflungs,\      |
|                         |                                            | the gold I hold\        |
|                         |                                            | and guard for ever!\    |
|                         |                                            | In hall nor heath\      |
|                         |                                            | nor hidden dungeon\     |
|                         |                                            | shall friend or foeman\ |
|                         |                                            | find it gleaming.       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 130                                        | Rhine shall rule it,\   |
|                         |                                            | rings and goblets,\     |
|                         |                                            | in weltering water\     |
|                         |                                            | wanly shining.\         |
|                         |                                            | In the deeps we cast    |
|                         |                                            | it;\                    |
|                         |                                            | dark it rolleth,\       |
|                         |                                            | as useless to man\      |
|                         |                                            | as of yore it proved!   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 131                                        | Cursed be Atli,\        |
|                         |                                            | king of evil,\          |
|                         |                                            | of glory naked,\        |
|                         |                                            | gold-bereavéd;\         |
|                         |                                            | gold-bereavéd,\         |
|                         |                                            | gold-tormented,\        |
|                         |                                            | murder-tainted,\        |
|                         |                                            | murder-haunted!'        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 132                                        | Fires of madness\       |
|                         |                                            | flamed and started\     |
|                         |                                            | from eyes of Atli;\     |
|                         |                                            | anguish gnawed him:     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Atli*                  |                                            | 'Serpents seize him!\   |
|                         |                                            | snakes shall sting      |
|                         |                                            | him.\                   |
|                         |                                            | In the noisome pit\     |
|                         |                                            | naked cast him!'        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 133                                        | There gleaming-eyed\    |
|                         |                                            | Gudrún waited;\         |
|                         |                                            | the heart within her\   |
|                         |                                            | hardened darkly.\       |
|                         |                                            | Grim mood took her,\    |
|                         |                                            | Grímhild's daughter,\   |
|                         |                                            | ruthless hatred,\       |
|                         |                                            | wrath consuming.        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 134                                        | There grimly waited\    |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar naked;\          |
|                         |                                            | snakes were creeping\   |
|                         |                                            | silent round him.\      |
|                         |                                            | Teeth were poisoned,\   |
|                         |                                            | tongues were darting;\  |
|                         |                                            | in lidless eyes\        |
|                         |                                            | light was shining.      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 135                                        | A harp she sent him;\   |
|                         |                                            | his hands seized it,\   |
|                         |                                            | strong he smote it;\    |
|                         |                                            | strings were ringing.\  |
|                         |                                            | Wondering heard men\    |
|                         |                                            | words of triumph,\      |
|                         |                                            | song up-soaring\        |
|                         |                                            | from the serpents' pit. |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 136                                        | There coldly creeping\  |
|                         |                                            | coiling serpents\       |
|                         |                                            | as stones were staring\ |
|                         |                                            | stilled, enchanted.\    |
|                         |                                            | There slowly swayed     |
|                         |                                            | they,\                  |
|                         |                                            | slumber whelmed them,\  |
|                         |                                            | as Gunnar sang\         |
|                         |                                            | of Gunnar's pride.      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 137                                        | As voice in Valhöll\    |
|                         |                                            | valiant ringing\        |
|                         |                                            | the golden Gods\        |
|                         |                                            | he glorious named;\     |
|                         |                                            | of Ódin sang he,\       |
|                         |                                            | Ódin's chosen,\         |
|                         |                                            | of Earth's most         |
|                         |                                            | mighty,\                |
|                         |                                            | of ancient kings.       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 138                                        | A huge adder\           |
|                         |                                            | hideous gleaming\       |
|                         |                                            | from stony hiding\      |
|                         |                                            | was stealing slow.\     |
|                         |                                            | Huns still heard him\   |
|                         |                                            | his harp thrilling,\    |
|                         |                                            | and doom of Hunland\    |
|                         |                                            | dreadly chanting.       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 139                                        | An ancient adder\       |
|                         |                                            | evil-swollen,\          |
|                         |                                            | to breast it bent\      |
|                         |                                            | and bitter stung him.\  |
|                         |                                            | Loud cried Gunnar\      |
|                         |                                            | life forsaking;\        |
|                         |                                            | harp fell silent,\      |
|                         |                                            | and heart was still.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 140                                        | To the queen that cry   |
|                         |                                            | came\                   |
|                         |                                            | clear and piercing;\    |
|                         |                                            | aghast she sat\         |
|                         |                                            | in guarded bower.\      |
|                         |                                            | Erp and Eitill\         |
|                         |                                            | eager called she:\      |
|                         |                                            | dark their locks were,\ |
|                         |                                            | dark their glances.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 141                                        | Pyres they builded\     |
|                         |                                            | proud and stately;\     |
|                         |                                            | Hunland's champions\    |
|                         |                                            | there high upraised.\   |
|                         |                                            | A pyre they builded\    |
|                         |                                            | on the plain standing;\ |
|                         |                                            | there naked lay\        |
|                         |                                            | the Niflung lords.      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 142                                        | Flames were mounting,\  |
|                         |                                            | fire was roaring,\      |
|                         |                                            | reek was swirling\      |
|                         |                                            | ringed with tumult.\    |
|                         |                                            | Smoke was fading,\      |
|                         |                                            | sunk was burning;\      |
|                         |                                            | windblown ashes\        |
|                         |                                            | were wafted cold.       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 143                                        | A hall was thronging,\  |
|                         |                                            | Huns were drinking\     |
|                         |                                            | the funeral feast\      |
|                         |                                            | of fallen men.\         |
|                         |                                            | Foes were vanquished,\  |
|                         |                                            | fire had burned them;\  |
|                         |                                            | now Atli was lord\      |
|                         |                                            | of East and West.       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 144                                        | Wealth he dealt there,\ |
|                         |                                            | wounds requiting,\      |
|                         |                                            | worthy weregild\        |
|                         |                                            | of warriors slain.\     |
|                         |                                            | Loud they praised him;\ |
|                         |                                            | long the drinking,\     |
|                         |                                            | wild grew the words\    |
|                         |                                            | of the wine-bemused.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 145                                        | Gudrún came forth\      |
|                         |                                            | goblets bearing:        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gudrún*                |                                            | 'Hail, O Hun-king,\     |
|                         |                                            | health I bring thee!'\  |
|                         |                                            | Deep drank Atli,\       |
|                         |                                            | drained them laughing:\ |
|                         |                                            | though gold he missed,\ |
|                         |                                            | yet was Gunnar dead.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gudrún*                | 146                                        | 'Hail, O Hun-king,\     |
|                         |                                            | hear me speaking:\      |
|                         |                                            | My brethren are slain\  |
|                         |                                            | that I begged of thee.\ |
|                         |                                            | Erp and Eitill\         |
|                         |                                            | dost thou ask to look   |
|                         |                                            | on?\                    |
|                         |                                            | Ask no longer --\       |
|                         |                                            | their end hath come!    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 147                                        | Their hearts thou       |
|                         |                                            | tastest\                |
|                         |                                            | with honey mingled,\    |
|                         |                                            | their blood was blent\  |
|                         |                                            | in the bowls I gave;\   |
|                         |                                            | those bowls their       |
|                         |                                            | skulls\                 |
|                         |                                            | bound with silver,\     |
|                         |                                            | their bones thy hounds\ |
|                         |                                            | have burst with teeth.' |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 148                                        | There awful cries\      |
|                         |                                            | of anguish woke;\       |
|                         |                                            | their heads men hid\    |
|                         |                                            | their horror            |
|                         |                                            | shrouding.\             |
|                         |                                            | Pale grew Atli,\        |
|                         |                                            | as one poison-sick,\    |
|                         |                                            | on his face crashed he\ |
|                         |                                            | fallen swooning.        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 149                                        | To bed they brought     |
|                         |                                            | him\                    |
|                         |                                            | in bower empty,\        |
|                         |                                            | laid him and left him\  |
|                         |                                            | to loathsome dream.\    |
|                         |                                            | Women were wailing,\    |
|                         |                                            | wolves were howling,\   |
|                         |                                            | hounds were baying\     |
|                         |                                            | the hornéd moon.        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 150                                        | In came Gudrún\         |
|                         |                                            | with ghastly eyes,\     |
|                         |                                            | darkly mantled,\        |
|                         |                                            | dire of purpose.        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gudrún*                |                                            | 'Wake thou, woeful!\    |
|                         |                                            | Wake from dreaming!'\   |
|                         |                                            | In his breast the       |
|                         |                                            | knife\                  |
|                         |                                            | she bitter drave it.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Atli*                  | 151                                        | 'Grímhild's daughter\   |
|                         |                                            | ghastly-handed,\        |
|                         |                                            | hounds should tear      |
|                         |                                            | thee\                   |
|                         |                                            | and to hell send thee!\ |
|                         |                                            | Stoned and branded\     |
|                         |                                            | at the stake living\    |
|                         |                                            | thou shouldst burn and  |
|                         |                                            | wither\                 |
|                         |                                            | thou born of witch!'    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 152                                        | Gudrún mocked him,\     |
|                         |                                            | gasping left him.       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gudrún*                |                                            | 'The doom of burning\   |
|                         |                                            | is dight for thee!\     |
|                         |                                            | On pyre the corpse is,\ |
|                         |                                            | prepared the faggot!\   |
|                         |                                            | so Atli passeth\        |
|                         |                                            | earth forsaking.'       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 153                                        | Fires she kindled,\     |
|                         |                                            | flames she brandished;\ |
|                         |                                            | the house was roaring,\ |
|                         |                                            | hounds were yelping.\   |
|                         |                                            | Timbers crumbled,\      |
|                         |                                            | trees and rafters;\     |
|                         |                                            | there sank and died\    |
|                         |                                            | slaves and maidens.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 154                                        | Smoke was swirling\     |
|                         |                                            | over sleeping town,\    |
|                         |                                            | light was lifted\       |
|                         |                                            | over land and tree.\    |
|                         |                                            | Women were weeping,\    |
|                         |                                            | wolves were yammering,\ |
|                         |                                            | hounds were howling\    |
|                         |                                            | in the Hun-kingdom.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 155                                        | Thus Atli ended\        |
|                         |                                            | earth forsaking,\       |
|                         |                                            | to the Niflungs' bane\  |
|                         |                                            | the night was come;\    |
|                         |                                            | of Völsung, Niflung,\   |
|                         |                                            | of vows broken,\        |
|                         |                                            | of woe and valour\      |
|                         |                                            | are the words ended.    |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 156                                        | While world lasteth\    |
|                         |                                            | shall the words         |
|                         |                                            | linger,\                |
|                         |                                            | while men are mindful\  |
|                         |                                            | of the mighty days.\    |
|                         |                                            | The woe of Gudrún\      |
|                         |                                            | while world lasteth\    |
|                         |                                            | till end of days\       |
|                         |                                            | all shall hearken.      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 157                                        | Her mind wavered,\      |
|                         |                                            | her mood grew cold;\    |
|                         |                                            | her heart withered\     |
|                         |                                            | and hate sickened.\     |
|                         |                                            | Life she hated,\        |
|                         |                                            | yet life took not,\     |
|                         |                                            | witless wandering\      |
|                         |                                            | in the woods alone.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 158                                        | Over wan rivers,\       |
|                         |                                            | over woods and          |
|                         |                                            | forests,\               |
|                         |                                            | over rocks she roamed\  |
|                         |                                            | to the roaring sea.\    |
|                         |                                            | In the waves she cast   |
|                         |                                            | her,\                   |
|                         |                                            | the waves spurned her;\ |
|                         |                                            | by the waves sitting\   |
|                         |                                            | she woe bemoaned.       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Gudrún*                | 159                                        | 'Of gold were the       |
|                         |                                            | days,\                  |
|                         |                                            | gleaming silver,\       |
|                         |                                            | silver gleaming\        |
|                         |                                            | ere Sigurd came.\       |
|                         |                                            | A maid was I then,\     |
|                         |                                            | a maiden fair;\         |
|                         |                                            | only dreams vexed me,\  |
|                         |                                            | dreams of evil.         |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 160                                        | Fell sorrows five\      |
|                         |                                            | hath fate sent me:\     |
|                         |                                            | they slew Sigurd,\      |
|                         |                                            | my sorrow greatest.\    |
|                         |                                            | In evil loathing\       |
|                         |                                            | to Atli me gave:\       |
|                         |                                            | too long lasting\       |
|                         |                                            | my life's disease.      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 161                                        | The heart of Högni\     |
|                         |                                            | they hewed living:\     |
|                         |                                            | my heart it hardened,\  |
|                         |                                            | my hardest woe.\        |
|                         |                                            | Gunnar heard I\         |
|                         |                                            | in the grave crying:\   |
|                         |                                            | my grief most grim\     |
|                         |                                            | was that ghastly voice. |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 162                                        | My sons I slew\         |
|                         |                                            | seared with madness:\   |
|                         |                                            | keen it bites me\       |
|                         |                                            | most clinging woe.\     |
|                         |                                            | There sits beside me\   |
|                         |                                            | son nor daughter;\      |
|                         |                                            | the world is empty,\    |
|                         |                                            | the waves are cold.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 163                                        | They slew Sigurd:\      |
|                         |                                            | my sorrow deepest,\     |
|                         |                                            | my life's loathing,\    |
|                         |                                            | my life's disease.\     |
|                         |                                            | Sigurd, Sigurd,\        |
|                         |                                            | on swift Grani\         |
|                         |                                            | lay saddle and bridle\  |
|                         |                                            | and seek for me!        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 164                                        | Rememberest thou\       |
|                         |                                            | what on marriage-bed\   |
|                         |                                            | in love we pledged,\    |
|                         |                                            | as we laid us down? --\ |
|                         |                                            | the light I would       |
|                         |                                            | leave\                  |
|                         |                                            | to look for thee,\      |
|                         |                                            | from hell thou wouldst  |
|                         |                                            | ride\                   |
|                         |                                            | and haste to me!'       |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 165                                        | In the waves she cast   |
|                         |                                            | her,\                   |
|                         |                                            | the waves took her;\    |
|                         |                                            | in the wan water\       |
|                         |                                            | her woe was drowned.\   |
|                         |                                            | While the world         |
|                         |                                            | lasteth\                |
|                         |                                            | woe of Gudrún\          |
|                         |                                            | till the end of days\   |
|                         |                                            | all shall hearken.      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                                                                      | \*                      |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | 166                                        | Thus glory endeth,\     |
|                         |                                            | and gold fadeth,\       |
|                         |                                            | on noise and clamours\  |
|                         |                                            | the night falleth.\     |
|                         |                                            | Lift up your hearts,\   |
|                         |                                            | lords and maidens\      |
|                         |                                            | for the song of sorrow\ |
|                         |                                            | that was sung of old.   |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
:::

::: {#calibre_link-20 .calibre2}
[**COMMENTARY\
on\
[GUÐRÚNARKVIÐA EN NÝJA]{.small}**](#calibre_link-316){.calibre5}

![art](images/000007.jpg){.calibre1}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-317 .calibre2}
# **COMMENTARY on GUÐRÚNARKVIÐA EN NÝJA** {#commentary-on-guðrúnarkviða-en-nýja .ct}

In this commentary *Guðrúnarkviða en Nýja* is referred to as 'the Lay of
Gudrún', or where no confusion is possible as 'the Lay', and
*Völsungakviða en Nýja* as 'the Lay of the Völsungs'. As there are no
sections in this poem, references are made simply by the numbers of the
stanzas.

The subordinate title *Dráp Niflunga* means 'The Slaying of the
Niflungs': on this name see the Lay of the Völsungs, VII.8 and note.

The relation of the Lay of Gudrún to its ancient sources is not
essentially different from that of the Lay of the Völsungs, but in this
case the sources are very largely extant in the poems of the Edda, and
the *Völsunga Saga* is of far less importance. In its content the Lay of
Gudrún is essentially a complex interweaving of the Eddaic poems
*Atlakviða* and *Atlamál*, together with some wholly independent
developments.

My father devoted much time and thought to *Atlakviða,* and prepared a
very detailed commentary (the basis for lectures and seminars) on this
extraordinarily difficult text. It is a poem that he much admired.
Despite its condition, 'we are in the presence (he wrote) of great
poetry that can still move us as poetry. Its style is universally and
rightly praised: rapid, terse, vigorous -- while maintaining, within its
narrow limits, characterization. The poet who wrote it knew how to
produce the grim and deadly atmosphere his theme demanded. It lives in
the memory as one of the things in the Edda most instinct with that
demonic energy and force which one finds in Old Norse verse.'

But the text as it stands in the Codex Regius, with its clearly corrupt,
defective or unintelligible lines or stanzas, its incompatible
additions, its strange variations in metre, has inevitably given rise
over many years to a great deal of discordant critical analysis. Here I
need say no more, however, than that [my
father](#calibre_link-318){#calibre_link-337} tentatively interpreted
the state of *Atlakviða* as the reworking of an earlier poem, a
reworking that had then itself undergone 'improvements', additions,
losses, and disarrangements.

Following *Atlakviða* in the Codex Regius is *Atlamál*, the longest of
all the heroic poems of the Edda. Whether or not the author of this poem
was familiar with *Atlakviða* (my father thought it improbable) it is
decidedly later, and if it tells the same story and keeps the old names,
it has nonetheless undergone an extraordinary imaginative transposition:
it could be said that the story has been removed from the Heroic Age and
re-established in a wholly different mode. Concerning this my father
wrote: '*Atlakviða* seems to preserve a most primitive (unelaborated and
unaltered) version of events. There is still a sense of the great
kingdom of Atli, and the wide-flung conflicts of the ancient heroic
days; the courts are courts of mighty kings -- in *Atlamál* they have
sunk to farmhouses. The geography, vague of course, is in keeping: [the
Niflungs](#calibre_link-319){#calibre_link-331} ride fen and forest and
plain to Atli (in *Atlamál* they seem only to row over a single fjord).
We may notice also the old traditional *vin Borgunda* of Gunnar, and the
*Myrkviðr* ('Mirkwood') specially associated with ancient Hun-stories'
(see the notes to the Lay of the Völsungs
VII.[14](#calibre_link-320){#calibre_link-234} and
[15](#calibre_link-321){#calibre_link-237}). But in *Atlamál*, while the
old 'plot' survives, the sense of an archaic and distant world, passed
down through many generations, has altogether disappeared. And with it
has gone altogether the hoard of the Niflungs and Atli's greed.

3--4, 6   These stanzas echo in their language the verses that Gunnar
sang when he first came to the halls of Gjúki, and use several of the
same phrases: see the Lay of the Völsungs,
VII.[14](#calibre_link-322){#calibre_link-116}--[15](#calibre_link-323){#calibre_link-117}
and notes. Gunnar was recalling the earlier wars of Goths and Huns (14),
and the battles in which 'the Borgund lords met Budli's host', and slew
Budli's brother (15).

      The compiler of the Codex Regius wrote a prose passage entitled
*Dráp Niflunga* 'The Slaying of the Niflungs', evidently intended as an
introduction to the poem that follows in the manuscript, which is
*Guðrúnarkviða en forna*, the Old Lay of Gudrún. The passage begins
thus:

Gunnar and Högni seized all the gold, the patrimony of Fáfnir. At that
time there was strife between the sons of Gjúki and Atli: he charged
them with the death of Brynhild. This was how they were reconciled: they
were to give him Gudrún in marriage -- and they gave her a draught of
oblivion to drink, before she would consent to be married to Atli.

      Here, as in the Old Lay of Gudrún itself, Brynhild is the daughter
of Budli, and the sister of Atli. Since in my father's version of the
story Brynhild was not associated with Atli this element is absent from
his Lay of Gudrún. 'There is no trace in *Atlakviða* of Brynhild and all
that complication,' he wrote, 'and in so far as the motive is apparent
-- it is not explicit -- it is *the greed of Atli* and the cursed hoard
that are at the bottom of the trouble.' On the drink of oblivion see the
note to 17--28.

10--16   *Atlakviða* and *Atlamál* do not take up the story until the
coming of Atli's messenger to the Gjúkings. The primary source for the
story of Gudrún after the death of Sigurd is *Guðrúnarkviða en forna*
(which has the story that Sigurd was not murdered in his bed but out of
doors, see the note to IX.[51--64](#calibre_link-324){#calibre_link-274}
in the Lay of the Völsungs). In this poem Gudrún looks back in
lamentation, and tells how she went and sat at night by the body of
Sigurd where it lay in the forest; from there she wandered on and came
at last to Denmark. It was in Denmark with Thora Hákon's daughter that
the tapestry was woven, and it was there that Gunnar and Högni came to
her, together with Grímhild.

      In the Lay (stanza 2) Gudrún is said to have gone 'witless
wandering in woods alone', and when Grímhild and her sons found her she
was still living alone, and weaving her tapestry in a 'woodland house'
(10).

      In the brief text (iii) concerning this poem given on
pp.[52--53](#calibre_link-325){#calibre_link-74} my father wrote:
'Gudrún did not take her own life, but for grief was for a time
half-witless. She would not look upon her kinsmen nor upon her mother,
and dwelt apart in a house in the woods. There after a while she began
to weave in a tapestry the history of the Dragon-hoard and of Sigurd.'
Thus the introduction of the tapestry in the Eddaic poem became a
device, having a wholly different content, to link *Guðrúnarkviða en
nýja* to *Völsungakviða en nýja*.

17--28   An important element in *Guðrúnarkviða en forna* which is
absent from the Lay of Gudrún is the draught of forgetfulness given to
Gudrún by Grímhild, intent on making her forget her injuries and consent
to be wedded to Atli. In the poem, followed by the Saga, several stanzas
are devoted to Grímhild's potion, and its curious ingredients enumerated
at length. But very strangely, the draught has no effect on Gudrún's
mind: in the verses that follow she fiercely withstands Grímhild's
persuasions; and it has been commonly supposed therefore that stanzas
have been disordered, those referring to the potion being placed too
early.

      My father did not accept this explanation. The first draft of
oblivion, administered by Grímhild to Sigurd, he believed to have been
invented 'to account for the difficulties raised by the previous
betrothal of Sigurd and Brynhild' (see
p.[244](#calibre_link-326){#calibre_link-298}). 'Here,' he wrote, 'we
have the same mechanism again resorted to -- and I think deplorably: for
the mere repetition is distasteful, these drinks of Grímhild are too
powerful or too powerless: why not give one to Atli too, and make him
forget the Hoard!'

      He thought it very probable that the stanzas relating to
Grímhild's drink of forgetfulness was an interpolation by a later hand.
In his Lay of Gudrún it is gone, and Gudrún (as is seen from stanza 28)
submitted without sorcery to the strength of purpose of her formidable
mother. In the Saga her last words to Grímhild were 'Then so it must be,
but it is against my will; and no joy will come of it, but rather
grief.'

22  Gudrún's dream is repeated from the Lay of the Völsungs, VII.2--4;
lines 5--8 of the present stanza, referring to Atli, are repeated from
VII.4, with change of 'A wolf they gave me' to 'A wolf thou gavest me'.

23  'boot': remedy.

24  'dreed': endured (as in the Lay of the Völsungs, VIII.4).

29  'of gold he dreamed him': this is a relic, apparently, of an old
impersonal construction of the verb 'dream': 'he dreamed of gold'. These
lines reappear in stanza 33.

32--34   In *Atlamál* the life of Atli and Gudrún has been a horror of
hatred and dissension; stanzas 32 and 34 of the Lay suggest rather the
story glimpsed in *Atlakviða,* where when Gudrún stabs Atli in his bed
it is said:

      'Often had the ways of love been better, when those twain were
wont many a time to embrace before their noble court.' In the Lay of
Gudrún Atli is explicitly presented as torn between his love of Gudrún
and his desire for the Niflung hoard.

35  In *Atlamál* (followed by the Saga) Gudrún overheard what Atli and
his men said together in secret; in the Lay this is changed to her
overhearing what Atli muttered in his sleep.

36  'kith': friends, neighbours, acquaintance (the original sense of the
word in the phrase 'kith and kin'); again in stanza 40.

37--48   The narrative elements of the Hunnish messenger and the ring
and runes sent by Gudrún are derived from both *Atlakviða* and
*Atlamál.* The name Vingi is from *Atlamál,* but 'Cold fell his cry'
(38) comes from *Atlakviða,* where Atli's messenger, there called
Knefröðr, *kallaði kaldri röddu* 'cried with a cold voice', which as my
father noted bore here a distinct sense, 'ill-boding, fateful'.

      From *Atlakviða* come also the great gifts offered by Atli, and
the words of Gunnar and Högni concerning Atli's invitation. In
*Atlakviða* Gudrún's warning takes this form, in Högni's words:

Hár fann ek heiðingja

riðit í hring rauðum.

Ylfskr er vegr okkar

at ríða örindi.

(I found a hair of the heath-roamer / wound in the red ring./
Treacherous as a wolf is the road for you and me / if we ride on this
errand.) But in *Atlamál* the wolf's hair is eliminated, and Gudrún sent
a message in runes, which Vingi altered before he delivered it.

      In the Lay of Gudrún both motives are combined (stanzas 44--5),
and in this my father was following the Saga and the note entitled *Dráp
Niflunga* in the Codex Regius. This latter adds that the ring was
Andvaranaut (taken by Sigurd from Brynhild and given to Gudrún: but not
so in the Lay of the Völsungs, see the note to
IX.[9--10](#calibre_link-247){#calibre_link-385}).

39  'boon': request, entreaty.

40  'dights': prepares, makes ready.

42--58   I set out here the interweaving of sources in this passage in
some detail, since it exhibits very clearly my father's narrative method
in this poem.

      In *Atlakviða*, Gunnar asks his brother why they should be tempted
by Atli's bounty when they themselves own such wealth and such arms (see
the Lay stanzas
[42](#calibre_link-327){#calibre_link-309}--[3](#calibre_link-328){#calibre_link-310}),
and Högni, not replying directly, speaks of the wolf's hair twisted
round Gudrún's ring. With no further direct indication of Gunnar's
thoughts, he at once makes the decision to go, crying *Úlfr mun ráða
arfi Niflunga,* the wolf shall possess the heritage of the Niflungs, if
he does not return. In *Atlamál*, on the other hand, neither Gunnar nor
Högni are shown to hesitate at all. The runic message that replaced the
wolf's hair of *Atlakviða* causes them no disquiet. It is only
subsequently that Högni's wife Kostbera examines the runes and perceives
that they have been overlaid on those originally cut; but Högni
dismisses her warning, as he also dismisses her warning dreams. Gunnar's
wife Glaumvör likewise has oppressive dreams, but they too are dismissed
by Gunnar; and the brothers set out next morning. Kostbera and Glaumvör
appear only in *Atlamál* and are not taken up into the Lay of Gudrún.

      In the Saga a further element is introduced, in that Vingi, seeing
that the brothers have become drunk, tells them that Atli, now aged,
wishes them to become the rulers of his kingdom while his sons are so
young (see stanzas
[51](#calibre_link-329){#calibre_link-313}--[2](#calibre_link-330){#calibre_link-314}
in the Lay). It is this that makes Gunnar decide to go, and Högni
reluctantly to agree, before the closer examination of the runes and the
telling of the dreams take place.

      In the Lay my father has taken elements from both the Eddaic lays
and from the Saga, but rearranged the context, so that the implications
are somewhat altered. Gunnar's scorn for Atli's offer and Högni's
warning about the wolf's hair are preserved, but Gunnar is now persuaded
to accept the invitation by the ostensible meaning of Gudrún's runic
message (45). It is Grímhild, not Kostbera, who warns that the runes
have been tampered with, and that the underlying meaning was quite other
-- and this leads Gunnar to tell Vingi that he will not now come (49).
This is the occasion of Vingi's final seduction (51--2); and though
Högni remains scornfully unconvinced (53--4), Gunnar, who had 'deep
drunken', cries out echoing the words of *Atlakviða*: 'Let wolves then
wield wealth of Niflungs!'

      The scene ends with a return to the runes: Högni observing heavily
that when Grímhild's counsel ought to be attended to they dismiss her
warning, and Vingi swearing, in an echo of his words in *Atlamál*, that
the runes do not lie. Gunnar's character is maintained: see p.52(ii).

50  'rune-conner': one who pores over, closely examines, runes.

54  'fey saith my thought': I take, but doubtfully, the word 'fey' here
to mean 'with presage of death'.

59  'few went with them': in *Atlakviða* there is no mention of any
companions of Gunnar and Högni; in *Atlamál* they had three, Högni's
sons Snævar (named in stanzas 87--8 of the Lay) and Sólar, and his
wife's brother Orkning.

59--63   On their journey to the land of the Huns, as my father wrote of
the passage in *Atlakviða* (see
p.[313](#calibre_link-331){#calibre_link-319}), 'the Niflungs ride fen
and forest and plain to Atli'. Stanza 62 is derived from *Atlamál*,
where the furious rowing of Gunnar and Högni and their companions is
described; but in the Lay the localized Scandinavian scene of *Atlamál*
is not intended -- they are crossing the Danube.

60  'fey': fated to die.

62  lines 7--8: this also is derived from *Atlamál*. My father remarked
in a lecture that the abandoning of the boat by the Niflungs, since they
hoped for no return, seems to be a detail that belongs to the oldest
form of the legend as it reached the North, since it is found also in
the German *Nibelungenlied.*

65--67   While the great courts of Atli are obviously quite differently
conceived from the farmstead of *Atlamál*, Högni's beating on the doors
derives from it, as does the slaying of Vingi -- though in *Atlamál*
they struck him to death with axes.

68--92   In *Atlakviða* there is no fighting when Gunnar and Högni come
to Atli's halls. Gudrún meets her brothers as they enter and tells them
that they are betrayed. Gunnar is at once seized and bound (and it is
here that he is called *vin Borgunda* 'lord of the Burgundians', the
only surviving trace in Old Norse literature of the Burgundian origin of
the Gjúkings: see p.228, note on
VII.[15](#calibre_link-332){#calibre_link-239}). Högni slew eight men
before he was taken.

      In *Atlamál,* on the other hand, as in the German
*Nibelungenlied*, there is fierce fighting on the arrival of Gunnar and
Högni, and Gudrún, in this poem leaving the hall and coming to her
brothers outside, takes part in it and herself strikes down two men. The
fighting lasted through the morning, and eighteen of Atli's men were
slain before Gunnar and Högni were taken. Then Atli speaks and laments
his marriage and the loss of his men.

      In the Lay this part of the narrative is greatly extended beyond
what is told in either of the Eddaic lays or in the *Völsunga Saga*. The
Saga introduces the idea of a lull in the fighting, not found in
*Atlamál*, when Atli spoke of his loss and his evil lot, before the
battle was rejoined and the brothers forced their way into the hall (cf.
stanzas 71 ff. in the Lay). But after fierce fighting Gunnar and Högni
were taken prisoner; whereas in the Lay the result of the assault is
that they hold Atli at their mercy -- and Gudrún persuades them to show
it.

      The Lay is far removed from *Atlamál* in the portrait of Gudrún,
who is naturally not here presented as a fierce warrior-woman; and an
entirely new element is introduced in the presence of Gothic warriors at
Atli's court (83), on whom Gudrún calls for aid and who rise against
their Hunnish masters (81--6); see the note to 86.

68  Budlungs: men of Budli (Atli's father).

80  'A wolf they gave me': see the note to stanza 22.

      'Woe worth the hour': see the note to the Lay of the Völsungs,
IX.[29](#calibre_link-333){#calibre_link-267}.

[86](#calibre_link-334){#calibre_link-46}  The introduction in the Lay
of the Burgundians' newfound allies in the Goths at Atli's court leads
to these references to ancient Gothic names remembered in old lays. This
stanza is an innovation of my father's.

      Iormunrek (*Jörmunrekkr*) was the Norse form of the name of
Ermanaric, king of the Ostrogoths, the eastern branch of the Gothic
people, who dwelt in the South Russian plains in the fourth century. The
vast dominion of Ermanaric extended over many tribes and peoples from
the Black Sea north towards the Baltic; but about the year 375, in his
old age, he took his own life, in the face of the first overwhelming
onset of the Asiatic steppe nomads, the Huns, who inspired widespread
terror by their savagery and their appearance. To that distant time the
song of Gunnar reached back, as did his minstrelsy at the feast held in
honour of Sigurd in the halls of Gjúki (the Lay of the Völsungs,
VII.14); the line 'earth-shadowing king' in the present stanza no doubt
refers to the vastness of Ermanaric's empire.

      In the centuries that followed Ermanaric became a mighty figure in
the heroic legends of Germanic-speaking peoples, his name darkened by
the evil deeds that attached to his fame. In the few traces of Old
English heroic legend that survive he was remembered as *wrað wærloga,*
'fell and faithless', and in the little poem called *Deor* he appears in
these lines:

We geascodon Eormanrices

wylfenne geþoht: ahte wide folc

Gotena rices: þæt wæs grim cyning.

'We have heard of the wolfish mind of Eormanric: far and wide he ruled
the people of the realm of the Goths: he was a cruel king.'

      The names in lines 5--8 are derived from *The Battle of the Goths
and the Huns,* a very ancient and ruinous Norse poem embedded in
*Heiðreks Saga* (also called *Hervarar Saga*), which is to be seen as
the bearer of remote memories of the first Hunnish attacks on the Goths,
with ancient names preserved in a traditional
[poetry](#calibre_link-335){#calibre_link-47}.

      Of these names, Angantýr is a Gothic king; and *Dúnheiðr*, scene
of a great battle, probably contains Norse *Dúna,* the Danube.
'Danpar-banks' in Gunnar's earlier song (Lay of the Völsungs VII.14) and
'Danpar's walls' in the present stanza derive from the Norse
*Danparstaðir,* a survival of the Gothic name of the river Dnieper. Of
its occurrence in *Atlakviða* my father noted in his lecture that it was
'a reminiscence probably of Gothic power and splendour in the old days
before Ermanaric's downfall'.

87  Snævar is named in *Atlamál* as one of Högni's sons (note to 59).

91  'ruth': sorrow, regret.

93--112   This part of the narrative in the Lay is entirely independent
of the Norse sources. Atli, being released, now sent for reinforcements
(93), while the Niflungs held the doors of the hall (95) -- and in this
the German tradition of the legend appears, but strongly influenced by
the Old English poetic fragment known as *The Fight at Finnsburg* (which
is not in itself in any way connected with the Niflung legend). Beside
stanzas 96--99 may be set the opening of *The Fight at Finnsburg*
(translation by Alan Bliss, cited from J.R.R. Tolkien, *Finn and
Hengest,* ed. Bliss, 1982, p.147):

'\... gables are burning.'

Hnæf spoke, the warlike young king: 'Neither is this the dawn from the
east, nor is a dragon flying here, nor are the gables aflame; nay,
mortal enemies approach in ready armour. Birds are crying, wolf is
yelping; spear clashes, shield answers shaft. Now that this moon shines,
wandering behind the clouds, woeful deeds are beginning, that will bring
to a bitter end this well-known enmity in the people. Awaken now, my
warriors! Grasp your coats of mail, think of deeds of valour, bear
yourselves proudly, be resolute!'

In the Lay the fighting is said to have lasted for five days (102); and
in *The Fight at Finnsburg* the same is said.

      It is interesting to see that in lecture notes on the
*Nibelungenlied* my father wrote 'compare Finnsburg' against his
reference to the scene when Hagen (Högni) and his mighty companion
Volker the Minstrel guarded at night the doors of the sleeping-hall
where the Burgundians were quartered, and saw in the darkness the gleam
of helmets. So also he wrote of the Old English poem in *Finn and
Hengest* (edition referred to above, p.27): 'The Fragment opens with the
"young king" espying an onset -- like the helmets gleaming when the
sleeping hall is attacked in the *Nibelungenlied.*'

The German tradition is again present in the burning down of the hall in
which the Niflungs were besieged. But in the *Nibelungenlied,* and in
the thirteenth century Norwegian *Thiðrekssaga* based on North German
tales and songs, this is altogether differently motivated, for it was
Kriemhild (Gudrún in the Norse legend) who inspired the invitation to
Hunland, in order to get vengeance on Gunther and Hagen (Gunnar and
Högni) for the murder of Siegfried (Sigurd). It was Kriemhild who gave
the order for the hall in which the Nibelungs slept to be set on fire;
whereas in the Lay of Gudrún it is one Beiti, counsellor of Atli, who
was the instigator of the burning (105). But the detail of the trapped
warriors drinking blood from the corpses (109) is derived from the
*Nibelungenlied.*

      In *Atlakviða* Gudrún set the hall on fire at the end of the poem,
after the murder of Atli and their children, and this appears at the end
of the Lay of Gudrún (153).

105  The name Beiti is derived from *Atlamál*, where he is Atli's
steward (see note to 118--131).

112  'the Need of the Niflungs'. 'Need' is written with a capital
because the phrase echoes the last words of the *Nibelungenlied*: 'Here
the story ends: this was *der Nibelunge nôt.*' The word *nôt*, which is
in origin the same as English *need*, refers to the terrible extremity
and end of the Nibelungs.

113--116   Atli's treatment of the bound Gunnar before Gudrún's eyes,
while taunting her with the vengeance now achieved for Sigurd, is found
neither in the Eddaic poems nor in the *Völsunga Saga*; but it is the
spring of Gudrún's 'ruthless hatred' (133) and of her insanely savage
action after her brothers have been killed: she makes her demand for her
brothers' lives (116) in the form 'by Erp and Eitill our own children'
(and in 120 'by those born of us!').

114  'Budlung's vengeance': the vengeance of Atli son of Budli.

118--131   In *Atlakviða* Gunnar, asked if would purchase his life with
the gold, replied that 'The heart of Högni must lie in my hand.' They
cut the heart from one 'Hjalli the craven' instead, and laid it before
Gunnar, who knew that it was not Högni's heart, because it quivered; but
it is not in any way explained why they did this. Then they cut out
Högni's heart, and Gunnar knew that it was his, since it quivered
scarcely at all. In *Atlamál* it is Atli who commanded the cutting out
of Högni's heart, but Beiti Atli's steward suggested that they take
Hjalli the cook and swineherd instead, and spare Högni; they seized the
screaming Hjalli, but Högni interceded for him, saying that he could not
endure the noise, and that he would 'rather play out this game myself'.
Then Hjalli was released, and Högni was killed, and there is no mention
of the story of the two hearts.

      In the Saga the two are rather crudely combined: Atli commands
that Högni's heart be cut out, a counsellor of Atli proposes the
substitution of Hjalli, Högni intercedes for him; Atli then tells Gunnar
that he can only purchase his life by revealing where the treasure lies,
Gunnar replies that he must first see Högni's heart, and so Hjalli is
seized again and his heart cut out, and the rest of the story is as in
*Atlakviða.*

      In the Lay of Gudrún the sources are interwoven more skilfully: it
is Gunnar who demands to see Högni's heart, as in *Atlakviða*, but an
explanation is provided (121) for the preliminary assault on Hjalli the
swineherd: 'wisemen bade him / wary counsel' (they told Atli to beware),
fearing the queen's wrath. Högni does not inter-cede for Hjalli, but
merely expresses his distaste for the shrieking; and the swineherd is
given no respite.

120  'Of his troll's temper / yet true were the words!' Atli refers, I
believe, to Gunnar's words (118) concerning Högni and the gold: 'to his
latest breath / he will loose it not.'

122  'Woe worth the wiles': A curse on the wiles; cf. 'Woe worth the
while' in the Lay of the Völsungs IX.29 and note.

124  'liever': more acceptable.

128--130   In *Atlakviða*, when they brought the heart of Högni to
Gunnar, he declared that 'Always I had a doubt, while two of us lived;
but now I have none, since I alone am living. The Rhine shall possess
the gold that stirs men to strife, the Niflungs' inheritance. In the
rolling water shall the fatal rings gleam, rather than that gold should
shine on the hands of the sons of the Huns.'

      The actual casting of the gold into the Rhine is not referred to
in *Atlakviða* (as it is in the Lay, 130, line 5, 'in the deeps we cast
it'), and this led to the contention that Gunnar meant no more than that
he would rather see the hoard drowned in the Rhine than adorning the
Huns. My father strongly rejected this, on several grounds: the syntax
of the passage; the statement by Snorri Sturluson in the Prose Edda that
'before they \[Gunnar and Högni\] departed from their land they
concealed the gold, the heritage of Fáfnir, in the Rhine river, and that
gold has never since been found'; and the references in the
*Nibelungenlied* to the sinking of the treasure in the Rhine. He thought
it probable that it was already part of the legend when it came North.

      He noted also that the answer to the question, if the treasure was
in the Rhine, what would it matter whether Högni were alive or dead,
must be that Högni was the only party to the secret of where in the
great river it lay; so in the *Völsunga Saga* Gunnar says: 'And now I
alone know where the gold is, and Högni will not tell you', and Snorri's
'that gold has never since been found'. 'Doubtless it could have been
fished up,' my father wrote, 'if you knew just where to look.' He
believed nonetheless that the episode was a later elaboration (he called
it 'theatrical-dramatic'), not perfectly fitting with the Rhine-gold
motive: see further the note to 148--150.

130  lines 5--8: compare the lines from near the end of *Beowulf*,
3166--8:

forleton eorla gestreon   eorðan healdan,

gold on greote,   þær hit nu gen lifað

ealdum swa unnyt,   swa hit æror wæs.

They gave the ancient wealth   to earth's keeping,

under stone the gold,   that there still dwelleth

as profitless to men   as it proved of yore.

      (From an alliterative translation by my father of *Beowulf* lines
3137--82.)

132--140   In *Atlamál* it is said, and it is repeated by Snorri, that
Gunnar in the snake-pit played the harp with his feet, an idea that may
have arisen from the observation that he was bound, as is told in
*Atlakviða* (and in the Lay, 113). [In the
Lay](#calibre_link-336){#calibre_link-31}, following *Atlakviða*, Gunnar
used his hands. Other features of this episode in the Lay are derived
from the Saga: that Gudrún sent him the harp (135), that his playing put
the serpents to sleep (136), and that he was finally stung to death by a
huge adder (139).

141--147   The great funeral pyres are not in the Eddaic poems, but
Gudrún's revenge on Atli is told in both -- the same hideous motive as
appears in the Greek legend, told by Ovid in the *Metamorphoses*, of
Procne, who for vengeance killed her own son Itys and gave his flesh to
her husband, Tereus King of Thrace, to eat.

142   Lines 5--8 are repeated almost exactly from the first stanza of
the poem, where they are used of the pyre of Sigurd and Brynhild.

148--50   I have said (p.[312](#calibre_link-337){#calibre_link-318})
that my father 'tentatively interpreted the state of *Atlakviða* as the
reworking of an earlier poem, a reworking that had then itself undergone
"improvements", additions, losses, and disarrangements'. He believed
that both the 'Högni-Hjalli episode' (see note to 118--131) and Gudrún's
revenge on Atli through their own children were later elaborations by
'the *Atlakviða* poet' on the earlier poem that he was reworking.

      This last section of *Atlakviða*, constantly difficult to
interpret in the detail of its language, is not altogether intelligible
at large, logically or psychologically. As it stands, Gudrún came to
meet Atli when he returned from the murder of Gunnar in the snake-pit
and welcomed him to the feast with a golden cup (cf. the Lay, stanza
145), brought drink and food to the assembled company, waited on Atli --
and then declared with ghastly clarity what she had done and what they
were doing. A great cry of horror and noise of weeping arose from the
benches, but Gudrún did not weep: 'she scattered gold, with red rings
enriched the men of her household\.... Atli unsuspecting had drunk
himself bemused; weapons he had not, he was not ware of Gudrún' (this
last phrase is my father's translation of a Norse verb of uncertain
meaning here). Then follows Gudrún's murder of Atli in his bed before
she set the hall on fire.

      'Why the distribution of gold,' my father wrote, 'when no help or
favour was needed by Gudrún, or could be expected by a declared
murderess of princes? Why the foolishness of Atli not suspecting
Gudrún?'

      His tentative solution was to suppose that while the perishing of
Atli's son, or sons, may have been a very old part of the legend, it was
not originally an essential part of Gudrún's revenge. The form in which
we here find it interwoven (he wrote) is certainly mainly a Norse
development, and the end of a long process. It is probable that it was
not present in the 'original source' of *Atlakviða*, and that its
introduction and interweaving with the main theme of revenge was the
work of the *Atlakviða* poet.

      He supposed that in an earlier form the story would have moved,
after the funeral feast, to the verse describing Gudrún's gold-giving,
which would in this case be naturally interpreted as her continuing the
pretence of cheerfulness, and acceptance, distributing rich gifts to
allay suspicion. Then Atli, 'unsuspecting' -- because he had no reason
for suspicion -- went to his bed very drunk (this being one of the
oldest elements in the whole story, see Appendix A,
pp.[345](#calibre_link-338){#calibre_link-350}--[46](#calibre_link-339){#calibre_link-351}).
But when the motive of the murdered children entered it had necessarily
to be introduced in the course of the funeral feast. The stanzas
referred to above were retained, but they were not successfully fitted
to the insertion ('Why the distribution of gold? Why the foolishness of
Atli?').

      In his Lay of Gudrún my father devised a remedy for this in Atli's
swoon of horror that caused the servants to carry him to his bed
(148--149).

The author of *Atlamál* here suddenly turns to a tradition that Högni
had a son who avenged him on Atli, and says (followed by the Saga, and
by Snorri) that this son, who has not been previously mentioned in the
poem, aided Gudrún in the murder. As is to be expected, this has no
place in the Lay of Gudrún.

152--154   The burning of the hall by Gudrún is derived from
*Atlakviða*: see note to 93--112.

156  Lines 5--8 are almost the same as the last lines of the Lay of the
Völsungs (IX.[82](#calibre_link-340){#calibre_link-141}), and become
also the last lines of the Lay of Gudrún (stanza 165) before the parting
words of the poet to his audience.

157--165   In a pencilled note on the manuscript my father wrote that
all the conclusion of the poem from stanza 157 should be omitted, only
the final stanza 166 being retained. Rough lines drawn on the
manuscript, however, show the omission as extending only to stanza 164,
so that the last four lines of 156 are the same as the last four lines
of 165 immediately following.

159--165   The verses given to Gudrún as she sits beside the sea are
inspired by the late Eddaic poem *Guðrúnarhvöt*, but there is little
close correspondence. The latter part of that brief lay is one of
several 'Laments of Gudrún'; but it includes her grief over the final
element in the Northern legend, which for his purposes in these poems my
father excluded.

      In *Guðrúnarhvöt* Gudrún tells that she attempted to drown herself
in the sea, but the waves cast her up (as in the Lay of Gudrún 158), and
her story was not ended. Early on, a wholly distinct and very ancient
Gothic legend was threaded on to the acquisitive Niflung theme. This
legend concerned the death of the Ostrogothic king Ermanaric (see note
to 86) at the hands of two brothers, in revenge for the murder of their
sister; and the sister, Swanhild (*Svanhildr*), became the wife of
Ermanaric and the daughter of Sigurd and Gudrún, her brothers (Hamðir
and Sörli) the sons of Gudrún by her third and last marriage to a
shadowy king named Iónakr.

      Earlier in the Lay of Gudrún, when Gunnar sang of ancient Gothic
deeds (86), he named Iormunrek (Ermanaric); and this of itself shows
that my father was cutting away the Gothic legend from his Niflung poem,
and setting Iormunrek in a historical context -- for in history
Ermanaric died some sixty years before Gundahari (Gunnar) king of the
Burgundians.

      Only in *Guðrúnarhvöt* is there any reference in Norse literature
to the manner of Gudrún's death (self-destruction on a funeral pyre);
but in the Lay of Gudrún she utters her lament, and again giving herself
to the waves is this time taken.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-21 .calibre2}
# [**APPENDICES**](#calibre_link-341){.calibre5} {#appendices .cn}

![art](images/000008.jpg){.calibre1}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-22 .calibre2}
# [APPENDIX A](#calibre_link-342){.calibre5} {#appendix-a .an}

# [[A short account of the]{.small} ORIGINS OF THE LEGEND](#calibre_link-342) {#a-short-account-of-the-origins-of-the-legend .at}

# § I Attila and [Gundahari](#calibre_link-343){#calibre_link-48} {#i-attila-and-gundahari .fm}

In both Lays my father used the expression 'Borgund lord(s)', chiefly in
reference to Gunnar, or Gunnar and Högni (who are also called 'Gjúkings'
and 'Niflungs'). In the commentary on the Lay of the Völsungs,
VII.[15](#calibre_link-344){#calibre_link-238}, I have explained that he
derived the name 'Borgund' from a single occurrence in *Atlakviða* of
the title *vin Borgunda* 'lord of the Burgundians', applied to Gunnar,
and that nowhere else in Norse literature was Gunnar remembered as a
Burgundian. In this title appears one of the chief elements in the
legend.

The Burgundians were in origin an East Germanic people who came out of
Scandinavia; they left their name in Bornholm (Norse *Borgunda holm*),
the island that rises from the Baltic south-east of the southern tip of
Sweden. In the Old English poem *Widsith* they are named together with
the eastern Goths (Ostrogoths) and the Huns: 'Attila ruled the Huns,
Ermanaric the Goths, Gifica the Burgundians', which may be taken to be a
memory of a time when the Burgundians still dwelt in 'East Germania';
but they moved westwards toward the Rhineland, and it was there that
disaster overtook them.

Early in the fifth century they were settled in Gaul, in a kingdom on
the west bank of the Rhine centred on Worms (south of Frankfurt). In the
year 435, led by their king Gundahari, the Burgundians, impelled as it
seems by the need for land, embarked on an expansion westwards; but they
were crushed by the Roman general Aetius and forced to sue for peace.
Two years later, in 437, they were overwhelmed by a massive onslaught of
the Huns, in which Gundahari and a very large number of his people
perished. It has been commonly supposed that the Roman Aetius, whose
primary purpose was to defend Gaul from the encroachments of the
barbarians, called in the Huns to destroy the Burgundian kingdom of
Worms. There is no reason to suppose that Attila was the leader of the
Huns in this battle.

But the Burgundians of the Rhineland were not wholly destroyed in 437,
for it is recorded that in 443 the survivors were allowed to settle as
colonists in the region of Savoy. A curious glimpse of them is found
among the writings of Sidonius Apollinaris, a cultivated Gallo-Roman
aristocrat, Imperial politician, and poet, born in Lyons about 430, and
in his later years the bishop of Clermont, the chief city of the
Auvergne. He left in his letters a portrait of the manners and mode of
life in the strange society of southern Gaul in the fifth century.

But to the fastidious Sidonius the gross Burgundians were repellent and
their culture wholly without interest. In a satirical poem he complained
humorously of having to sit among the long-haired barbarians (who were
excessively fond of him) and be forced to endure Germanic speech: to
praise with a wry face the songs sung by the gluttonous, seven foot tall
Burgundians, who greased their hair with rancid butter and reeked of
onions. Thus we learn nothing from him of the songs which were sung by
the contemporaries of Gundahari and Attila, but only that his own muse
fled away from the noise.

That they preserved their traditions, however great the disaster of 437,
is suggested by a Burgundian code of laws drawn up King Gundobad not
later than the early sixth century, in which the names of ancestral
kings are cited: Gibica, Gundomar, Gislahari, Gundahari. These names all
appear in later legend, though it cannot be known what were the
historical relationships between them. *Gundahari* is *Gunnarr (vin
Borgunda)* in Norse. He appears in Old English in the very dissimilar
but ultimately identical form *Guðhere*: in the poem *Widsith* the
minstrel says that when he was 'among the Burgundians'

me þær Guðhere forgeaf    glædlicne maððum

songes to leane;    næs þæt sæne cyning.

('there Guðhere gave me a glorious jewel in reward for my song: he was
no sluggish king.') In the German tradition he is
[*Gunther.*](#calibre_link-345){#calibre_link-49}

[*Gibica*](#calibre_link-346){#calibre_link-365}, in the form *Gifica*,
appears in the Old English *Widsith* as the ruler of the Burgundians
together with the rulers of the Goths and the Huns, as I have mentioned
above. In Norse the name became by regular phonetic change *Gjúki*, who
is the father of Gunnar; in forms of the German tradition *Gibeche* is
likewise the father of Gunther; but (especially in view of the placing
of Gifica in *Widsith*) it may be that he was in history an illustrious
ancestor of an older time.

'It is easy to understand,' wrote R.W. Chambers in his edition of
*Widsith* (1912) 'why the story of the fall of Gundahari and his men in
battle against the Huns was of interest not merely to the Burgundian,
but to all his neigh-bours, till, as the centuries passed, it became
known from end to end of Germania. Eight centuries after his fight
Gundahari was still remembered from Iceland to Austria.'

With this view my father did not altogether concur. In notes for
lectures primarily on the knowledge of the Völsung legend among Old
English poets, he said: 'Guðhere's tale is one of downfall after glory
-- and sudden downfall, not slow decay -- sudden and overwhelming
disaster in a great battle. It is the downfall, too, of a people that
had already had an adventurous career, and disturbed things in the west
by their intrusion and by the rise of a considerable power at Worms. It
is easy to see how their defeat by Aetius only two years previously
would be telescoped in the dramatic manner of legend into the defeat by
the Huns (if not actually connected in history, as it may have been).

'Guðhere, already valiant and a generous goldgiver as patron in
*Widsith*, must have been *very renowned*. Mere downfall, without
previous glory, did not excite minstrels to admiration and pity.
However, we are probably not far wrong in guessing that there must --
quite early -- have been some other element than mere misfortune in this
tale to give it the fire and vitality it clearly had: living as it did
down the centuries. What this was we can hardly guess.
[Gold?](#calibre_link-347){#calibre_link-357} It may well have been that
gold, or the acquisition of some treasure (that later still became
connected with some renowned legendary gold) was introduced to explain
Attila's attack. Attila (when legend or history is not on his side) is
represented as grasping and greedy. It may have been in this way that
Guðhere ultimately got connected with the *most* renowned hoard, the
dragon's hoard of Sigemund \[in Old English\], of Sigurd \[in Old
Norse\].'

[My](#calibre_link-348){#calibre_link-352} father did not mean to imply
that, in history, Attila was the leader in the attack on the Burgundians
in 437, for which there is no evidence. He saw that 'Attila only appears
in the story by an early legendary, or dramatic, simplification and
heightening of the importance of the battle in which Guðhere perished.
He became essential to it.' In the eighth century the Lombard historian
Paul the Deacon (monk of Monte Cassino) knew Attila as the foe; and from
his account it is seen that by then the tradition was that Gundahari was
not slain in his own town of Worms, but marched eastwards to meet
Attila: and this was an invariable feature of the legend in all its
forms.

Profound as was the impression made in Germanic legend by the colossal
figure of Attila, there is no occasion in this book to outline the
history of the most renowned of all the barbarian kings, which
necessarily involves the political and military complexities, often
obscure, of his relations with the disrupted Empire; and indeed, in the
development of the legend in Norse, it could be said that it was the
manner of his death that counted for more than his life. At the same
time there is no need, I think, to pass over altogether the
extraordinarily clear glimpse of that fearful tyrant and destroyer that
survives from more than fifteen centuries ago (in such contrast to
Gundahari, of whose personal characteristics we know nothing at all).

This is owing to an accomplished and well-informed historian named
Priscus of Panium (that being a town of Thrace), whose large work in
Greek *Of Byzantium and the events connected with Attila* survives,
lamentably, only in fragments; but one of those fragments contains the
story of his journey into Hungary as a member of a small diplomatic
deputation to Attila sent out from Constantinople, capital of the
Eastern Empire, in the summer of the year 449. Attila received the Roman
embassy in the village of wooden buildings that was his headquarters,
standing in the midst of a vast plain without stone or tree; and Priscus
not only narrowly observed the banquet at which Attila presided, and
much else, but described it in such sharp detail as to suggest that he
took notes at the time of all that he saw. In this unique account of a
barbarian banquet in the Heroic Age Priscus described the elaborate and
interminable ceremony in which Attila drank to the health of each guest
in turn, and the fine feast served on looted silver dishes with looted
drinking-cups of silver and gold -- in contrast to the unadorned
simplicity of Attila, who drank from a wooden cup and ate only meat, on
a wooden plate. He described the entertainment provided: there were
singers who chanted songs in praise of the great deeds of Attila; there
was a madman, and a buffooning dwarf, who aroused loud laughter, but not
from Attila, who sat through all this in grim and rigid silence. But
when his youngest son Ernac entered the hall Priscus saw that Attila
looked at him 'with softened gaze' and stroked his face. He asked a Hun
who sat beside him for an explanation of this, and he replied that the
soothsayers had told Attila that the fortunes of his family would fail,
but would be restored to greatness by this son. The carouse lasted far
on into the night, but the Romans prudently withdrew long before it
ended.

A description of the physical appearance of Attila is found in the work
of a sixth-century historian of the Goths named Jordanes, and this
description is directly derived from Priscus, though the original is
lost. He was short in stature with a broad chest; his small beady eyes
were set in a huge face; his nose was flat and his skin swarthy, his
beard straggly and flecked with grey. His step was haughty, and he had a
way of darting his glance hither and thither, 'so that the power of his
great spirit appeared in the movement of his body'.

Most important for the large evolution of the legend was the great event
of the year 451, the most famous battle of that age. In that year Attila
moved with a huge army westwards towards the Rhine, mounting an attack
on Gaul for which his motives are obscure. The Huns had destroyed the
Ostrogothic power in the east in the fourth century, and Attila ruled
over a great mixed dominion, as the Goths had done under Ermanaric (see
the commentary on the Lay of Gudrún, stanza 86,
pp.[322--3](#calibre_link-349){#calibre_link-315}). In his empire, and
so also in his armies, were many East Germanic peoples; and now in his
host came the Ostrogoths under their king Valamer, the Gepids under
Ardaric, Rugians, Thuringians, and warriors of other nations beside.
Against them came in uneasy alliance the Visigoths (the western Goths)
of Tolosa (Toulouse) under their aged king Theodoric, Aetius the Roman
general, Burgundians from their new lands in Savoy, Franks, even a
contingent of Saxons. The battle is known as the Catalaunian plains (the
plain of Champagne) and the Mauriac plain; it was fought in the region
of Troyes (a hundred miles south-east of Paris).

Of the course of the battle very little is known. Jordanes, writing a
century later, said that it was *bellum atrox, multiplex, immane,
pertinax* (ferocious, confused, monstrous, unrelenting). Theodoric, king
of the Visigoths, was among the vast numbers of the slain. The fighting
continued into the night, and Attila retreated into his camp, which he
had fortified with waggons. According to Jordanes, he had a great
funeral pyre heaped up out of horses' saddles on which he intended to be
burnt before final defeat should overtake him.

But the final assault was never made. The alliance against him broke up.
Again according to Jordanes, the imminent prospect of the total
destruction of the Huns filled Aetius with alarm. His deepest fear was
the power of the Visigothic kingdom in the south of France, centred on
Toulouse; and despite the eagerness of the young king of the Visigoths,
Thurismund, to avenge on the Huns the death of his father in the battle,
Aetius advised him to return to Toulouse, lest his brothers should seize
the throne in his absence. This counsel Thurismund accepted ('without
perceiving its duplicity'); the Visigoths departed from the battlefield,
and Attila was allowed to escape from Gaul.

In the year 452, following the great battle, Attila crossed the Alps,
and came down into Italy from the north-east. The cities of the north
Italian plain were not only ravaged by the Huns but in some cases
actually razed to the ground. Aquileia at the head of the Adriatic,
which both as fortress and great trading centre was one of the foremost
cities of northern Italy, was so utterly destroyed that when Jordanes
wrote, a century later, there was scarcely a trace of it to be seen.
Patavium suffered the same fate, and though unlike Aquileia it rose
again, it is a striking fact that Padua has no Roman remains.

But Attila never crossed the Apennines, making for Rome. Whatever the
reason, he returned to Hungary; and in the following year, 453, he died.
The story of his death is known from Jordanes; but Jordanes expressly
stated that he was following the authority of Priscus, and it can be
taken to be precise history.

Attila in this year added one more to his many wives (*innumerabiles
uxores* in Jordanes' words: the Huns were highly polygamous). His wife
was a very beautiful girl named Ildico (it has been commonly thought
probable that her name shows her to have been of Germanic origin -- a
diminutive form of *Hild*, or any name ending in -*hild*; perhaps a
Burgundian). [At](#calibre_link-350){#calibre_link-338} the wedding
feast Attila became hugely drunk and took to his bed, 'heavy with wine
and sleep'; and there as he lay on his back he suffered a violent
nose-bleeding, and was choked to death by the blood passing down his
throat. Late on the following day his servants broke down the doors and
found him lying dead and covered with blood 'without a wound', his bride
weeping, covered by her [veil](#calibre_link-351){#calibre_link-339}.

Jordanes described the funeral of Attila, clearly still following the
lost narrative of Priscus. His body was laid in a silken tent out on the
plain, and the finest horsemen of the Huns rode round in circles, 'after
the manner of the circus-games'; and they told of his deeds in a funeral
song. After wild extremes of grief and joy his body was buried at night,
covered in gold, and silver, and iron, with weapons taken from his
enemies and many treasures; and then, 'in order that human curiosity
should be kept away from such riches', those who performed the work of
burial were killed. In the same way, after the death of Alaric king of
the Visigoths in 410, the captives were made to divert the
mountain-river Busento in Calabria from its bed, and then after the
burial of the king and the returning of the river to its ordinary course
they were all put to death.

But the figure of Attila rose from his tomb and took different shapes in
the centuries that followed. Among Latin-speaking peoples he was taken
up into what has been called 'ecclesiastical mythology', and became
*Flagellum Dei*, the Scourge of God, divinely appointed to the
devastation of a wicked world. In the lands of Germania there were two
radically distinct traditions concerning him: he appears in a double
light, generous patron and monstrous foe, and it is not difficult to see
how this should have come about. On the Catalaunian plains there was a
colossal conflict between men of many Germanic nations. As I have said,
in the hosts of Attila went men of many East Germanic peoples subject to
the Huns, most notably the Ostrogoths, and for them Attila was the great
King and overlord, to whom their own kings paid allegiance: indeed his
very name *Attila* looks like a diminutive form of the Gothic word
*atta,* 'father'. In South German (High German) tradition Attila, his
name changed in the course of time through phonetic movement to *Etzel*,
is a benevolent monarch, hospitable and ineffectual, far removed from
the Attila of history.

But in more northerly lands his legendary image was derived from his
enemies, and thence, by whatever route it came, the Scandinavians
derived their grim and covetous king *Atli*, murderer of the Burgundians
for the sake of the Nibelung hoard.

The story that Jordanes, following Priscus, told of the manner of
Attila's death is beyond question the historical fact; and the knowledge
that that was how he died was known to Chaucer more than nine hundred
years later. His scoundrelly Pardoner finds in the death of Attila an
anecdote to illustrate the evil of drunkenness:

Looke, Attila, the gretë conqueróur,

Deyde in his sleepe, with shame and dishonóur,

Bledynge ay at his nose in dronkenesse;

A capitayn sholde lyve in sobrenesse.

But a chronicler named Marcellinus Comes, writing in Constantinople at
about the same time as Jordanes, knew a different story: Attila was
stabbed in the night by a woman. It may well be that this story
originated almost as soon as the true report -- it was lying ready to
hand.

In very brief remarks on this matter, my father sketched out his view of
the further evolution of the Burgundian legend when the story that
Attila was murdered by his bride had taken root. Such a deed must have a
motive, and no motive is more likely than that it was vengeance for the
murder of the bride's father, or kinsmen. Attila had come to be seen as
the leader of the Huns in the massacre of the Burgundians in 437 (see
p.[341](#calibre_link-352){#calibre_link-348}); now, the murder was done
in vengeance for the destruction of Gundahari and his people. Whether or
not Ildico was a Burgundian, her rôle in the evolving drama must make
her so. And she avenges her brother, Gundahari.

The essential features of the Burgundian story are then present.
Gundahari-Gunnar, *vin Borgunda*, was killed by Attila-Atli, and for
this he was murdered, *in his bed*, by a woman. And the woman was
Gudrún. But where the *gold* came from is of course a different
question.

## § II Sigmund, Sigurd and the Nibelungs {#ii-sigmund-sigurd-and-the-nibelungs .calibre16}

As the story of the Burgundians evolved it became intertwined with a
legend (or legends) distinct in nature and origin: the dragon-slayer and
his golden hoard, and the mysterious Nibelungs (German *Nibelungen,*
Norse *Niflungar*). When that conjunction and combination took place
cannot be said, but it seems plain that it was made in Germany, and not
in Scandinavia.

This is a matter that raises many questions that cannot be certainly
resolved, and its study has been marked by severe disagreements. My
father took a deep interest in it; but in his lectures at Oxford he
approached it primarily from his desire to convey an idea of the largely
vanished heroic poetry of ancient England. Since in this book my object
is to present his poems expressly in terms of his own beliefs and
opinions, it seems best to introduce this sketch of the subject in the
same way, with the same question: what can be learned of it from the
scraps and fragmentary references of Old English poetry?

In fact, there is only one text from which to look for an answer to that
question, namely, a passage in *Beowulf*. I give this passage here in my
father's translation of the poem, which he made, I incline to think, at
some time not far distant from that in which he wrote the Lay of the
Völsungs and the Lay of Gudrún.

Returning from their riding from the hall of Heorot to see the mere into
which Grendel had plunged dying, the knights were entertained by a
minstrel of the king.

At whiles a servant of the king, a man laden with proud memories who had
lays in mind and recalled a host and multitude of tales of old -- word
followed word, each truly linked to each -- this man in his turn began
with skill to treat in poetry the quest of Beowulf and in flowing verse
to utter his ready tale, interweaving words.

He recounted all that he had heard tell concerning Sigemund's works of
prowess, many a strange tale, the arduous deeds of the Wælsing and his
adventures far and wide, deeds of vengeance and of enmity, things that
the children of men knew not fully, save only Fitela who was with him.
In those days he was wont to tell something of such matters to his
sister's child, even as they ever were comrades in need in every
desperate strait -- many and many of the giant race had they laid low
with swords. For Sigemund was noised afar after his dying day no little
fame, since he, staunch in battle, had slain the serpent, the guardian
of the Hoard. Yea he, the son of noble house, beneath the hoar rock
alone did dare the perilous deed. Fitela was not with him; nonetheless
it was his fortune that the sword pierced through the serpent of strange
shape and stood fixed in the wall, goodly blade of iron; the dragon died
a cruel death. The fierce slayer had achieved by his valour that he
might at his own will enjoy that hoard of rings; the boat upon the sea
he laded and bore to the bosom of his ship the bright treasures, the
offspring of Wæls was he. The serpent melted in its heat.

He was far and wide of adventurers the most renowned throughout the
people of mankind for his works of prowess, that prince of warriors --
thereby did he aforetime prosper -- after the valour and might of
Heremod, his might and prowess, had failed\...

The remainder of the passage concerns the Danish king Heremod and does
not bear on the question at issue here. In a lecture on the subject my
father set down what he called 'preliminary points' -- considerations
arising from the Old English evidences alone, without looking further
afield. In what follows I give them in abbreviated form but almost
entirely in his own words.

There cannot be any serious doubt that the reference in *Beowulf* is to
a story related to the Völsung and Nibelung legends of other lands. The
names Sigemund, Wælsing, Fitela (and his relation *nefa* to *eam*
\[nephew to uncle\] of Sigemund), and the dragon with his hoard, must on
grounds of philology and legend be ultimately the same as Old Norse
*Sigmundr* son of *Völsung,* with his sister-son *Sin-fjötli.* This
remains true in spite of the serious discrepancies: e.g. that Sigemund
(not his son: no hint of whose existence is given) slew the dragon; or
that a boat, not a horse, is the vehicle for the treasure.

The Burgundians are not referred to at all in *Beowulf.* Neither are
many, certainly renowned, figures of Germanic story. The argument from
silence is peculiarly perilous in dealing with remnants so haphazard and
tattered as those we possess of Old English heroic traditions; and might
seem absurd when applied to *Beowulf*, which is a poem, not a catalogue.
Yet it actually has some point in this case. The Burgundian names *were*
known to Old English, and the subjects of verse and tale. We cannot be
certain that such a connexion was not present to the mind of the author
of *Beowulf.* But it does not look like it.

The Burgundians are indeed known. But where we meet them in Old English,
we find an exact reversal of the case in *Beowulf*. No reference, at any
rate, is made to their connexion with Sigemund Wælsing. The very early
poem *Widsith* reveals a wide-flung interest in a huge nexus of legend:
admittedly, specially devoted to the Goths or the northern sea-peoples,
but it is not silent on more southern Germanic topics. It refers to
Guðhere and to Gifica. It does not refer at all to Sigemund, or Wælsing,
or Fitela, or the dragon. (*Widsith* has indeed a specially historical
tendency.)

Certain reference to the 'Wælsingas' is indeed in Old English literature
confined to *Beowulf*. \[My father added 'literature' on account of the
place-name *Walsingham* in Norfolk.\] If we add to this the absence in
nomenclature of the special names peculiar to this story in its
full-grown form (Guðrún, Grímhild, Brynhild) we shall be forced at the
outset to conclude that it is probable:

that Sigemund Wælsing had no pre-eminent place in Old English
traditions, in spite of the words *wreccena mærost* used of him in
*Beowulf* \[in the translation given above 'of adventurers the most
renowned'\], which may be no more than poetic for 'a famous adventurer';

that his tale from the earliest times was of the more mythical-legendary
kind -- not one of the historical-legendary traditions;

that it was not concerned with Burgundians, who certainly were
originally figures of history, but with the dark background of the story
that in High German had practically faded out of memory: the part that
in Old Norse (though remodelled and drastically altered) concerns the
mysterious Odinic Völsungs before the advent of Sigurd. The names are
Sigemund, Fitela, Wælsing: these we can find trace of (even outside
*Beowulf* ). The names -- women's names especially -- which mark the
vital connexion with the Burgundians and their fall cannot be discovered
in Old English times in Old English form.

These are only *probable* considerations. But they are important even
so. For the tone, manner, and details of the Old English references are
peculiarly important. In general we are likely to get in Old English
allusions to an earlier state in legendary development, before the
confusion or combinations of later days in other lands. It is therefore
vital to note that the most reasonable interpretation of Old English
material is that the Sigemund story was originally of an older more
mythical type; that it co-existed with the Burgundian legend, *but was
not yet connected with it.*

The major problem raised by the passage in *Beowulf* in its relation to
the Norse story as it appears in the *Völsunga Saga* is of course the
fact that in *Beowulf* Sigemund is famed for his slaying of a dragon and
the gaining of its treasure hoard, whereas in Norse Sigmund has nothing
to do with any dragon, and it is Sigmund's son Sigurd who is the famous
dragon-slayer. Some scholars have held that Sigemund's dragon in
*Beowulf* originally belonged to Sigurd, but was transferred to Sigemund
when the two came to be linked as father and son. Others have said that
there is no reason to suppose that the author of the Old English poem
had ever heard of Sigurd. Some have said that Sigemund and Sigurd were
originally wholly independent heroes; others, that one hero became
divided into two.

My father accepted that his view was necessarily speculative, but
nonetheless favoured it strongly.

'We cannot tell if Old English knew of a famous son of Sigemund. But in
favour of the highly probable answer "it did not" are these
considerations.

'In the first place, great heroes (*wreccena maerost*), especially if
untrammelled by history, are apt to generate sons who carry on or
duplicate their father's deeds, to satisfy the desire for more, or to
introduce new elements, or to link with other tales.

'In the second place, no such son is anywhere mentioned in Old English.

'And in the third place, when such a son appears, his function is solely
to connect with and become a chief character in the Burgundian story,
*to bring the gold into it* -- and where he exists he has his father's
dragon and gold exploits attached to him. But in Old English these are
not yet detached from Sigemund.'

My father did not discuss in his lecture notes other and strongly
divergent opinions on this subject, apart from some remarks on the view
that Sigemund's dragon in *Beowulf* is a dragon of a very different sort
from Sigurd's, and that in fact they were unconnected. 'But it is a
dragon,' he wrote. 'And dragons are not common as essential actors in
Germanic stories -- in spite of the impression given by their being
prominent in the Völsung stories and *Beowulf.* It is highly unlikely --
however different in detail -- that there should be no connexion between
Sigemund's *wyrm* and Fáfnir.

'This of course is immeasurably strengthened if we believe that in order
to connect with the Guðhere (Gundahari, Gunnar) stories a son was given
to Sigemund (naturally his name begins with *Sige-*), but that this
stage, presumably reached in Low or High Germany first, was not reached
in Old English (which probably drew from archaic sources, and did not
reflect the state of the legend contemporarily in Scandinavia and
Germany about the year 800 or later).'

He thought also that the origin of the *re-forging* of the great sword
Gram (*Gramr*) -- carried by both father and son -- is to be found here.
The fact that the second element in the son's name is not constant
seemed to be significant. In Old Norse he is *Sigurðr,* derived from a
deduced earlier form *Sigiwarð,* in Old English *Sigeweard,* later
*Siward;* whereas the German name is quite distinct: *Siegfried*
(*Sîfrit*) corresponds to an Old English *Sigefriþ.* That the element
*mund* in the father's name is constant points, he thought, to its being
the older form.

His belief that, as he said, we are in the presence of the *duplication*
of a hero and his marvellous sword of strange origin -- as opposed to
the view that the father and the son were once entirely distinct and
unconnected beings -- leads to the conception, in his words, of a
legendary hero of supreme valour and beauty, whose name began with the
element *Sige-* 'victory'. The gleaming eyes of Sigurd (the Lay of the
Völsungs VIII.[29](#calibre_link-353){#calibre_link-121},
IX.[26](#calibre_link-354){#calibre_link-133},[59](#calibre_link-354){#calibre_link-138})
are probably an original trait. In all probability his most renowned
exploits concerned a dragon and a hoard, and -- possibly -- a
mysterious, half-supernatural bride.

[Questions](#calibre_link-355){#calibre_link-232} fundamental to the
genesis of the legend are how it came about that the 'Dragon-hero'
intruded into the story of Attila and the Burgundians, why the
treasure-hoard of this hero was called the Hoard of the Nibelungs, and
why the Burgundians themselves came to be called the Nibelungs. In the
only lecture-notes of my father's on these matters, or at any rate in
the only ones that survive, he indicated his own views very briefly (and
not at all points in a way easy to interpret), no doubt because his
primary concern was with the Sigemund passage in *Beowulf.* I shall not
therefore enter into any close account of the numerous attempts to solve
these baffling and tantalizing questions, but do no more than sketch out
some essential aspects. I have also of necessity avoided reference to
the German tradition, represented primarily by the *Nibelungenlied*,
except where its evidence is essential even within these limits.

A widely held but by no means unchallenged theory rests upon the
interpretation of the name *Nibelung (Niflung)* as etymologically
related to a group of Germanic words meaning 'darkness' or 'mist'
(modern German retains the word *Nebel* 'mist'). This is brought into
connection with certain things said about the Nibelungs. Snorri
Sturluson said of the grandsons of King Gjúki that they were 'black as a
raven in the colour of their hair, like Gunnar and Högni and the other
Niflungar'; and in a much earlier (ninth century) poem they are called
*hrafnbláir* 'raven-black': in the Lay of the Völsungs (VII.10) it is
said: 'As ravens dark were those raven-friends'.

An essential element in this theory is the figure of Högni, as he
appears in German tradition. In the *Nibelungenlied* his name is Hagen,
and he is not the brother of the Burgundians but their kinsman and
vassal. Ferocious and cruel, hating Siegfried and indeed his murderer,
he is very unlike the Norse Högni. In the *Thiðrekssaga,* a large
compilation made in Norway, in Bergen, about the middle of the 13th
century, but based on stories then current in North Germany, Högni, as
he is named in this work, is the half-brother of the Burgundians, for a
fairy or incubus slept with his mother, and the offspring of the union
was Högni. In the *Thiðrekssaga* his appearance is troll-like, and he is
said to have been all over dark, with black hair and black beard.
Especially notable is the fact that the name Hagen/ Högni does not
alliterate on G, showing that he did not originally belong to the
Burgundian clan at all.

An important evidence appears at the beginning of the *Nibelungenlied.*
When Siegfried arrived at the Burgundian court at Worms Hagen looked
down from a window at the magnificent knight who had ridden in with a
fine company; and guessing who it was he told King Gunther a story
concerning a great exploit of Sigurd. With the air of a casual
insertion, Hagen's story is briefly reported in the poem in a very
obscure fashion, and I will refer here only to features essential for
this purpose.

Siegfried was one day riding alone past a mountain, and he came upon
many men gathered round a huge treasure which they had carried out of a
cavern. For reasons that are not clearly explained Siegfried came into
conflict with 'the bold Nibelungs', the two princes named Nibelung and
Schilbung, and slew them, and their friends. He fought also with a dwarf
named Alberich, and subdued him, but did not kill him: he had the hoard
taken back into the cavern whence it had come, and made Alberich the
guardian of the treasure. He was now the lord of 'Nibelungeland', the
possessor of the great hoard, and for the rest of the first part of the
*Nibelungenlied* he has the support of warriors from Nibelungeland, who
are called Nibelungs. But in the second part of the German poem, which
is held to rest on a quite different poetic source, the name 'Nibelungs'
is applied, very strangely and on a first reading of the poem most
disturbingly, in a totally different sense: it now means the
Burgundians, just as it does in Norse.

Hagen also knew, and told this to Gunther, that Siegfried had slain a
dragon and bathed in its blood, from which his skin grew so horny that
no weapon would bite it. But this is in no way associated with the
Nibelung hoard.

In the *Nibelungenlied* the hoard is associated with a dwarf, and a
cavern in a mountain. What is the significance of the Dwarves?

In Norse mythology we are confronted, in the mythological poems of the
Edda and also in Snorri Sturluson's treatise, with a great many
scattered hints and observations about the minor beings of the immensely
rich and many-peopled heathen supernatural world. Taken all together it
is baffling; and beyond question there was once a whole world of thought
and belief concerning these beings which is now almost totally lost.
However, bearing in mind that Snorri was writing in the thirteenth
century and that behind him stretch century upon century of unrecorded,
various and shifting beliefs, we may notice what he says: which is, that
there are the Light Elves, *Ljósálfar*, and the Dark Elves, *Dökkálfar*.
The Light Elves dwell in a glorious place called *Álfheimr* (Elf-home,
Elf-world), but the Dark Elves 'live down in the earth, and they are
unlike the Light Elves in appearance, but much more unlike in nature.
The Light Elves are fairer to look upon than the sun, but the Dark Elves
are blacker than pitch.'

So far as we can now tell, there seems little difference between the
Scandinavian Dark Elves, black as pitch and living underground, and the
*Dvergar*, Dwarves; in fact Snorri more than once refers to Dwarves as
inhabitants of *Svartálfaheimr*, the Land of the Dark Elves. The Dwarf
Andvari, original owner of Fáfnir's treasure, dwelt, according to
Snorri, in the Land of the Dark Elves (see the commentary on the Lay of
the Völsungs, p.[189](#calibre_link-356){#calibre_link-159}): there he
kept his hoard within a rock, and there Loki caught him.

Characteristics of the Dwarves in Old Norse literature may be briefly
mentioned. They are above all master-craftsmen, the makers of marvellous
treasures and wonderful weapons. The most renowned objects in the Norse
myths were made by Dwarves: Ódin's spear Gungnir, Thór's hammer
Mjöllnir, and Skíðblaðnir, the ship of the God Freyr, which could carry
all the Gods, yet was made so intricately that it could be folded up
like a napkin and put in a pouch.

Dwarves lived always underground or inside rocks (an echo was called
*dverg-mál,* 'dwarf-talk'); and they possessed vast knowledge. If caught
in the open after sunrise they were turned to stone. There is a poem in
the Edda, the *Alvíssmál,* in which the God Thór asks many questions of
a Dwarf named Allvíss ('All-wise'); and Thór kept him answering his
questions so long that the sun came up. The poem ends with Thór crying:
'Dwarf, you are *uppi dagaðr*', you are 'dayed up', the sun has caught
you.

The train of thought that emerges from all this will be clear, and the
conclusion. Dark Elves, black as pitch, and Dwarves, closely related in
Norse mythology if not identical, guardians of treasure in caverns and
rocks; Alberich and Andvari; the origin of the Nibelung name in
connection with 'darkness' words; Hagen's 'elvish' birth, his dark and
troll-like appearance in *Thiðrekssaga.* On this theory, this is what
the Nibelungs originally were: they were beings of darkness, Dark Elves
or Dwarves, and Siegfried/Sigurd stole their great treasure from them.

This 'mythological' theory, or some form of it, is radically challenged
by other scholars. From place-names and personal names in the region of
Burgundian settlement there is evidence that is interpreted to mean that
*Nibelung* was the name of a powerful Burgundian family or clan. Putting
the matter in its simplest form, it is supposed on this basis that the
(purely human) Nibelung clan of Burgundia either possessed very great
wealth in historical fact, or else very early had it attributed to them;
and 'the hoard of the Nibelungs' was the family treasure of the
Burgundian kings.

That my father subscribed to the 'mythological' theory in some form is
plain; but his view of the process by which the Burgundians became
Nibelungs is nowhere clearly or fully expressed in his writings. He had
suggested (see this Appendix
p.[341](#calibre_link-357){#calibre_link-347}) that the connection of
the 'Dragon-hero' with the Burgundian king Gundahari began with 'gold'
as a motive to explain Attila's attack (when Attila had become the
leader of the Huns in the destruction of the Burgundian kingdom of
Worms). As Gundahari faded back into the past (he wrote), old legends of
fairy-hoards localized on the Rhine naturally became attached to the
famous king in Worms: 'this treasure probably had demon or dwarvish
guardians already, but need not originally have been the same as
Sigemund's gold, though it may well have been.'

'It would certainly seem', he said, 'that the gold-hero who intrudes
into the Burgundians had already gathered round him *enemy Niflungar*,
who robbed him of life, bride, and treasure. The historical Burgundians
partly take their place, and though there is never complete fusion they
are darkened.' He also saw it as virtually certain that the
*Nibelungenlied* is the more original 'in making the demonic and cruel
Hagen not a brother, but an associate vaguely connected with the
Burgundians. Very likely Hagen/Högni is a relic of some old mythical
figure connected originally with the gold, or at any rate with the
mythical pre-Burgundian part of the "Sigurd" story.'

From observations such as these in his notes one can perhaps surmise
that my father saw the genesis of the central part of the legend after
this fashion. The Dragon-hero was already the robber of the Hoard of the
dark, demonic Nibelungs (whom my father expressly saw as 'the original
owners'), and he brought with him into the Burgundian legend the story
of how the Nibelungs in revenge slew him, and took the treasure.

With the fusion of the two legends, the Burgundian princes necessarily
became his enemies: he must be killed in order that they should become
the possessors of the gold, and they drew into themselves, so to speak,
something of the dark Nibelung nature. It was from the 'Nibelung' side
of the composite legend that the 'demonic and cruel' Hagen ultimately
came, with (in the *Nibelungenlied*) his lust for the gold and his
guarding it to the death, his relentless hatred of Siegfried leading to
his murder. Hagen became more or less assimilated to the Burgundians,
and in the Norse (as Högni) wholly so; but the Burgundians on their side
became Nibelungs, or Niflungar.

My father also surmised that the demonic bride was part of the complex
of legend that was brought in with the Dragon-hero into the Burgundian
story; and that when he brought with him his enemies the Nibelungs, they
came not only as the robbers of his life and the treasure, but also of
his betrothed. 'It seems probable,' he said, 'that the robbing of Sigurd
of his bride by the *Niflungar* is part of the old legendary plot that
was handed over to the Burgundians. And the Valkyrie-bride has all along
retained too much that is fierce and inhuman about her for completely
successful treatment.'

Thus, finally, the hoard of which Sigurd was robbed became (by a curious
irony) the Hoard of the Nibelungs (as it had always been); for the
Burgundians were now the Nibelungs. And Gunnar acquired the
[Valkyrie](#calibre_link-358){#calibre_link-233}.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-23 .calibre2}
# [APPENDIX B](#calibre_link-359){.calibre5} {#appendix-b .an}

# [THE PROPHECY OF THE SIBYL](#calibre_link-359) {#the-prophecy-of-the-sibyl .at}

I include this poem by my father in rhyming couplets as a companion to
the altogether distinct *Upphaf* to the Lay of the Völsungs, since it
also was inspired by the Eddaic poem *Völuspá* (see the commentary on
the Lay,
pp.[183](#calibre_link-360){#calibre_link-145}--[84](#calibre_link-361){#calibre_link-149}).

It is found in a single very fine decorated manuscript; of earlier work
there is now no trace. There is no evidence of any kind for its date,
but on general grounds I would be inclined to ascribe it to the 1930s.

         *The Prophecy of the Sibyl*

From the East shall come the Giant of old

and shield of stone before him hold;

the Serpent that the world doth bind

in towering wrath shall him unwind

and move the Outer Sea profound,

till all is loosed that once was bound.

Unloosed at last shall then set forth

the ship of shadow from the North;

the host of Hel shall cross the sea

and Loki shall from chain be free,

and with the wolf shall monsters all

upon the world then ravening fall.

Then Surtur from the South shall fare

and tree-devouring fire shall bear

that bright as sun on swords shall shine

in battle of the hosts divine;

the hills of stone shall bend their head;

all men the paths of death shall tread.

Then darkened shall the sunlight be,

and Earth shall founder under sea,

and from the cloven heavens all

the gleaming stars shall flee and fall;

the steam shall rise in roaring spires

and heaven's roof be licked with fires.

                         \*

A house there is that sees no sun,

dark-builded on the beaches dun

where cold waves wash the Deadly Shore,

and northward looks its shadowy door;

the louver poisoned rain lets fall,

of woven serpents in the wall.

Laden in heavy streams there wade

men perjured, men who have betrayed

the trust of friend; and there the coward

and wolvish murderer is devoured:

the dragon who yet Yggdrasil

gnaws at the roots there takes his fill.

Dim-flying shall that dragon haste

over the beaches dark and waste,

up from the Nether-fells shall spring

bearing those corpses under wing,

then plunge, and sea close o'er his head

for ever, o'er the doomed and dead.

                         \*

At last once more uprising slow

the Earth from Ocean green shall grow,

and falls of water shimmering pour

from her high shoulders to the shore;

the eagle there with lonely cry

shall hunt the fish on mountains high.

The younger gods again shall meet

in Idavellir's pastures sweet,

and tales shall tell of ancient doom,

the Serpent and the fire and gloom,

and that old king of Gods recall

his might and wisdom ere the fall.

There marvellous shall again be found

cast in the grass upon the ground

the golden chess wherewith they played

when Ásgard long ago was made,

when all their courts were filled with gold

in the first merriment of old.

A house I see that standeth there

bright-builded, than the Sun more fair:

o'er Gimlé shine its tiles of gold,

its halls no grief nor evil hold,

and there shall worthy men and true

in living days delight pursue.

Unsown shall fields of wheat grow white

when Baldur cometh after night;

the ruined halls of Ódin's host,

the windy towers on heaven's coast,

shall golden be rebuilt again,

all ills be healed in Baldur's reign.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-24 .calibre2}
# [APPENDIX C](#calibre_link-362){.calibre5} {#appendix-c .an}

# [FRAGMENTS OF A HEROIC POEM OF ATTILA IN OLD ENGLISH](#calibre_link-362) {#fragments-of-a-heroic-poem-of-attila-in-old-english .at}

These verses in the old English alliterative metre were composed at some
date unknown, but I think it at least very probable that they belong to
the same period as all the writings in this book, my father's earlier
years at Oxford after his departure from Leeds.

In content and internal sequence both pieces are closely based on the
Old Norse *Atlakviða*. There is more than one copy of each, with minor
progressive improvement. In each case I have appended a translation and
a few explanatory notes.

# I {#i-1 .fm1}

This text corresponds to the first eight stanzas of *Atlakviða.* It is a
part of the Norse poem that poses many difficulties and doubts; and it
seems conceivable that my father selected it precisely because it is the
beginning of the poem, as if at one time he thought to transform it in
this way in its entirety. For the corresponding passage in the Lay of
Gudrún see pp.265--67, stanzas
[37](#calibre_link-363){#calibre_link-308}--[44](#calibre_link-364){#calibre_link-311}.

  ---------- -------------------------------------------------------------- ----
             Ætla Guðhere     ar onsende                                     
             cenne ridend -- Cneofrið hatte --:                              
             com to geardum Gifecan,     Guðheres healle;                    
             beornas ymb heorðe     beore gefægon.                           
             Druncon dryhtguman     on dreorsele,                           5
             mod miðende     meldan sæton;                                   
             Huna heteþanc     hæleþ ondreordon.                             
             Secg suðlendisc     sliþan reorde,                              
             Cneofrið ciegde     cuma on healle:                             
             'Hider on ærende     Ætla mec sende                            10
             geond Wistlawudu     wegas uncuðe                               
             mearh ridendne     midlbætedne;                                 
             het inc gretan wel,     Guðhere, beodan                         
             þæt git helmum þeahte     to his ham cwomen.                    
             Þær git sceld sculon agan     ond sceaft smeðne,               15
             helm goldhrodene,     Huna mænigo,                              
             sadol seolforweredne,     serc scynestan,                       
             blancan betstan     bitolhæbbendne,                             
             wæde wealhbeaswe,     ond wacne gar.                            
             Cwæþ þæt he giefan wolde     inc Gnitanhæðe,                   20
             weald þone widan     on geweald sellan,                         
             ofer giellendne gar     ond gylden stefn,                       
             maðmas micle,     mearce Dænepes,                               
             ond þæt mære holt -- Myrcwudu hatte.'                           
             Ða heafod hylde     helm Burgenda,                             25
             Hagenan sægde:     'Þa wit hyraþ swelc,                         
             hwæt rædeþ unc se rinc,     runbora geonga?                     
             On Gnitanhæðe     ic gold ne gefrægn                            
             þæt wit oþres ne ahten     efnmicle sped.                       
             Wit seld agon seofon     sweordum gefylled,                    30
             þára sint hiltu gehwilces     heawen of golde;                  
             mearh is mín mærest,     mece betsta,                           
             helm hwitesta     ond hilderand                                 
             ahyþed of horde     hean Caseres --                             
             þonne ealra Huna     an is min betera.'                        35
  *Hagena*   'Hwæt biecnede seo bryd þa heo unc beag sende,                  
             weargloccum wand?     wearnunge geteah!                         
             Þy ic wriðen fæste     þær wulfes hær                           
             hares hæþstapan     on hringe fand,                             
             wylfen, þæs ic wene,     bið uncer waþ heonan.'                40
             Ætla sent to Guðhere a bold messenger                           
             riding -- Cnéofrið was his name:                                
             he came to the courts of Gifeca, to the hall of Guðhere;        
             about the hearth warriors rejoiced in the ale.                  
             The men of that company drank in the gloomy hall,              5
             the *meldan* sat hiding their thoughts;                         
             the warriors feared the hatred of the Huns.                     
             The man from the south cried out with a fell voice,             
             Cnéofrið, the stranger in the hall:                             
             'Hither upon an errand Ætla sent me                            10
             on unknown ways through the Vistula forest                      
             riding the bit-bridled steed;                                   
             he bade me greet well you twain, Guðhere, and ask               
             that you come covered by your helms to his abode.               
             There you shall have shield and smooth-shaven lance            15
             gold-adorned helmet, a great company of Huns,                   
             silvered saddle, coat of mail most shining,                     
             the finest horse that bears a bridle,                           
             clothes of foreign scarlet, and slender spear.                  
             He said that he would give to you Gnitanheath,                 20
             give into your power the wide woodland,                         
             shrieking spear and golden prow,                                
             great treasures, the abodes of the Dnieper,                     
             and that forest renowned that is called Mirkwood.'              
             Then the lord of the Burgundians turned his head,              25
             to Hagena he spoke: 'When we hear such things                   
             what does he advise us, the young counsellor?                   
             I have not heard of a gold hoard on Gnitanheath                 
             that we twain did not possess another of as great abundance.    
             We have seven halls filled with swords,                        30
             the hilts of each of them hewn of gold;                         
             my horse is the most renowned, my sword the best,               
             my helm the brightest, my battle-shield                         
             plundered from the treasure of the high emperor --              
             mine alone is better than \[those\] of all the Huns.'          35
  *Hagena*   'What did the bride signify when she sent us a ring,            
             wound it with wolf-hair? She offered us warning!                
             Fast bound on the ring I found the hair of a wolf,              
             of the grey heath-roamer:                                       
             wolvish, as I think, will be our journey hence.'               40
  ---------- -------------------------------------------------------------- ----

## *Notes* {#notes .fm2}

1    *Ætla, Guðhere*: the Old English forms of the Norse names Atli and
Gunnar.

2    *Cnéofrið*: the name of Atli's messenger in *Atlakviða* is
Knefröðr: see the commentary on the Lay of Gudrún, stanzas 37--48.

3    *Gifeca*: the Old English form of the Norse name Gjúki, father of
Gunnar: see Appendix A, p.[340](#calibre_link-365){#calibre_link-346}.

5--6   In a lecture on the text of *Atlakviða* my father took the
meaning of the verse at this point to be that there was merriment in the
hall among Gunnar's folk, but the Hunnish envoys sat silent, hiding
their thoughts. But his Old English verses may not proceed from this
interpretation.

      The Old English word *melda* means one who declares, tells,
informs, or betrays. The man in *Beowulf* who stole the goblet from the
dragon's hoard and led Beowulf and his companions to the lair is called
a *melda.* But I do not know what significance my father gave to the
word in this verse.

11  *Wistlawudu.* This name occurs in the poem *Widsith*:

        ful oft þær wig ne alæg,

þonne Hræda here   heardum sweordum

ymb Wistlawudu   wergan sceoldon

ealdne eþelstol   Ætlan leodum.

'Seldom was warfare stilled, when the host of the Hrædas \[Goths\] about
the Vistula forest had to defend with their swords their ancient
dwelling-place from the people of Attila.'

      The reference to *Wistlawudu* is a vestige of very ancient
tradition; for it was about the end of the second century that the Goths
departed on a vast south-easterly migration from the Baltic coast and
the Vistula valley, and at length settled in the plains to the north of
the Black Sea. But in *Widsith* 'the Vistula forest' is thought of as
the primeval forest separating the territories of the Goths and the
Huns, and is to be equated with *Myrkviðr* (see the commentary on the
Lay of the Völsungs, VII.14
(pp.[227](#calibre_link-366){#calibre_link-235}--[28](#calibre_link-367){#calibre_link-236}):
in *Atlakviða* Knefröðr says that he had ridden through *Myrkvið inn
ókunna*, Mirkwood unexplored.

20  Ætla's offer (following *Atlakviða*) of 'Gnitanheath', where Fáfnir
had his lair, as if it were a part of his dominion constitutes a problem
to which a number of solutions have been proposed. My father thought it
probable that there was an ancient association of Gnitaheiðr with a gold
hoard, of which we know nothing, and that this caused it to be attracted
to Fáfnir, that is, became later the name of the region where he had his
lair and his treasure. I cannot account for the form *Gnitanheath.*

27  The word *runbora* seems not to be recorded in Old English, but I
take it to mean 'one who bears *run*' in the sense of '(secret)
counsel', hence 'counsellor', equivalent to the recorded word *rædbora*
of the same meaning.

36  *Hagena*: Högni.

37  *weargloccum* 'wolf's hair': in Old English the word *wearg* was
used exclusively of an outlaw or hunted criminal but Norse *vargr*
retained in addition the sense 'wolf'. From this was derived the name of
the *Wargs* of Middle-earth.

39  The word *hæðstapa* 'heath-roamer' occurs in *Beowulf,* where it is
used of a stag. In *Atlakviða* the word used is *heiðingi*, of similar
meaning: see the commentary on the Lay of Gudrún, stanzas 37--48, where
the verse in the Norse poem is cited.

# II {#ii .fm1}

This second text corresponds to verses much further on in *Atlakviða,*
beginning at stanza 24, *Hló þá Högni\...* 'Then Högni laughed\...' The
passage in the Lay of Gudrún is stanzas 127--130.

After line 19 my father evidently rejected a passage from his poem,
since it is not repeated in the finished copy. The Old English poem
takes up again, and concludes, with *Atlakviða* stanza 32, *Lifanda
gram\...,* 'the living prince\...'

+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Þa hlog Hagena     þe man heortan scear                     |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| of cwican cumbolwigan -- cwanode lyt;                       |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| blodge on beode     to his breðer gæf.                      |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Þa se gar-niflung     Guðhere spræc:                        |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| 'Her is me heorte     Hagenan frecnan,                      | 5  |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| ungelic heortan     eargan Hellan;                          |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| bifaþ heo lythwon     nu on beode liþ,                      |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| efne swa lyt bifode     þa on breoste læg.                  |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
|   Swa scealtu, Ætla,     ealdum maðmum,                     |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| leohte life samod     beloren weorðan! ;                    |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Her æt anum me     is eal gelang                            |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| hord Niflunga,     nu Hagena ne leofað:                     |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| a me twegra wæs     tweo on mode;                           |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| untweo is me,     nu ic ana beom.                           |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Rin sceal rædan     readum golde                            | 15 |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| wrohtweccendum,     wealcende flod                          |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| entiscum yrfe     Ealdniflunga;                             |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| blican on burnan     beagas wundene,                        |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| nealles on handum     Huna bearna!'                         |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| \*                                                               |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Leod lifigendne     on locan setton                         | 20 |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Huna mænigo.     Hringbogan snicon,                         |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| wyrmas gewriðene     wagum on innan.                        |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Slog þa Guðhere     gramhycgende                            |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| hearpan on heolstre.     Hringde, dynede,                   |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| streng wið fingre.     Stefn ut becwom                      | 25 |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| heaðotorht hlynnan     þurh harne stan                      |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| feondum on andan.     Swa sceal folccyning                  |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| gold guðfrea     wið gramum healdan.                        |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Then Hagena laughed when they cut out the heart             |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| from the living warrior -- little did he wail;              |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| on a dish, bleeding, to his brother they gave it.           |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Then spoke Guðhere, the spear-Niflung:                      |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| 'Here I have the heart of Hagena the brave,                 | 5  |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| unlike the heart of the craven Hella;                       |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| little does it quake now it lies on the dish,               |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| even so little did it quake when it lay in the breast.      |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
|    So shall you, Ætla, be deprived                          |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| of the old treasures, of light and life together;           | 10 |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| to me alone belongs                                         |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| all the hoard of the Niflungs, now Hagena lives not.        |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| One of twain, ever was there doubt in my mind;              |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| no doubt have I, now I am alone.                            |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| The Rhine shall rule the red gold                           | 15 |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| that stirs men to strife, the rolling flood \[shall rule\]  |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| the heritage of the old Niflungs, come from giants.         |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| The twisted rings shall gleam in the river                  |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| and by no means adorn the hands of the                      |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| children of the Huns.'                                      |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| \*                                                               |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| The living king they set in a fenced place,                 | 20 |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| the host of the Huns. Serpents were creeping,               |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| coiled snakes within the walls,                             |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| but Guðhere wrathful-hearted struck                         |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| the harp in his hiding-place. Rang, resounded,              |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| string against finger. His voice came                       | 25 |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| clear as a war-cry through the grey rock                    |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| in rage against his enemies. So shall a king of the people, |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| a warlike lord, guard his gold against foes.                |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+

## *Notes* {#notes-1 .fm2}

2    The element *cumbol* in the compound word *cumbolwiga* meant an
ensign, a banner.

4    *gar-niflung.* In earlier forms of this passage my father wrote
*gimneoflung* here, at line 12 *hord Neoflunga,* and at line 17
*Ealdneoflunga.* I cannot account for these forms of the name, but in
any case in the final text he returned to *Niflung, Niflunga*. In the
earlier forms (only) he wrote the word *gar* 'spear' against *gim*
'jewel' in *gimneoflung*; but since the verse in *Atlakviða* has *Mærr
kvað þat Gunnarr, geir-Niflungr* ('Glorious Gunnar spoke, the
spear-Niflung') I have adopted this.

6    *Hella*: in *Atlakviða* and in the Lay of Gudrún the name of the
thrall is Hjalli.

17  *entiscum yrfe.* This puzzling line depends on a very debatable
verse in *Atlakviða,* in which the word *áskunna* 'of divine race'
precedes *arfi Niflunga* 'the heritage of the Niflungs'. In his comments
on this my father seems to have favoured *áskunna Niflunga* 'the
Niflungs of divine race', while admitting that it is not clear what was
meant by this, rather than taking it with *arfi*, saying that 'it is
very dubious if one can speak of a hoard as being "of divine race".'

      In his Old English version he wrote first here *óscund yrfe*
(where *óscund* means 'of divine race, divine', the word *ós* being the
etymological equivalent of Norse *áss*, plural *æsir*), then changed it
to the adjective *entisc* (and subsequently *entiscum*) 'giant, of
giants' from the noun *ent* (from which was derived the name of the Ents
of Middle-earth). In a subsequent copy he wrote *óscund* in the margin
against *entisc*, as if still uncertain.

25--26   It is notable that almost exactly the same words

                                   stefn in becom

heaðotorht hlynnan    under harne stan

appear in *Beowulf* lines 2552--3, where they are used of Beowulf's
great cry of challenge at the approach of the dragon.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-26 .calibre2}
[Copyright](#calibre_link-368){.calibre5}

HarperCollins*Publishers*

77--85 Fulham Palace Road,

Hammersmith, London W6 8JB

www.tolkien.co.uk

www.tolkienestate.com

Published by HarperCollins*Publishers* 2009

1

All texts and materials by J.R.R. Tolkien © The Tolkien Trust 2009,
except for those derived from *The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien*

© The J.R.R. Tolkien Copyright Trust 1981, from *Morgoth's Ring*

*©* The J.R.R. Tolkien Copyright Trust 1993 and

*The Peoples of Middle-earth* © The J.R.R. Tolkien Copyright Trust 1996

Foreword, Introduction, Commentaries, Appendices and all other materials
© C.R. Tolkien 2009

Illustrations © Bill Sanderson 2009

![art](images/000009.jpg){.vrt} and Tolkien^®^ are registered trade
marks of The J.R.R. Tolkien Estate Limited

The Proprietor on behalf of the Author and the Editor hereby asserts
their respective moral rights to be identified as the author of the
Work.

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library

ISBN 978-0-00-731723-3

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of
this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in
or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any
form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or
hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of
HarperCollins e-books.

EPub Edition © APRIL 2009 ISBN: 978-0-007-32307-4
:::

::: {#calibre_link-25 .calibre2}
[*Works by J.R.R. Tolkien*](#calibre_link-369)

T[HE]{.small} H[OBBIT]{.small}

L[EAF BY]{.small} N[IGGLE]{.small}

O[N]{.small} F[AIRY]{.small}-S[TORIES]{.small}

F[ARMER]{.small} G[ILES OF]{.small} H[AM]{.small}

T[HE]{.small} H[OMECOMING OF]{.small} B[EORHTNOTH]{.small}

T[HE]{.small} L[ORD OF THE]{.small} R[INGS]{.small}

T[HE]{.small} A[DVENTURES OF]{.small} T[OM]{.small} B[OMBADIL]{.small}

T[HE]{.small} R[OAD]{.small} G[OES]{.small} E[VER]{.small} O[N
(WITH]{.small} D[ONALD]{.small} S[WANN]{.small})

S[MITH OF]{.small} W[OOTTON]{.small} M[AJOR]{.small}

*Works published posthumously*

S[IR]{.small} G[AWAIN AND THE]{.small} G[REEN]{.small} K[NIGHT]{.small},
P[EARL AND]{.small} S[IR]{.small} O[RFEO]{.small}

T[HE]{.small} F[ATHER]{.small} C[HRISTMAS]{.small} L[ETTERS]{.small}

T[HE]{.small} S[ILMARILLION]{.small}

P[ICTURES BY]{.small} J.R.R. T[OLKIEN]{.small}

U[NFINISHED]{.small} T[ALES]{.small}

T[HE]{.small} L[ETTERS OF]{.small} J.R.R. T[OLKIEN]{.small}

F[INN AND]{.small} H[ENGEST]{.small}

M[R]{.small} B[LISS]{.small}

T[HE]{.small} M[ONSTERS]{.small} A[ND]{.small} T[HE]{.small}
C[RITICS]{.small} & O[THER ESSAYS]{.small}

R[OVERANDOM]{.small}

T[HE]{.small} C[HILDREN OF]{.small} H[ÚRIN]{.small}

T[HE]{.small} L[EGEND OF]{.small} S[IGURD AND]{.small} G[UDRÚN]{.small}

*The History of Middle-earth -- by Christopher Tolkien*

I T[HE]{.small} B[OOK OF]{.small} L[OST]{.small} T[ALES]{.small},
P[ART]{.small} O[NE]{.small}

II T[HE]{.small} B[OOK OF]{.small} L[OST]{.small} T[ALES]{.small},
P[ART]{.small} T[WO]{.small}

III T[HE]{.small} L[AYS OF]{.small} B[ELERIAND]{.small}

IV T[HE]{.small} S[HAPING OF]{.small} M[IDDLE-EARTH]{.small}

V T[HE]{.small} L[OST]{.small} R[OAD AND]{.small} O[THER]{.small}
W[RITINGS]{.small}

VI T[HE]{.small} R[ETURN OF]{.small} T[HE]{.small} S[HADOW]{.small}

VII T[HE]{.small} T[REASON OF]{.small} I[SENGARD]{.small}

VIII T[HE]{.small} W[AR OF]{.small} T[HE]{.small} R[ING]{.small}

IX S[AURON]{.small} D[EFEATED]{.small}

X M[ORGOTH'S]{.small} R[ING]{.small}

XI T[HE]{.small} W[AR OF]{.small} T[HE]{.small} J[EWELS]{.small}

XII T[HE]{.small} P[EOPLES OF]{.small} M[IDDLE-EARTH]{.small}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-27 .calibre2}
![art](images/000010.jpg){.calibre26}

[ABOUT THE PUBLISHER](#calibre_link-370)

**Australia**

HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.

25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)

Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au

**Canada**

HarperCollins Canada

2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor

Toronto, ON, M4W, 1A8, Canada

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca

**New Zealand**

HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited

P.O. Box 1 Auckland,

New Zealand

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz

**United Kingdom**

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

77-85 Fulham Palace Road

London, W6 8JB, UK

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk

**United States**

HarperCollins Publishers Inc.

10 East 53rd Street

New York, NY 10022

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com
:::

::: {#calibre_link-371 .calibre2}
 

^[\*](#calibre_link-372){#calibre_link-40}^ The Ragnarök is 'the fate of
the Powers', 'the doom of the Gods' in the Norse mythology; assimilation
to a distinct word *rökr,* meaning 'dusk', 'twilight', led to the
interpretaion *Götterdämmerung*, the twilight of the Gods.

 

^[\*](#calibre_link-373){#calibre_link-43}^ My father thought it
probable that the loss was due to robbery of the 'Long Lay of Sigurd'
(see [p.234](#calibre_link-374){#calibre_link-256}), supposed to have
been the chief constituent of the poetry in the lost gathering.

 

^[\*](#calibre_link-375){#calibre_link-44}^ A round figure! -- rounded
down, whether my father was counting from 1643 or 1663.

 

^[\*](#calibre_link-376){#calibre_link-69}^ To a full *lift* a value 4
may be given. The *subordinate stresses* (reduced in force and lowered
in tone) that appear in such compounds as *highcrèsted* may be given
value 2. But reduction also occurs in other cases. For instance, the
second of two clashing stresses in a sentence; or of two juxtaposed
words (of equal significance when separate), such as nouns and
adjectives, tends to be reduced to approximate value 3. Using these
rough values we see that the normal total value of each pattern is 10; C
tends to be slightly lighter, and E to be slightly heavier.

 

^[†](#calibre_link-377){#calibre_link-70}^ And so not purely phonetic,
nor exactly measurable in figures (such as those used above) or by a
machine.

 

^[\*](#calibre_link-378){#calibre_link-75}^ After *the Völsungs* my
father wrote *(the Chosen)*, but struck this out. An etymological
speculation on the origin of the name which (at any rate at one time) he
favoured associated it with Germanic words meaning 'choose'.

 

^[\*](#calibre_link-379){#calibre_link-77}^ In the Lay of the Völsungs
Gunnar sang of the slaying of Budli's brother by the Burgundians
(VII.15); and the same is said in the Lay of Gudrún, stanza 4.

 

^[\*](#calibre_link-380){#calibre_link-151}^ For references and
citations from volumes of *The History of Middle-earth* on this matter
see *The Peoples of Middle-earth* (1996), pp.374--75; and for the entry
in the *Annals of Aman* see *Morgoth's Ring* (1993), pp.71, 76.
:::
