---
title: "The Book Before Printing: Ancient, Medieval and Oriental"
author: "David Diringer"
voice: "David Diringer"
voice_role: "Book Historian - Pre-Print Culture"
tradition: "Book History"
period: "20th Century"
region: "International"
genre: "Historical Study"
form: "Scholarly History"
mode: "Historical Analysis"
work_type: "Primary Source"
source_type: "Complete Work"
source_quality: "Original Text"
chamber_integration: "June 2025"
significance: "Comprehensive history of manuscript culture, writing systems, and book production before Gutenberg"
tags:
  - book-history
  - manuscripts
  - writing-systems
  - pre-print-culture
  - codex
  - scroll
  - material-culture
  - typography-history
related_voices:
  - Johannes Gutenberg
  - Aldus Manutius
  - Nicolas Jenson
  - Robert Bringhurst
chamber_position: "First Ring - Sacred Craft Lineage - Historical Foundation"
amphitheatre_status: "New voice - expands book history"
status: "source-aware"
note: "Essential context for understanding the transition to print"
---

# The Book Before Printing: Ancient, Medieval and Oriental

*David Diringer*

---

*Chamber Note: Adds essential historical foundation to the Sacred Craft Lineage, providing deep context for understanding manuscript culture, writing systems, and the material history of texts before the printing revolution. Critical for appreciating the continuity and transformation in book culture.*:::

[Z6.D57 1982]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[002]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[81-17290]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[9780486142494]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[AACR2]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Manufactured in the United States by Courier Corporation]{.style_}

[24243907]{.style_}

[[www.doverpublications.com](http://www.doverpublications.com){.calibre6
target="_new"}]{.style_}
:::::::::::::::

::::: {#calibre_link-2 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-286}

::: calibre7
:::

#### [Table of Contents]{.style_1} {#table-of-contents .calibre8}

::: calibre5
:::

[[Title Page](#calibre_link-3){.calibre9}]{.style_}

[[Copyright Page](#calibre_link-4){.calibre9}]{.style_}

[[PREFACE](#calibre_link-5){.calibre9}]{.style_}

[[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS](#calibre_link-6){.calibre9}]{.style_}

[[CHAPTER I - THE BOOK IN EMBRYO](#calibre_link-7){.calibre9}]{.style_}

[[CHAPTER II - THE EARLIEST SYSTEMS OF
WRITING](#calibre_link-8){.calibre9}]{.style_}

[[CHAPTER III - CLAY TABLET BOOKS](#calibre_link-9){.calibre9}]{.style_}

[[CHAPTER IV - PAPYRUS BOOKS](#calibre_link-10){.calibre9}]{.style_}

[[CHAPTER V - FROM LEATHER TO
PARCHMENT](#calibre_link-11){.calibre9}]{.style_}

[[CHAPTER VI - GREEK AND LATIN BOOK
PRODUCTION](#calibre_link-12){.calibre9}]{.style_}

[[CHAPTER VII - THE BOOK FOLLOWS
RELIGION](#calibre_link-13){.calibre9}]{.style_}

[[CHAPTER VIII - OUTLYING REGIONS (I) : ANCIENT MIDDLE EAST, CENTRAL AND
SOUTHERN ASIA](#calibre_link-14){.calibre9}]{.style_}

[[CHAPTER IX - OUTLYING REGIONS (11) : THE FAR EAST AND PRE-COLUMBIAN
AMERICA](#calibre_link-15){.calibre9}]{.style_}

[[CHAPTER X - ANGLO-CELTIC CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE
MEDIEVAL BOOK](#calibre_link-16){.calibre9}]{.style_}

[[CHAPTER XI---APPENDIX - INKS, PENS AND OTHER WRITING
TOOLS](#calibre_link-17){.calibre9}]{.style_}

[[GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY](#calibre_link-18){.calibre9}]{.style_}

[[INDEX](#calibre_link-19){.calibre9}]{.style_}

[[A CATALOG OF SELECTED DOVER BOOKS IN ALL FIELDS OF
INTEREST](#calibre_link-20){.calibre9}]{.style_}
:::::

::::::::::::::::::: {#calibre_link-21 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-5}

::: calibre7
:::

### [PREFACE]{.style_2} {#preface .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE results of many years' research into the history of the book are
here presented. While many of the facts mentioned have been known for
some time, there is much information that is believed to be new and, so
far as the author is aware, these facts and the conclusions to be drawn
from them have never previously been brought together. The history of
the book is one of the most fragmentary chapters in the history of
civilization, however great the gaps may be in other fields of research.
It is, indeed, remarkable that---notwithstanding the enormous number of
publications on particular aspects of the development of the book---very
few comprehensive histories of the book have appeared in English during
the last fifty years, a period of unexampled progress in many fields of
knowledge. Some of the discoveries during this period have completely
reversed the ideas concerning the history of the book current about the
beginning of the century. Of late years we have learnt much regarding
the antiquity of writing and of book production, and it is of primary
importance to study the earliest records in the light of modern
research. In almost every department of science the theories of
yesterday are refuted by facts of today, though the ascertainment of
these facts has frequently been aided by those very theories. So it is
that, in the main, the works of the greatest scholars and experts have
no finality; they are but stepping-stones towards the high goal of
perfect knowledge.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Naturally the author's own theories must inevitably colour his
presentation of facts, but so far as is known this has never been
allowed to lead to any distortion for the sake of supporting a favourite
thesis. In stating facts preference has been given to the actual words
of the authors quoted. Since the main purpose of this volume is to
provide a handy and up-to-date work of interest to the general reader,
the author has not thought it necessary in all instances to supply
precise references for his quotations. It has hardly been possible
within the limits prescribed to do more than stimulate interest by
providing sufficient information for the inquiring reader. The latter
will probably wish to follow particular developments in greater detail.
To meet this need, long lists of books, some dealing fully with a
particular period or subject, others dealing with the field as a whole,
are given after single chapters or sections, or at the very end. Indeed,
the subject is much too rich to be exhausted in one or two books, and
the present volume may serve as a guide for future research.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Inevitably a certain amount of information is given on the contents or
the literary aspect of some of the manuscripts mentioned---particularly
in the generally less known departments---but this work is not intended
as a review of the world's literature, and the contents are referred to
mainly as being examples of the common phenomenon of the influence of
the contents on size, shape and presentation.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Writing materials, from the hammer and chisel to the paintbrush and the
pen, from stone to clay, to papyrus and parchment, have commanded a fair
amount of space, and it would be unfortunate to ignore entirely the
human side or some of the stories about the men whose work has
culminated in the modern book as we know it. Naturally many of the books
mentioned are hardly books in the modern sense, but a certain amount of
latitude in the use of terms must be permitted.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The present work is another step in the plan outlined in the
author's]{.style_} [The Alphabet, A Key to the History of
Mankind,]{.style_1} [in which it was indicated that the story of the
alphabet would in due course be followed by a history of the development
of writing. It is perhaps unfortunate that it has been found impossible
to cover the whole story of the book in one volume, but the first of the
two volumes now presented tells the story of the hand-produced book from
the earliest times to the invention of printing, and the second volume
will cover illumination and binding of the hand-produced book.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Of the ten chapters of the volume, chapters IV---VII tell the main
story. Chapter i is something of an introduction. Chapter n deals with a
subject of material importance from the point of view of the development
of the book, but is not in itself a part of the history. Chapters III,
VIII and ix deal with these parts of the history which are aside from
the main line of development of the book as we know it. The long chapter
x has been written mainly for the English reader. If the present work is
translated into other languages]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---Italian, French, German, Spanish, Dutch, and so on---it would be the
author's desire to add a chapter on the development of the book in the
country concerned.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Unavoidably, a book of this kind is bound to contain a certain amount
of repetition, but this has been reduced to a minimum and is usually
more apparent than real; indeed, the same subject matter, if dealt with
more than once, is usually presented from a different angle.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the spelling and transliteration of Egyptian, Semitic, Indian,
Chinese, Greek and other foreign words, especially place-names and
proper names---as already pointed out in the Preface to]{.style_} [The
Alphabet]{.style_1}[---inconsistencies in a composite work such as this
are unavoidable, and the general reader should understand that a quite
satisfactory solution of the problem has not been found. The practice
commonly adopted has in general been followed, but here and there
consistency is sacrificed to the idea of presenting to the reader
familiar names in their familiar forms. And since in any case
inconsistency is unavoidable, certain spellings have been simplified
where no confusion is likely to result. Although in some cases divergent
transliterations may cause difficulties, it is reasonable to assume that
general readers are indifferent to what experts know, while experts do
not always agree as to the precise spelling.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[As one might expect, there is a long list of people to whom the author
is indebted. It seemed advisable to have all sections carefully checked
by experts in the respective fields. Some of these are mentioned in the
list of acknowledgements, but perhaps some should be included here, such
as Professors A. J. Arberry and H. W. Bailey, Professors B. Dickins and
W. F. Edgerton, Dr. I. Gershevitch, the late Prof. G. Haloun, Prof. T.
Kamei, Sir Thomas Kendrick, Prof. M. C. Knowles, Messrs. J. Leveen and
C. Moss, Professors R. A. B. Mynors, J. M. de Navascués and D. L. Page,
Messrs. J. M. Plumley and R. M. Rattenbury, the Hon. S. Runciman, Prof.
J. M. C. Toynbee, Messrs. P. van der Loon, G. M. Wickens and D. J.
Wiseman, and Prof. F. Wormald. Gratitude is expressed to Mrs. Hilda
Freeman and to Messrs. L. A. Freeman, and C. E. Vulliamy, who carefully
read the whole book in manuscript, and made many valuable criticisms and
suggestions. The suggestions made by various experts often concerned
debatable questions which, in this book, the author has endeavoured to
reduce to a minimum.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is impossible for the author to express adequately his most sincere
gratitude to all the librarians and others who have collaborated in the
production of this volume---first and foremost to the following
scholars: Abbot Anselmo Maria Albareda, Prefect of the Vatican Library;
Prof. H. W. Parke and M. J. Hanna, resp. Librarian and Assistant
Librarian of Trinity College, Dublin; Dr. R. J. Hayes, Director of the
National Library, Dublin; Dr. R. W. Hunt and Dr. A. F. L. Beeston,
Keepers, resp., of the Western and the Eastern Manuscripts of the
Bodleian Library, Oxford; the staff of the University Library,
Cambridge; Dr. Irma Tondi-Merolle, Director of the Riccardian Library,
Florence ; Dr. P. Calisse, Secretary of the]{.style_} [Enciclopedia
Italiana,]{.style_1} [Rome; Prof. D. T. Rice, University of Edinburgh;
Prof. J. Weingreen, Mlle F. Henry, Dr. L. Bieler, and other scholars of
the two University colleges of Dublin.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The author also wishes to express appreciation to those who have given
encouragement and counsel relative to bringing the work to publication,
and particularly to Mr. W. H. Johnson, the manager of the Scientific and
Technical Department of Hutchinson and Company. Furthermore, he desires
to record his most sincere thanks to Professors A. J. Arberrey and D.
Winton Thomas, Mr. R. D. Barnett, Mrs. and Mr. J. I'A. Bromwich for
having read the proofs of the book, and for in other ways facilitating
the publication of this work.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[CAMBRIDGE,]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[D. D.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Easter Term, 1953.]{.style_}
:::::::::::::::::::

:::::: {#calibre_link-22 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-6}

::: calibre7
:::

### [ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS]{.style_2} {#acknowledgements .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

[EVERY conscientious effort has been made to give due acknowledgment and
full credit for borrowed material, but if through any unwitting
oversight some trespass has been committed, by quoting from secondary
sources, forgiveness is sought in advance, apology is freely offered,
and correction promised in any subsequent editions.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Thanks are gratefully given to the following persons, institutions and
publishers for permission to quote and to reproduce illustrations
contained in books written or published by them, or else to reproduce
objects of art in their possession: Director F. B. Adams, Jr. and the
Pierpont Morgan Library; the Librarian of the American Museum, Madrid;
the American Schools of Oriental Research; Sir Leigh Ashton (Director
and Secretary) and Mr. A. W. Wheen (Librarian) for Victoria and Albert
Museum Crown Copyright; Dr. U. Baroncelli and the Queriniana Library,
Brescia; Lt.-Col. C. F. Battiscombe and the Dean and Chapter of Durham;
Dr. L. Bieler; the Bodleian Library, Oxford; Revd. D. Botto, Arciprete,
Sarezzano; the British Academy; the British and Foreign Bible Society;
the British Museum; Dr. Calisse and the]{.style_} [Enciclopedia
Italiana;]{.style_1} [Miss B. Christensen; Mr. Harold C. Conklin
and]{.style_} [Pacific Discovery,]{.style_1} [California Academy of
Sciences, San Francisco; Mr. J. Conway Davies, M.A.; Dr. P. E. P.
Deraniyagala and the National Museums, Colombo; Miss S. Dcr Nersessian;
Monsieur É. Drioton and the Egyptian Department of Antiquities; Prof. G.
R. Driver; Prof. W. Eberhard; Mr. H. W. Edwards, Publisher of]{.style_}
[Antiquity;]{.style_1} [Expres; Newspapers, London; Dr. L. Giles; Prof.
S. R. K. Glanville; Prof. L. C. Goodrich; the late Dr. H. Guppy; Mr. G.
Lankester Harding; Messrs. Harper and Brothers, New York; Canon F.
Harrison; Dr. R. J. Hayes and the National Library, Dublin; Mlle. F.
Henry; Prof. P. K. Hitti; Prof. S. H. Hooke; Dr. A. W. Hummel and the
Library of Congress, Washington; Sir Herbert Ingram, Bt.; Sir Thomas
Kendrick; the late Sir Frederick Kenyon; Dr. S. N. Kramer and the
University Museum, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia; Mr. J.
Leveen, M.A.; Sir Richard Livingstone; Mr. P. van der Loon, M.A.; Prof.
E. A. Lowe; Canon P. Marinonc and the Capitulary Library, Vercelli;
Messrs. Gactano Macchiaroli, Publishers, Naples; Comm. Prof. A. Maiuri,
Naples; Monsieur F. Masai; Prof. F. Mateu y Llopiss and the Central
Library, Barcelona; Sir Ellis Minns; Prof. R. A. B. Mynors; Prof. O.
Neugebauer; Mr. W. Oakeshott, M.A.; Prof. D. L. Page; Prof. H. W. Parke
and the Library of Trinity College, Dublin; Miss D. W. Pearson; Dr. H.
L. Pinner and Messrs. A. W. Sijthoff, Leyden; Prof. D. T. Rice; Director
Warner G. Rice and the Museum of Archaeology, University of Michigan;
Prof. E. Robertson and The John Rylands Library; Dr. Cecil Roth; Messrs.
Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd., London; Messrs. Shinch sha, Tokyo;
Messrs. Shiry -hensanjo and Dr. Shorijo Ota, Tokyo University; Prof. E.
A. Speiser; Sen. Prof. W. B. Stanford; Prof. E. L. Sukenik; Mr. S. C.
Sutton, Mr. H. L. Greenaway and the India Office Library---Commonwealth
Relations Office; Messrs. Thames and Hudson, London; Mr.J. E. S.
Thompson, M.A.; Prof. P. Toesca; Dr. Irma Tondi-Merolle and the
Riccardian Library, Florence; Dr. John C. Trevor; the University
Library, Glasgow; the Vatican Library; Prof. K. Weitzmann; Prof. W.
Perceval Yetts.]{.style_}
::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: {#calibre_link-23 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-7}

::: calibre7
:::

### [CHAPTER I]{.style_2} {#chapter-i .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

### [THE BOOK IN EMBRYO]{.style_2} {#the-book-in-embryo .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

[IT is significant that man's intellectual progress and, particularly,
the recording of his achievements---history in fact---are very late
developments in his story as a whole. The modern anthropologist regards
the human race as having had probably a million years' existence on this
earth. Of this million years, only a small fraction ---the last five
thousand years or so---are recorded in any contemporary form.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Indeed, the earliest known books or their equivalents are the inscribed
clay tablets of Mesopotamia and the papyrus rolls of ancient Egypt, both
of which, in their primitive origins, are reputed to date at least from
the early third millennium B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[If one goes further back, however, one might by a stretch of
imagination regard as very nebulous beginnings of the book the Old Stone
Age cave paintings---such as we find at Altamira or Lascaux---and other
prehistoric or more recent picture-writings, as well as the oral
tradition, aided by gesture and song, of prehistoric or other primitive
peoples. Moreover, since so little is known of the origins and the early
history of the book, it may be useful to follow up some clues afforded
by language, which tenaciously preserves various terms originally
denoting primitive writing materials. These primitive writing materials
were not necessarily used earlier than the Mesopotamian clay tablets or
the Egyptian papyri.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The present chapter dealing with such prodromes of the book, is thus
divided into three sections, which will treat the following subjects:
(1) oral tradition; (2) primitive human records and pictographic
representations of stories; and (3) primitive writing materials,
especially as evidenced by some modern terms. Numerous statements from
classical and other early writers are included without any expression of
opinion regarding their validity, because the beliefs of such men as
Theophrastus or Livy or Pliny are of interest in themselves.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000108.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-24}

[Fig. I---1]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a, Chinese gestures (1---2, command; 3---5, vow, oath; 6---9, refusal;
10, refuse to marry; 11, usurpation). b, Knot-records and notched sticks
(1, Peruvian quipu; 2, knot-record from Riukiu Islands; 3, notched stick
from Laos, Indo-China; 4, "geographical map" from Greenland; 5, Makonde
knot-record, Tanganyika Territory; 6---7, notched sticks from North
America; 8, Australian notched sticks). c, The famous Pennwampum of the
Historical Society of Pennsylvania.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-287}

## [Oral Tradition]{.style_2} {#oral-tradition .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Unable to write, prehistoric man (like primitive men of today) relieved
his soul by means of the spoken word aided by
[]{#calibre_link-288}gesture---see [Fig.
I---1](#calibre_link-24){.calibre9},]{.style_} [a]{.style_1}[---and
song. Whatever lore of nature and of well-being had been gained by one
generation, was related by the]{.style_} [pater familias]{.style_1} [or
by story-tellers to the children, and lived with other traditions in
their memories. Medicine men and story-tellers were selected for their
personalities and exceptional gifts of memory. The first hymns, chants,
jingles and tunes were invented by the story-teller to assist his memory
in relating the general epics of the tribe, or by the medicine man for
instruction in the mystic rituals.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Story-telling is thus one of the oldest cultural manifestations of man.
From very early times, before the dawn of recorded history, man
endeavoured to educate himself and his children, and told them of his
and his father's adventures, of the lives and struggles of their gods
and witches. His community was, of course, very much smaller than even
many present-day villages. The feeling of community would be shared by
all who would gather together in a convenient place of assembly, for
instance, around a camp fire, where they would listen to the gifted
story-teller relating the ancient traditions. The story-teller may have
been a gifted singer who could recite his story in simple verse, and all
would join in. Probably the story-teller or bard, growing old, would
find a likely successor and pass on to him his store of stories, ballads
or songs. Thus, for instance, Polynesian story-tellers trained their own
memories and that of their sons so that they were able to hand down to
posterity by word of mouth their people's history, especially their
valuable migration traditions.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ORIGINS OF MYTHS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is notable that in the oral traditions of primitive people there is
no conception of accuracy or originality or plagiarism; lines or
passages would be added or omitted, or other changes introduced.
Generally, the importance of events was exaggerated; various episodes
were connected with some great natural phenomenon or historical event
(such as the Flood or the Trojan War), or with some mighty names (such
as Gilgamesh or Samson or Ulysses or King Arthur). The natural
surroundings, the phenomena of nature, the celestial bodies, the gods,
the legendary heroes, the living spirits hidden in nature, all were
given the attributes of human beings.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The mythology thus shaped and preserved by the minds of these primitive
tribes is an ocean filled with pearls, but it is far from sufficient for
the reconstruction of prehistoric life. It is surprising, indeed, in how
short a time all memory may be lost of events which are not recorded in
some form of writing. Thus, it may be safely affirmed that no ancient
civilized people or modern primitive tribes preserved any distinct
recollection of their own origin. All experience shows that what may be
transmitted by memory and word of mouth, consists mainly of heroic poems
and ballads in which the historical element is so overlaid by mythology
and poetry that it is not always easy to distinguish between fact and
fancy.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Even with myths of relatively recent times, such as the Arthurian
legends, it is difficult to know what measure of history they represent;
there may, indeed, have been an historical Arthur, perhaps a chief of
Christianized Romano-Britons, who led a gallant resistance to the flood
of Anglo-Saxon invasion, but he is certainly not the hero of romance
that Medieval Ages have made him out to be.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[REAL HISTORY IS BASED ON WRITTEN DOCUMENTS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[To write real history, we require something very different---apart from
the special qualities of the historian, with his powers of imaginative
insight and keen analytical understanding; we require actual and
reliable record. This, indeed, may be an ideal requirement, particularly
if we include the idea of continuity in the record; but there is no
doubt that we cannot entirely rely on a purely oral tradition, fostered
as this would normally be by tribal feeling and pride, rather than by a
concern for historical accuracy. At the very least, we require
contemporary]{.style_} [written]{.style_1} [documents.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[As Professor R. A. Wilson points out, the world of mind advances by
accumulative movement. "The library of the British Museum would
illustrate adequately this cumulative movement of reason, where the
various phases through which the world has passed in its previous
evolution, themselves now vanished in time, are preserved in a permanent
present, a pure world of mind though stored in the sensuous material of
paper and ink. If we think of what a university, say, would be without a
single book, and without blackboards, or notebooks, shut off from a
vanished and irrecoverable past, we should have a picture of the
limitations which time sets upon oral speech alone as instrument of
conscious mind."]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-289}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Primitive Human Records]{.style_2} {#primitive-human-records .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. H. Bushnell may be right in suggesting that presumably the first
writing was done on soil by means of a human finger, followed by
scratching upon trees and rocks, but, of course, there is no evidence to
support any such suggestion and probably there never will be.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[We do not know how "the book" began any more than we know how writing
or language started. If we take "the book" to mean any kind of literary
production, including story-telling, there is no people in all the world
without books. If, on the other hand, we mean by "book" the handsome
volumes we see in our modern libraries, we must realize that this use of
the word is a relatively recent development.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Prehistoric Man probably did not think about true writing; even
nowadays there are primitive tribes who can do without it. Indeed,
various acoustic and optical devices (such as war-cries, signal horns,
drums, gestures, and smoke-and-fire signals) suffice for their
communication needs.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[PRIMITIVE DEVICES OF COMMUNICATION]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[As man emerged from his primitive state, he must have felt a need of
recording his knowledge in some permanent form, or of helping his memory
in conveying important messages. Crude systems of conveying ideas or
mnemonic devices are found extensively. (See]{.style_} [The
Alphabet,]{.style_1} [2nd ed., 1949, pp. 21---31.) In these primitive
devices of communication the symbols employed---see [Fig.
I---1](#calibre_link-24){.calibre9},]{.style_} [b]{.style_1}
[and]{.style_} [c---]{.style_1}[are mere memory aids and need the
interpretation of the messenger; they may, therefore, be considered a
preliminary stage of writing.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[STONE-AGE PAINTINGS AND CARVINGS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is probable that the earliest examples extant of human attempts to
scratch, draw or paint highly naturalistic or schematic pictures of
animals, geometric patterns, crude pictures of objects, on cave walls or
rocks or bones in the Upper Palaeolithic period and successive ages,
belonging perhaps to 20,000---5,000 B.C., are also to be considered a
preliminary stage of writing []{#calibre_link-26}(see [Fig.
I---2](#calibre_link-25){.calibre9}). These carvings and paintings may
have had religious significance, or may have served as fetishes or
charms, such as hunting charms.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The marvellous cave paintings---some of them astonishingly vivid and
lifelike and wonderfully distinct in detail---of Altamira, Northern
Spain; of Cambarelles, and Font-de-Gaume, Southern France; and of
various other places in Northern Spain and Southern France, "are
generally situated in the deep recesses of limestone caves, whither no
daylight can penetrate. No families have ever lived in these fastnesses;
they are often very difficult of access. And in executing the drawings
the artist had often to adopt most uncomfortable attitudes, lying on his
back or standing on a comrade's shoulders in a narrow crevice" (Prof.
Gordon Childe).]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000119.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-25}

[[Fig. I---2](#calibre_link-26){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Prehistoric conventionalized figures, geometric signs, and so forth,
painted or engraved on stone, from a, Spain; b, Portugal; c, Italy; d,
Palestine; e, Crete; f, Egypt; and g, North Africa]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[These paintings show animals standing, and are merely "portraits" of
those which the Palaeolithic Man hunted.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["SYMPATHETIC MAGIC"]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is not likely that any cf these splendid paintings were made just
for show or for the purpose of decorating these dark recesses. Sometimes
they are executed one on top of the other, without any apparent order.
What, then, is their meaning and purpose? Even in modern times and in
"civilized" countries, the burning of images of enemy leaders is not
unfamiliar; somewhere there remains the primitive feeling that what one
does to the image, is done to the person it represents; it is a remnant
of those ancient superstitions which still survive amongst many
primitive tribes of Africa, Asia and Australasia. Medicine men and
witches have been known to try to "work" magic in this way; they make an
effigy of an enemy and then pierce it through the heart, or burn it,
hoping that the enemy will suffer a similar fate. It would seem
probable, indeed, that all these prehistoric paintings were done neither
for purposes of art nor for transmitting records, but for performing
magic.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-290}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Pictographic Representations of Stories]{.style_2} {#pictographic-representations-of-stories .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Pictography or picture-writing, which is the most primitive stage of
true writing, may be subdivided into the following three
classes:]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(1)]{.style_} [Iconography]{.style_1}[, which gives a static
impression; the pictures, known as pictograms, represent the objects in
a motionless state: the sketch of an animal would represent the animal,
and, for example, a circle might represent the sun. Today with our
action photographs and films, our comic strips and illustrations, the
putting of action into pictures seems a small thing; actually it was a
tremendously important development when the "artist" began to "write"
picture-stories, i.e. when he began to make pictures tell
[]{#calibre_link-28}stories---see [Fig.
I---3](#calibre_link-27){.calibre9}. It was, perhaps, the true beginning
of the book.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000130.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-27}

[[Fig. I---3](#calibre_link-28){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Picture stories of native tribes: a, ideographic document of North
American Indians; b, symbolic proverbs of the Ewe (West African people);
c, sad love-story of a Yukaghir girl; d, Dakota "winter-count" chronicle
(drawing by Kedma Diringer). For full explanation of a, b, and c, see
The Alphabet, pp. 34---35.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(2) Thus, at any rate, arose]{.style_} [synthetic]{.style_1}
[or]{.style_} [ideographic writing.]{.style_1} [This can best be studied
in the relatively recent pictographic scripts of primitive peoples of
Polynesia, West Africa, Central America, South-Western Asia, and among
the Yukaghirs of N.E. Siberia (see]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1}
[pp. 31---5), but the most famed among the pictorial documents are those
of North American Indians, so beautifully described by Longfellow
in]{.style_} [The Song of Hiawatha,]{.style_1} [xiv.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A good example of these "picture-books" are the]{.style_} [wan'iyetu
wo'wapi,]{.style_1} [or "winter counts" of the Dakota tribes: they
"count" the times by winters, which, however, they do not number, but
apply to them a name taken from the main event marking the given
winter,]{.style_} [e.g.]{.style_1} ["plenty-stars-winter" for the winter
of 1833---4: a great meteoric shower occurred in the evening of
12.11.1833 ([Fig. I---3](#calibre_link-27){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[d]{.style_1}[).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[[Fig. I---3](#calibre_link-27){.calibre9},]{.style_} [d,]{.style_1}
[shows the winter count of Shunka-ishnala (Lonely Dog) of the Yanktonnai
tribe of the Dakotas, living in 1876 near the Fort Peck, Montana. The
"chronicle" painted on a buffalo hide consists of ideographic pictures,
each of them representing one winter or year, and starts with the winter
(1800---1) representing the "thirty-Dakotas-killed-by-Absarokas (or Crow
Indians)", indicated by a symbol made up of thirty vertical strokes in
three rows. In spiral direction from right to left, the symbols
represent the "chronicle" of the years 1800---1 to 1870---1. The second
symbol ---"smallpox-used-them-all-up-again-winter"---represents the
winter 1801---2; the last symbol, showing the
"battle-between-Uncpapas-and-Absarokas-winter", is depicted at the top
left hand, while the last but one represents the total eclipse of the
sun (a dark sun with stars around it) of the winter 1869---70.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[As to the spiral direction of writing, it is extremely interesting to
compare this "chronicle" with the Phaistos disc---see p. 64
[]{#calibre_link-30}and [Fig.
I---4](#calibre_link-29){.calibre9},]{.style_} [a]{.style_1}[. No
suggestion is made that the two documents, separated by over three and a
half millennia of time and thousands of miles of space, have any
relationship whatever. Curiously enough, as regards shape, the Phaistos
disc can be compared with the "stone calendar" of the ancient Aztecs,
these documents also being separated by thousands of years and thousands
of miles; for the ancient Aztecs see p. 71 ff.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(3)]{.style_} [Analytic Writing.]{.style_1} [Neither iconographic nor
synthetic writing constitutes a complete system of writing, as does an
analytic script, in which definite pictures, conventional and
simplified, selected by custom from many experimental pictures, become
fixed pictorial symbols, representing single objects or words.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Most of the important systems of writing may belong to this category:
see next chapter. They are the Sumerian script, predecessor of the
cuneiform writing, the Egyptian hieroglyphic script, the Cretan
pictographic scripts, the Indus Valley script, the Hittite hieroglyphic,
the Chinese, the Maya, and the Aztec scripts; perhaps also the Easter
Island writing (]{.style_}[The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp. 136---40) as
well as some other medieval and modern scripts
(]{.style_}[ibid]{.style_1}[., pp. 141---51) belongs to this
class.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000141.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-29}

[[Fig. I---4](#calibre_link-30){.calibre9},]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a, One side of the Phaistos disc; b, inscribed wooden tablet from Egypt
(British Museum, 1455); c, two Egyptian wood-labels (obverse and
reverse), written in demotic---note two lines of "upside-down" Greek:
right hand side, below.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Not all these systems of writing, however, are purely pictographic and
ideographic, although all of them may have been so in origin. In the
later stages of development, Sumerian and cuneiform scripts, the
Egyptian scripts, the Cretan and other systems are generally, but
improperly, called ideographic, and are sometimes considered
transitional, representing, as they do, the stage between pure
ideographic writing and the pure phonetic system, and making use of the
two, side by side. It is to be noted, however, that the term
"transitional" is hardly appropriate to systems of writing lasting as
long as three thousand years.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Nevertheless, from the point of view of the history of "the book", some
of these systems can be regarded either as primitive or prehistoric, or
as transitional. While in their initial stages they were not employed
for book purposes as we use our writing, and were thus in a certain
sense prehistoric, in their later stages they were often used for
writing books, although these had a quite different form from that of
the modern book.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-291}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Primitive Writing Materials, especially as evidenced by some Modern Terms]{.style_2} {#primitive-writing-materials-especially-as-evidenced-by-some-modern-terms .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Since so little is known of the origins and the early history of "the
book", it may be useful to follow up some clues which language affords
us. A study of words reveals that many familiar expressions in our
language, no less than in other languages, are used in senses other than
those in which they were used originally.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Inference from the presence or absence of certain words is a common
practice known for many years to critics and historians of literature,
and is often used for what is known as "internal evidence"; but in
general very little use has been made of language itself, that is to
say, of the historical forms and meanings of words as interpreters of
the distant cultural past.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It has only just begun to dawn on us that in modern languages the past
history of humanity is spread out in an imperishable map, which
preserves the inner, living history of ancient man's soul. Indeed, in
many common words, words we use every day, the souls of past peoples,
their thoughts and feelings, stand around us, not dead, but frozen into
their attitudes like the courtiers in the garden of the Sleeping Beauty.
These words reveal in their analysis a story of the deepest interest;
they represent a kind of "fossil history". But already, before these
words originated, throughout much of Asia and Africa, and partly also in
Europe, there were in existence different civilizations in various
stages of development. Even so, such words represent early stages of
cultural life, although in point of chronology they are much later than
the earliest books, or their equivalents, of ancient Mesopotamia and
Egypt.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[What information can be deduced, for instance, from such words as
"book", "write" and "library"?]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE WORD "BOOK"]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[What is a book? Dr. Johnson is supposed to have said that, though he
could not define an elephant, he knew one very well when he saw it.
Nowadays various definitions can be given to the word "book", which---in
spite of their common root idea---differ very much from one another.
Here, needless to say, we are concerned not with the "book" which some
reader may have built up for himself in his trade or profession, or with
the kind of "book" kept by the book-keeper, or with the word as used by
those who "book" tickets for a theatre or a journey, or who have left
their money with a "bookmaker". We are dealing with the "books" which
"in all their variety offer the means whereby civilization may be
carried triumphantly forward" (Winston Churchill). In this sense, the
term "book" may indicate (1) a collection of paper leaves bound
together; (2) a number of written or printed sheets fastened together at
the back by means of some kind of cover known as binding; (3) a literary
treatise, usually written or printed in one volume, but sometimes in
several volumes if forming a single work; (4) a literary work; (5) main
parts of a literary production (]{.style_}[e.g.]{.style_1}
[the]{.style_} [Iliad]{.style_1} [consists of twenty-four
"books").]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The actual origin of the word "book" has been the subject of dispute,
but it is commonly believed that it is etymologically connected with the
name of the beech tree. The numerous ancient English forms of "book"
(]{.style_}[bóc, boc, bok, bock, boke, booc, boock, booke, buk, buke,
buik, buick)]{.style_1} [show that this word is derived from Old
English]{.style_} [bóc]{.style_1} [(pl.]{.style_} [béc),]{.style_1}
[connected with Old Frisian and Old Saxon]{.style_} [bôk]{.style_1}
[(pl.]{.style_} [bôk),]{.style_1} [Old Norse]{.style_} [bók]{.style_1}
[(pl.]{.style_} [boékr),]{.style_1} [Old High German]{.style_}
[buoh]{.style_1} [(pl.]{.style_} [buoh).]{.style_1} [(Middle High
German,]{.style_} [buoch,]{.style_1} [Modern German,]{.style_}
[Buch.)]{.style_1} [The Old English word for "beech tree" was]{.style_}
[bóc,]{.style_1} [Old Norse]{.style_} [bók.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The exact connection between "book" and "beech tree", however, is not
known. According to some scholars, the English monks wrote their books
on white beech tablets; according to others, beech bark---for writing on
bark see p. 34---was originally used for writing; still others have
suggested that originally inscriptions were scratched on beech
tablets.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[More probable is the following theory: Old English]{.style_}
[bóc]{.style_1} [means "charter", and its plural means "tablets, writing
tablets, written sheets"; hence, supposedly "book". The word "book"
or]{.style_} [bóc]{.style_1} [seems, indeed, to have been introduced
into this country in Anglo-Saxon times by the ecclesiastics, who applied
it to the written charters, also introduced by them; these afforded a
more permanent and satisfactory evidence of a grant or conveyance of
land than the symbolical or actual delivery of possession before
witnesses, which was the previous system of transfer. This meaning of
"book" is clearly shown in the legal term]{.style_} [b c-land]{.style_1}
[(or "book-land"), property held under the express terms of a written
document, and in the term]{.style_} [b c-hord,]{.style_1} [a place where
charters or other written records were kept. Also Shakespeare uses
"book" in this meaning: "By this our book is drawn; we'll but seal, . .
." (The First Part of]{.style_} [King Henry IV,]{.style_1} [Act III,
Scene i).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Gothic language, however, has no similar form for "book", though
there is]{.style_} [bôkôs,]{.style_1} [plural (derived probably
from]{.style_} [bôka,]{.style_1} ["letter"), which in the opinion of
some scholars derives from the original use for writing on
beech-sticks]{.style_} [(Buch-Stab,]{.style_1} [in German). Curiously,
also in Russian there is the word]{.style_} [bookva,]{.style_1} [for
"letter", but "book" is]{.style_} [kniga.]{.style_1} [Finally, according
to some scholars, the term "book" derives from---it would be more
accurate to say "is parallel to"---the German word]{.style_}
[Buch,]{.style_1} [meaning "beech", and is connected with the fact that,
in early days, beech wood was largely used for binding books. The
beechen covers "were light, decorative, and very carefully dried and
seasoned. It is remarkable how flat such old boards are, and they were
no doubt very highly valued as they often have upon them the stamp of
the monastery in which they were used" (C. Davenport). While, then,
there is not sufficient evidence for a complete solution of the problem,
there is at least a great probability that the ancient Germanic tribes
used beech tablets or beech bark for writing.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE WORD "TO WRITE"]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This theory finds support in the etymology of another English word,
"write". It is derived from the Old English]{.style_}
[wrítan,]{.style_1} [connected with the Old Frisian]{.style_}
[wrîta]{.style_1} [("to scratch, to write"), the Old Saxon]{.style_}
[wrîtan]{.style_1} [("to cut, to write"), the Old Norse]{.style_}
[ríta]{.style_1} [("to scratch, to write") (Norwegian,]{.style_}
[vríta]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [ríta,]{.style_1} [and Swedish]{.style_}
[rita,]{.style_1} ["to draw"), and Old High German]{.style_}
[rîzan]{.style_1} [("to tear, to draw": cf. Modern German]{.style_}
[ritzen,]{.style_1} ["to scratch", and]{.style_} [reissen,]{.style_1}
["to tear") ; it is thus obvious that the ancient Teutonic conception of
"writing" corresponded to the conceptions of "scratching" and
"drawing"]{.style_} [(i.e.]{.style_1} [on wood).]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000152.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-31}

[Fig.I---5]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Roman wooden cliptych (6 inches by inches): waxed tablets, dated to the
seventh year of Septimius Severus (A.D. 198). The text, in Latin
cursive, and a woman's signature, written for her, in incorrect Greek,
occupy the two sides of the interior of the diptych. which are here
represented (above, page 2 of the diptych; below, page 3). Bodleian
Library, at Oxford. MS. Lat, Class,. I. 9 10.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is known, too, that the ideas of writing and drawing were identical
in pre-historic Egypt and in Early Greece, as is shown by the Egyptian
word]{.style_} [s-sh]{.style_1} [and by the Greek]{.style_}
[grapheîn,]{.style_1} [both of which mean "writing" and "drawing". The
word]{.style_} [grapheîn]{.style_1} [gave us the main component of many
words connected with "writing" or "description", such as "epigraphy",
"palaeography", "ideography", "pictography", "stenography", "geography",
and "choreography".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Hebrew verb]{.style_}
[k]{.style_1}[a]{.style_3}[t]{.style_1}[a]{.style_3}[b]{.style_1} [means
"to write" as well as "to incise".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[USE OF WOOD AS WRITING MATERIAL IN GREECE, EGYPT, AND ROME]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Wood was the main writing material not only of the ancient Germanic
tribes. Pliny says that in Greece table books of wood were in use before
the time of Homer.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(]{.style_}[Pugillarium enim usum fuisse etiam ante Troiana tempora
invenimus apud Homerum]{.style_1}[: "We find, however, in Homer that the
use of]{.style_} [pugillares]{.style_1} [(wood-tablet books) existed
before the Troian times. . . .": Pliny,]{.style_} [Nat.
Hist.,]{.style_1} [xiii, 69.)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This information however, is hardly reliable, as it is mainly based
on]{.style_} [Iliad,]{.style_1} [vi, 168, referring to Bellerophon ("he
in the gilded tables wrote and sent"); see p. 29. According to uncertain
information given us by Plutarch (A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[.
50---]{.style_}[c.]{.style_1} [120) and Diogenes Laertius (third century
A.D.), Solon's laws (early sixth century B.C.) were inscribed on tables
of wood. This tradition is also mentioned by Aulus Gellius
(born]{.style_} [c.]{.style_1} [A.D. 130):]{.style_} [in legibus Solonis
illis antiquissimis, quae Athenis axibus ligneis incisae sunt]{.style_1}
[(ii, 12). This information, too, is not altogether reliable.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Tables of wood as writing material, however, are also mentioned by
Sextus Propertius (second half of the first century B.C.), iii, 23.8; by
Ovid (Publius Ovidius Naso, 43 B.C.---A.D. 17), i]{.style_}
[Eleg.,]{.style_1} [2, and by many other Roman writers.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Actually, plain wooden tablets were used in Egypt ([Fig.
I---4](#calibre_link-29){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[b]{.style_1}[---]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[) and in Greece---where they
were called]{.style_} [déltos, pínax,]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[pyxíon---]{.style_1} [as early as the fifth century B.C. or earlier,
for such purposes as the keeping of accounts, and the writing of models
for schoolboys to copy (Herodotus, vii, 239). It should also be noted
that in]{.style_} [Iliad,]{.style_1} [vi, 169, the message carried by
Bellerophon]{.style_} [(sémata lygrá)]{.style_1} [plainly refers to a
wooden tablet.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000163.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-35}

[Fig.I---6]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Roman ivory diptych, representing the Christian miracles; each leaf
measures 12 inches by inches; fifth-century production from Italy.
Victoria and Albert Museum, No. 51,391 (Victoria and Albert Museum Crown
Copyright).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[In Egypt, reed was also employed as writing material; for instance, a
large split reed with a Coptic inscription written in ink on the inside,
is reported to be in the Cairo Museum.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[TABLETS: "PUGILLARES"]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Wooden tablets]{.style_} [(tabellae]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[tabulae)]{.style_1} [were commonly employed in ancient Rome; hence, the
modern term "tablet" (from Latin]{.style_} [tabula,]{.style_1} [meaning
"board"). These wooden tablets were also called by the Romans]{.style_}
[pugillares,]{.style_1} ["notebooks", literally "handbooks"; perhaps
they were so called because their small dimensions allowed of their
being held in the hand or "fist",]{.style_} [pugnus,
pugillus.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The writing was at first upon the bare wood, which was cut into thin
tablets, and finely planed and polished. Later, waxen tablets were used;
these were made either of common wood (such as beech, fir, box, and so
on) or of more expensive material---such as cedarwood---and were thinly
coated with wax (in Greek]{.style_} [k rós]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[málth , máltha;]{.style_1} [in Latin,]{.style_} [cera),]{.style_1}
[usually []{#calibre_link-292}black---see [Fig.
[]{#calibre_link-34}I---5](#calibre_link-31){.calibre9}, [Fig.
[]{#calibre_link-37}I---7](#calibre_link-32){.calibre9}, [Fig.
I--8](#calibre_link-33){.calibre9}. Sometimes, however, they were coated
with a thin layer of gesso, which was polished.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The tablets were used singly, or in twos (known as]{.style_}
[diptychon, diptych, i.e.]{.style_1} ["double-folding \[waxen
tablets\]": see [Fig. I---5](#calibre_link-31){.calibre9}) or in
threes]{.style_} [(triptych,]{.style_1} [[Fig.
I---7](#calibre_link-32){.calibre9},]{.style_} [below);]{.style_1} [or
more]{.style_} [(polyptych)]{.style_1} ["leaves"]{.style_}
[(cerae)]{.style_1} [were hinged together---such sets of tablets being
known as]{.style_} [codices]{.style_1} [(see p. 35).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The writing was incised in the wax by means of a pointed implement,
known as a]{.style_} [stilus]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[graphium]{.style_1} [(see p. 553); it was so done particularly in
the]{.style_} [scriptio interior (i.e.]{.style_1} [in the writing on the
internal sides). The]{.style_} [scriptio exterior (i.e.]{.style_1} [the
writing on the external sides) was sometimes done with ink]{.style_}
[(atramentum).]{.style_1} [The matter written (especially that scratched
with a]{.style_} [stilus)]{.style_1} [upon the waxen tablets was easily
effaced, and by smoothing the wax (in the case of]{.style_}
[gesso]{.style_1} [tablets the writing could be washed off) new matter
might be substituted for what had been written. Such tablets were,
therefore, suitable for ephemeral notes, accounts, memoranda, lists of
names, and so forth. They were particularly used by
schoolboys.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The majority of the tablets measure 14 or 14.5 by 12 cm., but some
measure 18 by 16 cm. and even 27.5 by 23.5. G. Pugliese Carratelli
remarks, however, that the]{.style_} [pentaptych]{.style_1} [and
the]{.style_} [octoptych]{.style_1} [([Fig.
I--8](#calibre_link-33){.calibre9},]{.style_} [below)]{.style_1}
[referred to further on, measure only 12.1 by 3 6 and 13.5 by 7 cm.,
respectively. The tablets, especially those made of box wood, were
sometimes (as already mentioned) very thin and highly polished. So, for
instance, the thickness of the external tablets of both the]{.style_}
[pentaptych]{.style_1} [and the]{.style_} [octoptych]{.style_1} [is
given as 0.6 cm., and of the internal tablets as 0.4 cm., the]{.style_}
[speculum]{.style_1} [of wax being reduced to 0.1 cm.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000174.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-32}

[[Fig. I---7](#calibre_link-34){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Roman inscribed wooden tablet; (below) Triptych from Pompei,
dated 10.5.A.D.54.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The outside of the codices, especially of the diptychs, was made of
different materials, such as wood, ivory, or parchment---see Martial,
xiv, 3---7. Originally the diptych cases were small, unornamented, and
usually made of wood, but from the second century A.D. onwards they
became larger and were mainly made of ivory. []{#calibre_link-293}See
[Fig. I---6](#calibre_link-35){.calibre9}. Ivory diptychs, elaborately
carved, were in later times used for "Byzantine" bookbindings---see the
forthcoming book on]{.style_} [Illumination and Binding.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Greeks and Romans continued the use of]{.style_}
[pugillares]{.style_1} [long after the use of papyrus (or even
parchment) became common, because they were so convenient for correcting
extemporary compositions. From the]{.style_} [pugillares]{.style_1}
[they transcribed the final text on to papyrus rolls (or parchment), and
when the work was to be published, the transcription was done by
the]{.style_} [librarii]{.style_1} [(see p. 34). Writing on]{.style_}
[pugillares]{.style_1} [is particularly recommended by Quintilian
(Fabius Quintilianus, A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 35---95),]{.style_}
[Institutio Oratoria,]{.style_1} [X, Chapter 3.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[See also, for instance, Ovid,]{.style_} [Metamorphoses,]{.style_1} [ii.
522---5:]{.style_} []{#calibre_link-281}[(Cf.]{.style_1} [[Fig.
XI---3](#calibre_link-36){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[a]{.style_1}[).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Dextra tenet ferrum, vacuam tenet altera ceram.]{.style_1} [In her
right hand she holds her stilus, in her left an empty waxen
tablet.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Incipit et dubitat; scribit damnatque tabellas;]{.style_1} [She begins,
then hesitates; writes on and hates what she has written.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Et notat et delet; mutat culpatque probatque;]{.style_1} [Writes and
erases; changes and condemns and approves.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Inque vicem sumptas ponit positasque resumit.]{.style_1} [By turns she
lays her tablets down and takes them up again.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The]{.style_} [pugillares,]{.style_1} [as mentioned, were generally
used in schools (like slates in modern times), and sometimes for
letters, the replies being written on the re-spread wax; they were
particularly used for judicial and administrative purposes.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Several specimens are preserved in the British Museum (Add. MSS. 33270,
33293, 37533, and others), one of the most interesting being Add. MS.
33270, consisting of seven wooden tablets, or]{.style_}
[heptaptych,]{.style_1} [belonging to the late third or early fourth
century A.D. ([Fig. I--8](#calibre_link-33){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[above).]{.style_1}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000185.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-33}

[[Fig. I--8](#calibre_link-37){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) "Page" from a heptaptych (British Museum, Add. MS. 33270);
(below) Octoptych from Herculaneum, as reconstructed by M.
Paolini.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Amongst the numerous]{.style_} [codices]{.style_1} [found at
Herculaneum (see pp. 251---258), there are a few polyptychs found in
the]{.style_} [Casa del Bicentina-rio,]{.style_1} [the best preserved
specimens being a]{.style_} [pentaptych]{.style_1}
[(]{.style_}[i.e]{.style_1}[. consisting of five tablets) and
an]{.style_} [octoptych]{.style_1} [(consisting of eight tablets). A
reconstructed design of the latter is represented in [Fig.
I--8](#calibre_link-33){.calibre9},]{.style_} [below.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Some specimens of ancient Roman tablets were found in the Alburnus
Major (Voeroes Patak) gold mines in Dacia (Transylvania). One is of fir
wood, and one of beech, each consisting of three "leaves". They are
about the size of a modern octavo book. The outer parts exhibit a plain
surface of wood, the inner parts are covered with a layer of wax
surrounded by a raised margin of the wood; the edges of one side are
pierced that they may be fastened together by means of a thread or wire.
The wax is so thin that the stilus used by the writer cut through it
into the wood below. The writing still remains and on one the name of
the consul is given determining the date to be A.D. 169. Another
document belongs to A.D. 139. The earliest extant examples of Roman
tablets, dated A.D. 53 and 55, may be seen at the Naples Museum of
Antiquities (they came from Pompeii).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The use of wooden tablets as writing material lasted into the modern
age. In Luebeck, there are preserved fifteenth-century waxen tablets; in
outlying regions they were used for making occasional notes or accounts
down to our own times.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["LIBRARY"]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A few English words still remind us of the Roman use of wood as a
writing material; for example, the word "library" (the building or room
where books are kept, or else the collection or shelves of books), from
the Old French]{.style_} [librairie; "libretto"]{.style_1} [(book
containing the text of an opera), from Italian; "libel" ("a false
defamatory statement", a "formal document", but also "a little book", "a
short treatise" or "writing"), from Latin]{.style_}
[libellus,]{.style_1} [the diminutive form of]{.style_}
[liber,]{.style_1} ["little book", "pamphlet"---the term]{.style_}
[libellus]{.style_1} [was frequently used in classical times (see
Cicero,]{.style_} [Orationes,]{.style_1} [i, 21; Horace,]{.style_}
[Satires,]{.style_1} [i, 10, 92; Suetonius,]{.style_}
[Julius,]{.style_1} [56).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[These and a few other words are derivations from the Latin
word]{.style_} [liber,]{.style_1} ["book", believed to be connected
etymologically with liber meaning "bast", "rind", or the inside bark of
a tree---the bark of trees having, according to Roman tradition, been
used in early times as a writing material. It has nothing to do,
however, with the material of which paper or papyrus was made,]{.style_}
[i.e., charta]{.style_1} [(from Greek]{.style_} [khárt
s]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[,]{.style_1} [the pith of the papyrus plant
(see Chapter IV).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[BARK USED AS WRITING MATERIAL]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It may, instead, be assumed that in very ancient times the finest and
thinnest part of the bark of such trees as the tilia, the philyra, a
species of linden, the lime, the ash, the maple, and the elm, was used
as writing material, just as the Sumatran []{#calibre_link-44}([Fig.
I--10](#calibre_link-38){.calibre9}, []{#calibre_link-45}and [Fig.
I_11](#calibre_link-39){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[above]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[,]{.style_1} [Central Asian, and Indian
peoples (see pp. 354, 361, 379 and]{.style_}
[passim]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[,]{.style_1} [and also the American
Indians used similar substances in comparatively modern times.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A specimen of Latin writing on bark is preserved in the Cottonian
collection of the British Museum. The National Library, at Madrid, is in
possession of a charming book printed on bark, which the present writer
examined during a recent visit to Spain.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Romance languages (French]{.style_} [librairie;]{.style_1} [Italian and
Spanish]{.style_} [libreria;]{.style_1} [Portuguese,]{.style_}
[livraria]{.style_1}[) maintain the late Latin meaning of]{.style_}
[libr ria]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[sc. taberna]{.style_1}[) as
"bookseller's shop", but actually the Latin adj.]{.style_} [libr
rius,]{.style_1} [and subst.]{.style_} [libr rium,]{.style_1} [mean
"connected with books". The Romans had their]{.style_}
[librarii]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [librarioli;]{.style_1} [the former
multiplied books by transcribing manuscripts, and the latter illustrated
them by ornamenting the title-pages, margins, and
terminations.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-294}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BIBLE-BIBLIOTHECA]{.style_2} {#bible-bibliotheca .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Romance and other languages employ for "library" a word such as
late Latin]{.style_} [bibliotheca,]{.style_1} [Italian and
Spanish]{.style_} [biblioteca,]{.style_1} [French]{.style_}
[bibliothèque,]{.style_1} [German]{.style_} [Bibliothek,]{.style_1} [and
Polish]{.style_} [bibljoteka.]{.style_1} [These terms have derived from
Greek]{.style_} [bibliothék ,]{.style_1} [connected with the Greek
common word for "book",]{.style_} [biblíon,]{.style_1} [diminutive
of]{.style_} [bíblos,]{.style_1} ["the inner bark of the papyrus" (see
Chapter IV).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This word gave to English and to all the other modern languages the
name "Bible". The Greek plural neuter]{.style_} [ta biblía,]{.style_1}
["the books", became Latin fem. sing.]{.style_} [biblia,]{.style_1}
[passed over to Italian,]{.style_} [Bibbia,]{.style_1} [Spanish and
Portuguese,]{.style_} [Biblia,]{.style_1} [Provençal,]{.style_}
[Bibla,]{.style_1} [French,]{.style_} [Bible,]{.style_1}
[German,]{.style_} [Bibel,]{.style_1} [Dutch,]{.style_}
[Bijbel,]{.style_1} [Polish,]{.style_} [Biblja,]{.style_1} [etc.
Curiously the word]{.style_} [biblioth ca]{.style_1} [was originally
used (so Jerome) for the Sacred Scriptures: in Old English we
find]{.style_} [bibliothéce,]{.style_1} [and in Anglo-Latin,]{.style_}
[biblioth ca,]{.style_1} [sometimes employed instead of the word
"Bible".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In modern English we find numerous words connected with Greek]{.style_}
[biblion,]{.style_1} [such as "bibliography" (history, or lists of books
and their editions), "biblioklept" (a book thief), "bibliolatry" (book
worship), "bibliomania" (mania for possessing books), "bibliopegy" (art
of bookbinding), "bibliophile" (book lover), "bibliophobia" (aversion to
books), "bibliopoly" (book selling), "bibliotaph" (book burier), and
many others. Some of these terms have preserved their meaning from
ancient times. The Romans had their]{.style_} [bibliopegi]{.style_1}
[("bookbinders"), who employed their skill on the embellishment of the
exterior of the manuscripts, and the]{.style_} [bibliopola]{.style_1}
[("booksellers"), who were engaged in the disposal of the books when
finished.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Another Latin word connected with the employment of wood as writing
material was]{.style_} [caudex]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [c
dex]{.style_1} [(originally it meant "the trunk or stem of a tree"),
signifying anything made of wood, as, for instance, a wooden tablet (see
p. 29 ff.).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Later, the term was used for wooden tablets coated with a thin layer of
blackened wax, commonly known as]{.style_} [pugillares,]{.style_1} [or
(see p. 29), for a set of two, three, or more (four, five, six, seven,
or eight) tablets strung or bound together in a primitive and simple
manner, of which our modern loose-leaf system may be said to be an
elaborated revival. As already mentioned, the inside tablets had raised
margins (]{.style_}[alvei]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[;]{.style_1} [they had
also a slight projection, generally square, to prevent the wax of one
tablet from rubbing against the other (which might deface or destroy the
written notes): see, for instance, [Fig.
I--8](#calibre_link-33){.calibre9}. Finally,]{.style_} [codex]{.style_1}
[came to denote the set of tablets not only as writing material, but
also as a book in the modern sense of the word.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[When at a later period parchment and other material were substituted
for wood and put together in book shape, the term]{.style_}
[codex]{.style_1} [was often used as synonymous with]{.style_}
[liber,]{.style_1} [but it was the name more particularly given to an
account book, or ledger (]{.style_}[codex accepti et
expensi]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[.]{.style_1} [In the time of Cicero it
was also applied to a tablet on which a bill was written, and in still
later times to any collection of laws or constitutions of the emperors,
such as]{.style_} [Codex Theodosianus or Codex Iustinianeus.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[For literary compositions, the term]{.style_} [codex]{.style_1} [was
used by Christian writers, beginning with the "codices" of the sacred
writings. The term was occasionally used by other writers at the end of
the third century, but did not become popular till the fifth century,
when the "codex" form of the "book" was firmly established (see Chapter
V).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Latin word]{.style_} [codex]{.style_1} [passed into all the modern
languages, where it is used for a volume of a biblical or classical text
in manuscript. English words derived from codex are "codify", "code",
and "codicil".]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-295}

::: calibre5
:::

## [WOODEN WRITING MATERIAL IN GERMANIC LANDS]{.style_2} {#wooden-writing-material-in-germanic-lands .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The use by the ancient Germanic tribes of wooden tablets as their main
writing material has already been mentioned. Another proof of this
practice may be seen in the shapes of the runic letters (see The
Alphabet, pp. 507---24), which can be considered as the "national"
writing of the ancient Germanic peoples. The thorny, elongated and
angular shapes of these letters, which even in inscriptions of the
thirteenth and later centuries A.D. look as though they belonged to the
seventh or sixth century B.C., show that this script was used chiefly
for inscriptions. Indeed, there is no evidence whatever of wide literary
use of runes in early times.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[From our point of view it does not matter much whether the runes were
originally employed simply for magical purposes or as a normal means of
communication (the former theory being more acceptable), or whether they
were originally used mainly for drawing and painting on clay and wood,
so that the angular shapes might be due to the script from which the
runes descended; the most probable theory being that they were
originally carved on wood, so that the straight strokes and the angular
shapes, which could be carved with ease, were preferred to curves. Sir
Ellis Minns suggests the following explanation of the absence of
horizontal strokes in the runic letters: "Runes must have been developed
for carving on round sticks. Then every letter can be very quickly made
with a knife."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Whatever their origin, the fact that the employment of these thorny
letters continued for so many centuries, indicates that they were used
mainly for writing on wood, or on other hard material.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-296}

::: calibre5
:::

## [FAR EAST AND INDONESIA]{.style_2} {#far-east-and-indonesia .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Wood and bamboo sticks were used as writing materials in ancient China
(see p. 390, 398 ff.). About fifteen wooden tablets (known as]{.style_}
[kohau rongo rongo]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[,]{.style_1} [covered with
pictographic writing, still undeciphered, are the only documents extant
of the "mysterious" script (unique in Polynesia) of ancient (?) Easter
[]{#calibre_link-43}Island---see [Fig.
I--9](#calibre_link-40){.calibre9},]{.style_} [b]{.style_1}
[and]{.style_} [c.]{.style_1}

[]{#calibre_link-297}

::: calibre5
:::

## [SUMATRA]{.style_2} {#sumatra .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Bataks, living in Sumatra, sometimes use as writing material long
strips of bamboo, welded by "beating" them together, then folded
together, accordion-like, between wooden covers, and bound together with
a string of woven rushes. Often long strips of the thin bark of
trees---such books being known as]{.style_} [pustakas]{.style_1} [(see
p. 379 f.)---are used.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[One such book is in the Sloanian collection of the British Museum; it
is on a long piece of bark folded up as in [Fig.
I--10](#calibre_link-38){.calibre9},]{.style_} [b.]{.style_1} [Another
specimen of writing on bark, from India, is a Nabob's letter, on a piece
of bark about two yards long, and richly ornamented with gold. It, too,
is preserved in the British Museum. [Fig.
I--10](#calibre_link-38){.calibre9}]{.style_} [c,]{.style_1} [and [Fig.
I---11](#calibre_link-39){.calibre9},]{.style_} [above,]{.style_1}
[reproduce Batak books on tree bark. The people on the Malabar coast
also frequently wrote upon bark with a stilus: several specimens are
preserved in the British Museum and in many other collections, public
and private.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Some ancient books of the Bataks were written in brilliant ink on paper
made of bark. The Lampong and Rèndjang tribes, also inhabiting Sumatra,
scratch their messages and books on bamboo ---see [Fig.
I---11](#calibre_link-39){.calibre9},]{.style_} [below---tree]{.style_1}
[bark, or certain kinds of leaves. See also p. 377 ff.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-298}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE PHILIPPINES AND ELSEWHERE]{.style_2} {#the-philippines-and-elsewhere .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The pagan tribes of the Philippines Hanunóo (southern Mindoro) and
Tagbánuwá (central Palawan) employ for purposes of writing the shiny
surface of bamboo tubes and a small knife []{#calibre_link-46}(see [Fig.
I--12](#calibre_link-41){.calibre9}).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Wooden writing material was also employed in many other countries to
which reference has already been made. Its use in ancient Mesopotamia is
mentioned by G. R. Driver (]{.style_}[Semitic Writing,]{.style_1} [p.
16). A Kharoshthi book on wood from Eastern Turkestan is reproduced in
Fig. 9,]{.style_} [a.]{.style_1} [Amongst many primitive tribes, wood is
still used as writing material.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[For the]{.style_} [amatl]{.style_1} ["paper" used in pre-Columbian
America and even in modern Mexico, see p. 429 ff.
[]{#calibre_link-227}and [Fig. IX--13](#calibre_link-42){.calibre9}. In
the Bodleian Library, at Oxford, there is a Mexican book on
bark.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-299}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PALM LEAVES AS WRITING MATERIAL]{.style_2} {#palm-leaves-as-writing-material .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The substances used for the reception of writing in the ancient world,
as well as in modern times in some outlying regions, were numerous.
Indeed, whatever was most conveniently available for the purpose was
used.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000001.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-40}

[[Fig. I--9](#calibre_link-43){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a, Kharoshthi "book" on wood, found at Niya (Ruin XXIV, vii) by Sir
Aurel Stein in his second expedition to Chinese Turkestan (1906-08); b,
and c. specimens of kohau-rongo-rongo tablets (inscribed wooden tablets
from Easter Island).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000012.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-38}

[[Fig. I--10](#calibre_link-44){.calibre9} a, Forms of Oriental books;
b, Batak divination bark-book in the form of a folded roll (drawings by
Ella Margules); c, written page (left) and cover (right of a Batak MS.
written on the inner bark of terap tree, known as Artocarpus kunstleri
(Cambridge University Library, Or. 930).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Among the various forms of perishable writing materials previously in
use in Central and Southern Asia (and probably also in other parts of
the world) we may place first the leaves of plants or trees; in Central
and Southern Asia there were the]{.style_} [Talipat palm]{.style_1} [and
the]{.style_} [Palmyra palm---]{.style_1}[see Chapter VIII.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000023.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-39}

[[Fig. I---11](#calibre_link-45){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Another Batak divination book written on bark: represents part
of the divination table for the thirty days of the month; (below)
portion of a Story of Creation, written on bamboo in Malay language and
Rèndjang characters employed in the South-Sumatran mountainous region in
the districts of Palembang and Benkulen: the four sticks here seen are
"numbered" (on the left side) with the letters ta, pa, la, and sa.
(Explanation by Dr. P. Voorhoeve, University Library,
Leyden).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000034.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-41}

[[Fig. I--12](#calibre_link-46){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Bamboo used as writing matyerial by the Hanunóo tribe of the Philippine
islands (left) Bamboo manuscript. small nknife used for "writing", and
sheath for the knife; (right) left-handed Hanunóo boy "writing" with a
knife on a bamboo tube.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Pliny, speaking particularly of the Egyptians, says that men at first
wrote upon the leaves of palm trees.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Pliny's passage is also important for the other writing materials he
mentions. (]{.style_}[In palmarum foliis primo scriptitatum; deinde
quarundam arborum libris; postea publica monumenta plumbeis voluminibus;
mox et privata linteis confici coepta aut ceris.]{.style_1} ["First of
all, people wrote on palm leaves, then on bark of certain trees,
afterwards sheets of lead were used for public documents, then also
sheets of linen or waxen tablets for private documents": Pliny, xiii,
69.) This statement---which induces Sir John Myres (]{.style_}[Scripta
Minoa,]{.style_1} [II, Oxford, 1952, p. 2) to write that according to
Pliny "the first Cretan writings were on palm-leaves"-gives a clue to
the long narrow shape of the inscribed Minoan clay tablets (see p.
63).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Palmyra and Talipat palm leaves, which are thick, but long and
narrow, were the only writing material for books in ancient Odra as in
other parts of the coastal provinces of Southern India; they were also
used to some extent in Ceylon, Burma and Siam, and in Northern
India.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The British Museum, the India Office Library []{#calibre_link-50}([Fig.
[]{#calibre_link-211}I--13](#calibre_link-47){.calibre9},
[]{#calibre_link-214}[VIII--13](#calibre_link-48){.calibre9},
[VIII--15](#calibre_link-49){.calibre9}), the University Library of
Cambridge ([Fig. I--13](#calibre_link-47){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[above]{.style_1}[), the Bodleian Library, and many other important
collections, especially in India and Ceylon, contain numerous examples
of books written on leaves in the Indian, Burmese, Sinhalese, and other
languages. The preparation of this writing material was quite simple.
Slips---from 16 to 36 inches long, and from to 3 inches broad---were cut
out from the leaves, they were sometimes boiled in water or milk, when
they were smoothed, with all excrescences pared off with the knife; and
they were then ready for use.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The scribes, employing an iron stilus (a sharp-pointed implement) to
scratch the letters, were compelled to avoid long straight lines,
because any scratch along the longitudinal fibre, which runs from the
stalk to the point, would split the palm leaf, which is extremely
fragile. (This gave rise to the rounded shapes of the Oriya, Burmese,
and other "round" current hands---see]{.style_} [The
Alphabet]{.style_1}[, p. 360 and]{.style_} [passim]{.style_1}[.) In
order to make the signs plainer, ink---prepared from oil and
charcoal---or other pigment was rubbed over the surface of the leaf, and
filled up the finely incised lines to make them visible, and so
permanent that they cannot be effaced. The strips of leaves were then
bound, by stringing them on cords or a piece of twine, and attaching
them to a board: see Fig. VIII-16.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In Siam, sacred works were written on Talipat palm leaves, their edges
being gilded or painted with vermilion, and the leaves threaded on
strings and folded like a fan. See also Chapter VIII.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-300}

::: calibre5
:::

## [OTHER LEAVES]{.style_2} {#other-leaves .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is generally suggested that in ancient times leaves of other trees
were also used for writing. This is probably true, but---except for
literary evidence---proof seems out of the question. The material is,
after all, perishable; specimens have never been discovered, and we can
exclude the possibility of any such discovery in the future.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000045.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-47}

[[Fig. I--13](#calibre_link-50){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Palm-leaf books. (Above) Abhidhamattha-Sangaha, a Burmese Pali book,
Cambridge University Library, Or. 953; (below) "Illuminated" Oriya
manuscript---Gitagovinda by Yayadeva---preserved in the India Office
Library---Commonwealth Relations Office.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, there is ample literary evidence that both in Greece and in
Magna Graecia as well as in Rome the use of leaves for writing was quite
familiar. Diodorus Siculus relates (]{.style_}[lib]{.style_1}[.
xi,]{.style_} [cap]{.style_1}[. 35) that the judges of Syracuse were
anciently accustomed to write the names of those whom they sent into
exile upon the leaves of olive trees. This sentence was termed]{.style_}
[petalismos,]{.style_1} [from]{.style_} [pétalon,]{.style_1} ["a leaf".
The Sibyl's leaves are referred to by Virgil
(]{.style_}[Aeneid]{.style_1}[, iii, 58), and Juvenal writes]{.style_}
[Credite me vobis folium recitare ,Sibyllae.]{.style_1} [Also the terms
"folio", "foliate", "foil", and so on, from Latin]{.style_}
[folium,]{.style_1} ["a leaf", as well as the word "leaf" itself, may
indicate that leaves were used as writing material.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-301}

::: calibre5
:::

## [OTHER WRITING MATERIALS]{.style_2} {#other-writing-materials .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Of the principal ancient writing materials, clay tablets, papyrus,
leather and parchment will be dealt with in the following chapters, ink
and pens will be treated in the Appendix to the present book, while
paper will be discussed in a forthcoming volume on]{.style_} [The
Printed Book.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Here mention may be made of somewhat unusual writing materials. In some
countries not only the skins and intestines, but even the shoulder
blades of various animals (the shoulder blade of a camel with a Coptic
inscription in ink is in the Cairo Museum), as well as the skins of
fishes and the intestines of serpents were pressed into the service of
the scribes. See also p. 48.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The most famous instance is that of the original writing materials used
to record the]{.style_} [revelations]{.style_1} [of Allah to Mohammed,
which later became the Koran (see p. 327 ff.). About a year after the
Prophet's death, his successor, Caliph Ab Bckr, at the suggestion of
Omar, ordered the collection of the scattered fragments of the Koran.
Zaid ibn-Thâbit, one of Mohammed's]{.style_} [ansars]{.style_1}
[("helpers"), appointed to carry out this task, gathered together all
his material "from date leaves and tablets of white stone, and from the
breasts of men" (Bagawi,]{.style_} [Mishkât al-Masabih,]{.style_1} [i,
p. 524; Engl. transl. B. viii, 3, 3.) According to other versions, the
material was collected from bits of parchment, thin white stones,
leafless palm branches and bosoms of men. From these and other stories
it is easy to understand that all sorts of material readiest to
hand---such as shoulder blades, palm-leaves, and stones---were used to
write down what later became the Koran.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-302}

::: calibre5
:::

## [LINEN]{.style_2} {#linen .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Linen for writing upon was in use among the Romans in very early
times.]{.style_} [Libri lintei]{.style_1} [("linen books") are mentioned
by Livy not as existing in his own time, but as recorded by Licinius
Macer (the democratic tribune and historian who died in 66 B.C.), who
stated that linen "books" were kept in the temple of Juno Moneta. They
were not "books" in the modern sense, but simply "very ancient annals
and]{.style_} [libri magistratuum]{.style_1} [(books of
magistrates)".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Sibylline Books were generally imagined to have been]{.style_}
[libri lintei,]{.style_1} [though by some, palm leaves were thought to
have been their material. The old story of the Sibylline Books bought by
Lucius Tarquinius Superbus (534---510 B.C.) which relates that the king
twice refused to purchase the venerable volumes from the old woman who
offered them to him, but afterwards provided a stone chest and two
keepers to take charge of the three not very large volumes of]{.style_}
[magical formulae,]{.style_1} [may indicate that linen books were known
to the Romans at that early date.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Livy speaks of a Samnite ritual book as]{.style_} [liber vetus
linteus]{.style_1}[, "an ancient linen book" (Livy, x, 38); he also
mentions that when Augustus ordered the reconstruction of a ruined
temple of Jupiter, he found there a book of linen. Even in a much later
period, we hear of Roman linen books; the Emperor Aurelius is said to
have used linen as writing material for his official diary. Also Varro
(M. Terentius Varro, 116---27 B.C.) and the Roman jurist Ulpian
(Domitius Ulpianus, A.D. c. 170---228) mention book rolls of linen,
though it is doubtful whether they saw such books. However, linen seems
to have been the substance on which the sacred books and the ancient
records of Rome were written.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Apart from ancient Rome, it is well known that the ancient Egyptians
wrote books on linen and on linen mummy wrappings (remains of a
Sixth-Dynasty "book" are preserved in the Cairo Museum), that in Further
India until recent times black cotton rolls were used for
writing---writing being done with a white chalky material---that the
Parthians sometimes wove their writings; the Arabs, too, used linen as
writing material. The most remarkable ancient book written on linen is
undoubtedly the Agram linen wrapping, containing the longest Etruscan
document which has come down to []{#calibre_link-53}us---see [Fig.
I---14](#calibre_link-51){.calibre9}, a. This book, written on twelve
bands or strips, which covered an Egyptian mummy belonging to the
Graeco-Roman period, was found before 1880, at Alexandria, and is
preserved in the museum of Zagreb or Agram (Yugoslavia). It contains
about fifteen hundred words (see also p. 51).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Finally, mention may be made---though, strictly speaking, the object in
question is hardly a "book"---of the famous Bayeux Tapestry, preserved
at Bayeux (Normandy, France). It is a roll of linen, 20 inches wide and
231 feet long, and is a superb piece of needlework or embroidered
"tapestry". It is worked in coloured woollen thread, and is supposed to
be a panoramic representation of the invasion and conquest of England by
the Normans. Tradition attributes it to Matilda, wife of William the
Conqueror, but according to some scholars it was made for his
half-brother Odo, bishop of Bayeux. It is divided into 72 compartments
and contains 1,512 figures with Latin inscriptions, giving their names
and the subject of composition. It was discovered in 1724. In 1803,
Napoleon carried it away to Paris, and also during the last war (after
the allied invasion of Normandy) the Germans took it to Paris, but in
both instances it was brought back to Bayeux. It is of extreme interest,
both as medieval needlework and as a record of certain details of
history otherwise unknown. []{#calibre_link-54}([Fig.
I--16](#calibre_link-52){.calibre9}.)]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-303}

::: calibre5
:::

## [DURABLE WRITING MATERIALS ([Fig. I---14](#calibre_link-51){.calibre13}. and 15)]{.style_2} {#durable-writing-materials-fig.-i14.-and-15 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[From very early times, men have succeeded in leaving behind them
records of their activities. Apart from making articles, they painted or
incised or scratched symbols or marks on durable materials. As already
mentioned, the natural surfaces of rock walls, of caves or cliffs,
offered the most obvious opportunities for mankind's first attempts at
pictography. Later, great slabs of rock (megaliths) were incised with
pictographs. Still later, smaller stone slabs were inscribed. Softer
stone, like limestone and alabaster, harder stone, like marble, onyx and
lapis lazuli, as well as the hardest volcanic stone (basalt, dacite,
dolerite, diorite) were chosen for inscriptions.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The great majority of the inscriptions belong to three classes,
commemorative or historical, dedicatory or votive, and donative. The
first two comprise a vast variety of records, and these are mostly
incised on stone. The donative, relating to religious endowments or
secular donations, are sometimes on stone. In general, stone has always
been a principal material for inscriptions, but other hard substances
have also been used for the reception of writing; sometimes (mostly in
India) plates of copper, sometimes antimony, or copper, bronze, brass,
clay, earthenware (incised or inscribed with ink), crystals, ivory,
gold, silver, or mother-of-pearl on wood (see [Fig.
I---14](#calibre_link-51){.calibre9},]{.style_} [b]{.style_1}[). Even
bones were used as writing material: see, for instance, [Fig.
I---14](#calibre_link-51){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[c]{.style_1}[---]{.style_}[d,]{.style_1} [and I---15
(]{.style_}[below]{.style_1}[).]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000056.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-51}

[[Fig. I---14](#calibre_link-53){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a. Small portion of an Etruscan book wwritten on strips of linen
(courtesy Prof. Marcel Gorene, Archaeological Museum. Zagreb): b, book
of mother-of-pearl on wood: fragment of a "page" from a Manual for the
Ordination of a Buddhist Priest; it is written in Burmese Pali
(Cambridge University Library, Or. 783): c. fragment of bone engraved in
ancient Chinese characters, from Hsiao-l'un. near An-yang, in nothern
Honan, belonging to the fourteenth century B.C.; d, Coptic imprecation
written on a rib. Archacological Museum, Florence, No. 3359.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Among the Greeks, the Romans and other Italic peoples, the laws penal,
civil, religious and ceremonial were often engraved on tables of bronze
or of other metals. It is said that more than three thousand tables of
bronze or brass kept in the Roman Capitol perished by a fire in the
reign of Vespasian; these tables are supposed to have contained
proclamations, laws and treaties of alliance. An important group of
inscriptions, known as]{.style_} [ostraca]{.style_1}[, consist of broken
fragments of pottery or fragments of limestone, inscribed with
ink.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[These ancient inscriptions are very important in the history of writing
(see]{.style_} [The Alphabet, passim]{.style_1}[). Strictly speaking,
with a few exceptions, they do not belong to the history of]{.style_}
[the book]{.style_1}[; indeed, they hardly come within the category of
book production. It must be borne in mind, however, that men who could
cut inscriptions on stone or metal or other hard material, could also
write on perishable materials, such as wood, leather, or papyrus; such,
indeed, as would normally be used in writing what we now call a
book.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In some countries, such as Burma and Siam (see Chapter VIII), durable
materials were used for books.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Pliny (]{.style_}[Natur]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [Hist]{.style_1}[.
xiii, 1) states that the public acts among the most remote nations were
written in leaden books, and the existence of such books also seems to
be suggested by Suetonius and Frontinus. Even more illuminating is
Pausanias' statement (ix, 31, 4) that the Boeotians of Helicon showed
him a sheet of lead, much decayed, on which was inscribed
Hesiod's]{.style_} [Works and Days.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The eminent French scholar and antiquary Bernard de Montfauçon
(1955---1741) purchased a book at Rome in 1699, which lie described as
composed entirely of lead. (It is known that ancient leaden plates were
frequently beaten with a hammer until they were rendered so extremely
thin and pliable that they might easily be rolled up.) "It is about 4
inches long by 3 wide. Not only the pieces which form the cover, but
also all the leaves, in number six, the stick inserted into the rings,
which hold the leaves together, the hinges and nails, are all of lead,
without exception" (]{.style_}[L'Antiquité expliquée et représentée en
figures,]{.style_1} [Paris, 1719---24, ii, 378). It contained "Egyptian
gnostic figures, and writing". Montfauçon presented it to Cardinal de
Bouillon, but what has become of it is unknown.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000067.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig I--15]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Metal and whale's bone used as writing material in England: (above) The
scramasax or sword-knife, found in the Thames in 1857 and now in the
British Museum; it probably belongs to about A.D. 800; (below) one side
of the "Franks Casket", attributed to about A.D. 650 or A.D. 700; the
runes have been translated: "The fish-flood (sea) lifted the whale's
bones on to the mainland; the ocean became turbid where he swam aground
on the shingle."]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Be this as it may, so far as we know, metals were never used for book
production in the ordinary sense of the term.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-304}

::: calibre5
:::

## [CONCLUSION]{.style_2} {#conclusion .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[We have ample evidence that at the dawn of history---which, after all,
was fairly late in man's cultural development---writing was practised at
various places and on various materials. Amongst peoples who had
attained a certain cultural level---though this may be surprising in
view of the tendency to regard "barbarism" as the characteristic
condition of prehistoric or protohistoric peoples---there would usually
have been individuals, or rather a class, who cultivated the art of
"writing". There is evidence that even at so early an age man was not
without artistic promptings; and, under suitable conditions, these would
find easy and natural expression in drawing, painting and carving. At
the same time, with the increase in size of social and political groups
and the extension of govcrn-mental authority, the need would be
increasingly felt for written communication.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000078.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-52}

[[Fig I--16](#calibre_link-54){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Extract from the Bayeux Tapestry.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[In time, there would gradually emerge a system---rudimentary to start
with---based on pictorial or pictographic signs. At that period, perhaps
even more than now, there would be an urge to record striking events, or
even impressive dreams or ideas. And where writing had developed beyond
the primitive pictographic stage, we might expect an ability to reduce
to writing current teachings or coherent sets of ideas. Yet, of book
writing at that early stage of culture, for many lands, we have no
positive evidence; but it must be remembered that the materials that
would have been employed for the purpose would be perishable.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-305}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PHOENICIAN AND ETRUSCAN BOOKS]{.style_2} {#phoenician-and-etruscan-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[For this reason, we shall never be able to read the many books which we
have reason to believe existed, for instance, amongst the Minoans, the
Phoenicians and the Etruscans. As to the last mentioned---]{.style_}[The
alphabet]{.style_1}[, pp. 49022---501---while nearly 9,000 inscriptions
(on stone, pottery, objects of bronze, lead, on walls and so on) were
discovered in Etruria proper, roughly corresponding with modern Tuscany,
by far the longest and the most important written document, and actually
the only extant Etruscan manuscript which may be considered as a "book",
is the Agram (or Zagreb) document ---already referred to---written on
linen wrappings of an Egyptian mummy ([Fig.
I---14](#calibre_link-51){.calibre9},]{.style_} [a]{.style_1}[). The
text was written originally on fifteen strips or bands, and, with the
exception of the first three, is almost complete; but the meaning of
this text is still a matter of conjecture, all attempts at the
decipherment of the Etruscan language having been
unsuccessful.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The existence of Etruscan books is confirmed by Roman literary sources.
See also Dionysius Halicarnasseus, i, 21. We know, indeed, that the
Etruscans had religious, liturgical, "wisdom", and other books. The
Romans mentioned the Etruscan]{.style_} [libri Tagetici, libri Vegonici,
libri fatales]{.style_1} [from]{.style_} [Veii, libri haruspicini,
fulgurales, rituales, fatales, Acheruntici,]{.style_1} [and
others.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-306}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE "FIRST" BOOKS]{.style_2} {#the-first-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is a happy coincidence that the earliest records of true book
writing that have come down to us were discovered in the two main
cradles of civilization: baked clay tablet books in Mesopotamia, and
papyrus books in the Nile Valley.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[When, indeed, one is faced with a cardinal historical problem, such as
the "creation of the book", inquiry into the first causes is
extraordinarily difficult, just as in the case of a war or revolution.
For, as the late Prof. Chiera pointed out, there never was a man who
could sit down and say "Now I am going to be the first man to write".
Writing, that supreme achievement of man, the one which makes possible
the very existence of civilization by transmitting to later generations
the acquisitions of the earlier, was the result of a slow and natural
development. Even with recent events of any magnitude, it is difficult
to determine their precise origin; in tracing back their causes, we
reach a welter, where cause and effect condition each other and follow
each other in turn. To avoid this perplexity, a starting point must be
chosen, a birth certificate so to speak.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Thus, anyone wishing to study the history of "the book" must take as
the starting point the earliest known "books",]{.style_}
[i.e.]{.style_1} [the baked clay tablets of Mesopotamia and the papyrus
rolls of Egypt. Moreover, though the Mesopotamian clay tablets were
books in the real sense of the word (though hardly in accord with modern
conceptions), only the Egyptian papyrus book can be considered the true
ancestor of the modern book.]{.style_}
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: {#calibre_link-55 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-8}

::: calibre7
:::

### [CHAPTER II]{.style_2} {#chapter-ii .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

### [THE EARLIEST SYSTEMS OF WRITING]{.style_2} {#the-earliest-systems-of-writing .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

[HISTORY naturally relates only what we know, and, as a British scholar
(Bushnell) states, "it is commonly realized that nine-tenths of the
story of mankind is quite unknown; that is to say, its story has not
been preserved in books and libraries". "Until a language is written, it
leaves no traces of its history, except what can be inferred (and it is
relatively little) from its geographical distribution and that of its
related dialects; and especially from the distribution of place names,
which do not migrate" (J. L. Myres), and are sometimes
lasting.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[WRITING INITIATES A NEW AGE]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The history of "the book", even more than the history of mankind and
the history of language, begins with the history of writing. Only when
history began to be recorded, when the historical events, the
traditions, customs, laws, religious myths and rituals, and the formerly
memorized "works" of literature could be put down in writing, were they
enshrined into "books" to be preserved in the libraries of temples and
royal palaces.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The history of the book must obviously take into account the history of
writing. The detailed account of the various systems of writing would be
a long story if it could be fully told. Here it will be necessary only
to suggest the main headings of the story, being for the most part a
summary of the results already indicated in]{.style_} [The
Alphabet.]{.style_1}

[]{#calibre_link-307}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Mesopotamian Written Tablets]{.style_2} {#mesopotamian-written-tablets .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest written documents extant are Mesopotamian tablets,
inscribed with a crude pictographic writing which is certainly not
cuneiform, many characters being purely pictorial and the picture
symbols representing various objects, animate or inanimate. Some of the
signs, moreover, are clearly the later developments of forms which have
not come down to us.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Pictorial symbols are, however, not very suitable for writing on moist
and soft clay. Curves, circles and fine and long lines could not be
executed satisfactorily, so that the Sumerians, the earliest known users
of this writing, in the course of time replaced these symbols by
combinations of short, straight, vertical, horizontal or oblique
strokes, or angles, which formed what we now know as cuneiform
writing.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The gradual change from the pictographic to the
[]{#calibre_link-57}cuneiform---see [Fig.
II---1](#calibre_link-56){.calibre9}---which was not a deliberately
chosen device, but came about by the employment of soft clay as a
writing material, suggests that some perishable material may previously
have been used, on which pictorial symbols were scratched, not
impressed. Of course, this suggestion cannot be substantiated---we might
unearth many more thousands of clay tablet books belonging to various
periods, but it will never be possible to recover earlier "books"
written on perishable material.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[We must, therefore, be content to regard early clay tablet books as
representing the earliest specimens of "the book". Of the many thousands
of clay tablets that have been recovered no more than a few hundred can
properly be termed books.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Early tablets were discovered mainly in four sites in southern
Babylonia (Uruk or Warka, the biblical Erech; Jemdet Nasr; Shuruppak,
the modern Fârah; and Ur of the Chaldees, the Hebrew Ur Kasdim, modern
Tell el-Muqayyar). The earliest of them are generally attributed to the
middle of the fourth millennium B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[EARLY SUMERIAN WRITING ([Fig.
II---1](#calibre_link-56){.calibre9})]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A limestone tablet from Kish (now in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford),
assigned roughly to the middle of the fourth millennium B.C., seems to
be the earliest Mcsopotamian text. According to Dr. Gadd, of the British
Museum, this tablet "must be regarded for the present as representing
the archetype of all Sumerian writing". It contains a number of symbols
representing objects, the human head, hand, foot and]{.style_} [membrum
virile,]{.style_1} [a hut with a man squatting in it, a sledge, and a
few signs not clearly determined. Unfortunately, this tablet cannot be
read, and its meaning can hardly be guessed at.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The small clay tablets from Uruk, layer IVb, present the same stages of
development; they show representations of objects still for the most
part recognizable (such as parts of the human body, fishes, heads of
animals, plants, vessels, and boats), while tablets from Jemdet Nasr and
Fârah contain signs which can be considered transitional between the
pictograph and the cuneiform; there also appear groups of wedges bearing
little or no resemblance to the original forms.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000089.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-56}

[[Fig. II---1](#calibre_link-57){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Development of cuneiform symbols.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The reasons for the invention of writing can only be guessed at; in
Professor G. R. Driver's opinion they are tolerably clear. "The
development of the cuneiform script was due to economic necessity, and
the form that it took was conditioned by the means afforded by the
Mesopotamian river-country."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Indeed, the contents of the earliest tablets, as far as they can be
interpreted, seem to be economic or administrative, never religious or
historical. "Writing in fact seems to have existed for over five hundred
years before being put to such other uses; the only exceptions are
scholastic texts, as yet mere lists of signs and words, required for the
training of scribes" (G. R. Driver). According to the American scholar,
E. A. Speiser, the property marks, the primitive prototypes of those
which appear on the Mesopotamian cylinder seals, were the beginning of
the Mesopotamian pictographic writing.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ORIGIN OF CUNEIFORM WRITING]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Not only is the exact date of the invention of this system of writing
unknown; the nationality of the inventors is also uncertain. It would
seem that the great invention was due to the Sumerians, a people of
uncertain ethnic and linguistic affiliations, who spoke not a Semitic or
Indo-European, but an agglutinative language. The Sumerians entered
Mesopotamia before the middle of the fourth millennium B.C., conquered
the land and established a very high culture, which they passed over to
the Akkadians, who were Semites.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[There are doubts, however, both whether the Sumerians did invent
writing, and whether this system of writing was invented in Mesopotamia.
The question of the origins---also uncertain---of the proto-Elamite
script, of the Egyptian hieroglyphic writing and of the Indus Valley
script, which probably have some connection with the origins of the
Sumerian writing, makes the whole problem still more
intricate.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Nevertheless, whether it was the Sumerians who invented the
Mesopotamian pictographic writing or not, there is no doubt that it was
they who developed it into the cuneiform.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[EARLY ELAMITE WRITING]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Elamites, a non-Semitic and non-Indo-European people, who spoke
agglutinative dialects apparently related to the Caucasian group of
languages, inhabited the country situated to the north of the Persian
Gulf and to the east of the lower Tigris, corresponding to the modern
Persian province of Khuzistan.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The early Elamites possessed an indigenous script, known as early
Elamite or proto-Elamite, which seems to have descended from
pictographic symbols. According to some scholars, both the prototype of
the cuneiform writing and the early Elamite script go back to a common
source, but this is still an open problem.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000100.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-58}

[Fig. II---2]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Seal inscriptions from Indus Valley.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-308}

## [Indus Valley Script []{#calibre_link-309 .calibre14}([Fig. II---2](#calibre_link-58){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#indus-valley-script-fig.-ii2 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Twenty-five years of excavation, exploration and study have added
fifteen hundred years to the history of India. Complete cities of the
third millennium B.C. have been unearthed; regular and well-planned
streets, a magnificent drainage and water system, and well-equipped
private houses, bear evidence to a careful system of town planning. The
origins of this high civilization (known as Indus Valley Civilization or
Harappa Culture) are still unknown.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The most noteworthy characteristic of this culture is the use of an
indigenous script, which appears on large numbers of finely cut seals of
stone or copper discovered on various sites: [Fig.
II---2](#calibre_link-58){.calibre9}. About eight hundred of these seals
are inscribed. The writing, which still defies decipherment, may be
defined as one of stylized pictographs. A connection is probable between
this script and the common ancestor of the cuneiform writing and the
early Elamite script, although it is impossible to determine what the
connection is. It may be suggested, however, that the Indus Valley
script was an indigenous invention inspired by the knowledge of the
existence of writing.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-310}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Egyptian Scripts []{#calibre_link-60 .calibre14}([Fig. II---3](#calibre_link-59){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#egyptian-scripts-fig.-ii3 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Still more difficult is the paramount question concerning the origin of
Egyptian hieroglyphic writing. It is a moot problem which script, the
Egyptian hieroglyphic or the Sumerian pictographic, is the older. Both
were already in existence at the end of the fourth millennium B.C., and
in the light of our present knowledge it is possible to say that in
Mesopotamia and in the Nile Valley the development of writing follows a
very similar but not identical course.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ORIGIN OF HIEROGLYPHIC WRITING]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to some scholars the Egyptian hieroglyphic writing was
created as a whole at the beginnings of the united kingdom in Egypt
(thirtieth century B.C.). The famous slate palette of the king, whose
Horus-name is Nar-mer ([Fig. II---3](#calibre_link-59){.calibre9}, a),
and the plaque of Aha---[Fig. II---3](#calibre_link-59){.calibre9}, b
(both of whom have been identified by some students with Menes or Mena,
the traditional founder of the First Dynasty, while others consider
Nar-mer as the second king of this Dynasty) are regarded by some
scholars as being no more than pictures, while the majority consider
these documents as important evidence of the initial stage in the
developments of hieroglyphic writing,]{.style_} [i.e.]{.style_1} [a kind
of]{.style_} [incunabula]{.style_1} [of this important system. In the
opinion of Sir Alan Gardiner, for instance, in the Nar-mer palette "we
are able to observe the birth of hieroglyphics taking place, as it were,
under our very eyes.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000109.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-59}

[[Fig. II---3](#calibre_link-60){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a -h. "Incunabula" of Egyptian hieroglyphic writing: a, the Nar-mer
Palette; b, the Plaque of Aha: both probably belong to the thirtieth
century B.C. c, Development of Egyptian signs (from G.
Moeller).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000110.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-61}

[Fig. II---4]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Minoan linear scripts: (left) main symbols of "Linear Glass A": (above)
main symbols of "Linear Glass B" (drawings by Michael
Ventris).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to other scholars, however, in Egypt writing was invented and
developed "possibly under Sumerian influence" (G. R. Driver). And "it
may be suggested that among the Egyptians the invention of the emergence
of the hieroglyphic system of writing is simply the extension of already
existing cultural elements to a new social situation" (S. H.
Hooke).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However that may be, there is no doubt that during the initial period
of the First Dynasty, Egyptian writing was already fully developed. It
is now commonly agreed to place the rise of the First Dynasty in the
thirtieth century B.C., which date would synchronize with the beginning
of the classical Sumerian age.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[CHARACTERISTICS OF EGYPTIAN WRITING]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Whatever its origin, the Egyptian writing was essentially national (in
complete contrast with the cuneiform); it originated in Egypt, it
developed in Egypt, it was employed only for Egyptian speech (perhaps
with one or two exceptions), and it died out in Egypt. The Egyptians had
every reason to be proud of their writing, and from the earliest ages
they had the greatest veneration for it, considering it to be the
foundation of all education and well-being. In spite of its complexity,
the Egyptian writing is, in a certain way, one of the most accurate and
most intelligible of the great ancient systems of writing.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Its history, including the hieratic script (a cursive form, used beside
the hieroglyphic for three thousand years, and of particular importance
from the point of view of the history of "the book") and the demotic
script (a highly cursive derivative of the hieratic), is dealt with
in]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp. 58---71. See also [Fig.
II---3](#calibre_link-59){.calibre9}, c.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-311}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Cretan Scripts []{#calibre_link-312 .calibre14}([Fig. II---4](#calibre_link-61){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#cretan-scripts-fig.-ii4 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The ancient civilization of the Island of Crete---the only European
country which had a culture to equal the contemporary civilizations of
Egypt and Mesopotamia---presents distinctive features. It is generally
known as Aegean or Minoan, and its high level is demonstrated not only
by the architectural remains, fresco painting and ceramic art, but also
by the considerable influence exercised on the civilization of the Greek
mainland and the islands; it is noteworthy that Greek traditions
regarded Crete as an ancient centre of a great civilization. This
ancient culture has left many problems which may remain unsolved for all
time. The ethnic and linguistic affinities of this people, their origin,
history, rulers, even their name are still open problems, as are the
questions of their culture and book production.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The beginning of the Minoan civilization, corresponding to the Bronze
Age epoch of Crete, seems to have coincided, roughly, with the First
Dynasty of Egypt and the classical Sumerian dynasties. The Minoan
culture came to an end abruptly, about 1100 B.C. owing probably to
political disturbances in the eastern Mediterranean, similar to those
which somewhat earlier (c. 1200 B.C.) brought about the downfall of the
Hittite and the decline of the Egyptian Empires.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-313}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MINOAN SCRIPTS]{.style_2} {#minoan-scripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The scripts of ancient Crete still remain a riddle to which a happy
discovery of a bilingual inscription may, one day, provide the key. From
the first phase of Early Minoan (thirtieth century B.C.) onwards, seal
engraving was practised.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The engraved subjects were mainly decorative designs such as meanders,
but there were also some crude picture-symbols, such as parts of the
human body, animals, birds, plants and implements. "Both the engraved
seal stones of Crete and many of the pictorial signs on them closely
resemble those of Egypt . . . there is no doubt that the general notion
of seal cutting and sign writing came from Egypt" (J. L. Myres). It is
an open question whether these pictorial devices should be considered as
true writing but, in Sir John Myres's opinion, they "are sufficient
evidence that writing was practised".]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-314}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PICTOGRAPHIC CLASS A AND B]{.style_2} {#pictographic-class-a-and-b .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The first phase of Middle Minoan (c. twenty-second to twenty-first
centuries B.C.) saw the beginning of a true system of writing, known as
the "Pictographic Class A", which later developed into the "Pictographic
Class B". There was already a numerical system, influenced by that of
Egypt.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-315}

::: calibre5
:::

## [LINEAR CLASS A AND B ([Fig. II--4](#calibre_link-61){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#linear-class-a-and-b-fig.-ii4 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Apparently in the seventeenth century B.C. the pictographic gave place
to a linear script, which is generally distinguished into "Linear Class
A" and "Linear Class B". Both scripts are cursive---they may even have
been book-hands---and do not appearon the seals.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Linear Class A appears engraved on stone or metal, incised on clay, or
written with ink on pottery; some inscriptions have been found outside
Crete. This script, containing about seventy-five symbols, continues in
the sixteenth century B.C. Linear Class B seems to be a kind of aulic or
official script: it is found on numerous clay tablets belonging to the
archives of the palaces at Knossos in Crete, and at Pylos in S.W.
Peloponnesus. Until the discovery of the Pylos archives, assigned to c.
1200 B.C., it was thought that not even Class B continued during the
last Late Minoan phase (i.e. from the end of the fourteenth century B.C.
onwards). The number of symbols of Class B is slightly reduced, but
forty-eight of them can be connected with Class A. The numeration
symbols are also partly changed.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In July-August, 1952, over thirty tablets, inscribed in Linear Class B,
were unearthed in the excavation of the famous ancient city of
Mycenae.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-316}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ORIGIN OF MINOAN SCRIPTS]{.style_2} {#origin-of-minoan-scripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The origin of these scripts is uncertain. The theory of a derivation
from the Egyptian scripts, not only of the pictorial signs of the
engraved seals, but also of the pictographic scripts, and even of the
linear scripts, is not acceptable.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Although some of the Cretan pictographic symbols are identical
---probably externally only---with Egyptian hieroglyphs, the great
majority of them seem to be of indigenous invention, since they are
strictly connected with Cretan customs and religion, and indigenous
agriculture.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is thus probable that the Cretan scripts, especially the linear
characters, are indigenous creations, although the inspiration may have
come from outside. Some scholars have suggested Anatolian connections,
but chronological reasons alone would preclude this
possibility.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[More recently (1949), Sir John Myres has suggested that "the Minoan
pictographic and linear scripts came into existence in a region which
had ceased for a while to be influenced by Egypt",]{.style_}
[i.e.]{.style_1} [after the collapse of the Twelfth Dynasty empire ;
"another influence replaced that of Egypt: that of the Babylonian
culture with its art of inscribing signs and sign-groups on tablets of
clay". However, Crete "lay too far off to be affected by Babylonia; and
had the peculiar fortune to be indirectly affected by the flexible
pictorial script of Babylonia, not the rigid cuneiform convention of a
later phase. Crete was thus able to create a composite and adaptable
technique of its own, undisturbed by foreign competitors. . .
."]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-317}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE PHAISTOS Disc ([Fig. I---4](#calibre_link-29){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [a]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#the-phaistos-disc-fig.-i4-a .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[This most remarkable of all the Cretan inscriptions, which has already
been referred to, was found in Crete in 1908, and is assigned
to]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 1700 B.C. It is the first-known stamped
object of its kind, being an irregularly circular terra-cotta tablet,
about 6---7 inches in diameter, with highly pictorial sign groups
impressed by means of separate stamps in inscribed compartments, and
printed on both sides of the disc, in a spiral band, broken into
concentric bands with connection marks.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Sir John Myres points out that this spiral band, an ingenious device to
prevent the reader from "losing his place", recurs on a Minoan gold ring
from Mavrospeio near Knossos, and on two inscriptions from Knossos
painted on the inner surface of clay cups. The highly pictorial signs,
which show no relationship with Cretan pictographs, number 241, and
include forty-five different symbols, such as human figures and parts of
the body, animals, plants and tools.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is thought, largely because of the plumed head-dress, that the disc
was not of indigenous origin, but belongs to the south-west coast of
Asia Minor. According to Myres, a few of the signs suggest a Lycian
origin. Some scholars connected the disc with the Philistines, others
with North Africa. It must, however, be pointed out that until the
present day nothing resembling it has appeared either in Anatolia or
elsewhere, nor is there any trace in Crete or outside of a similar
script, especially at the period in question.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-318}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Hittite Hieroglyphics []{#calibre_link-63 .calibre14}([Fig. II---5](#calibre_link-62){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#hittite-hieroglyphics-fig.-ii5 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Hittites, a group of peoples of differing ethnical and linguistic
affinities who inhabited Asia Minor and northern Syria from the third to
the first millennia B.C., developed a high civilization, and during two
hundred years (c. 1400---1200 B.C.) constituted one of the chief empires
of the Near East.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Hittite Empire having come to an end at the beginning of the
twelfth century B.C., the Hittite political and cultural centre was
transferred to northern Syria, where small Hittite states arose, the
most important of them being Carchemish. In the eighth century B.C. all
these small kingdoms were conquered by the Assyrians.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[HITTITE SCRIPTS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Hittites early adapted the Babylonian cuneiform writing to their
own language, and many Hittite written documents, including literary
productions, are extant in this script (see p. 106). The Hittite
cuneiform writing continued to be used until the end of the Hittite
Empire. About the middle of the second millennium B.C. they developed a
hieroglyphic form of script, now known as the Hittite hieroglyphic
writing.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000111.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-62}

[[Fig. II---5](#calibre_link-63){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Hittite hieroglyphic cursive signs (ii, iv, vi, vii) compared with
monumental symbols (i, iii, v, viii).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The majority of the inscriptions in this writing belong to the period
of the Syrian Hittite states, particularly to the tenth-eighth centuries
B.C.; the latest may be assigned to c. 600 B.C. Not many inscriptions
come from the Hittite mother country, the greater number having been
discovered in northern Syria (Carchemish, Hamath and Aleppo). Many
inscriptions are in relief on stone monuments, others are engraved, a
few on lead; there are inscribed seals (one in silver), and impressions
in clay. Some are engraved in a more cursive form of writing (see [Figs.
II---5](#calibre_link-62){.calibre9}, columns ii, iv, vi, and
vii).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[With certain other facts, the existence of such a cursive hand may
induce us to assume that there existed Hittite books written in Hittite
hieroglyphic writing; but no such books have come down to us. It must be
remembered, however, that the materials that would have been employed
for the purpose would probably be perishable (papyrus or
parchment).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ORIGIN OF HITTITE HIEROGLYPHIC WRITING]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Some scholars have derived the Hittite hieroglyphic writing from the
Egyptian hieroglyphs, others from the Cretan pictographic script.
Although the Hittite hieroglyphs are highly pictorial, as also are the
Egyptian hieroglyphs (or the Cretan pictographs), there does not seem to
be any direct connection between the Egyptian and the Hittite
signs.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[As to possible affinities with the Cretan pictographic scripts, apart
from chronological difficulties, no connection can be proved so long as
the Cretan scripts remain undeciphered. There is, however, the
possibility that the Hittite hieroglyphic writing was an indigenous
creation, perhaps inspired by the Egyptian and Cretan scripts.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-319}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Chinese Writing []{#calibre_link-65 .calibre14}([Figs. II---6](#calibre_link-64){.calibre13}-7, IX---1-5)]{.style_2} {#chinese-writing-figs.-ii6-7-ix1-5 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Not only is Chinese writing the only ancient analytic (partly
ideographic, partly phonetic) system of writing still used, but it is
employed by a nation comprising one-fifth of the world's population, and
in a country larger than the whole European continent. Notwithstanding
its extensive use by peoples of high and ancient culture, and its
history of almost four thousand years, the internal development of
Chinese writing has been practically imperceptible.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ITS DEVELOPMENT]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The main evolution of the Chinese signs was indeed technical and
external---calligraphic as we may call it. The writing has never reached
even the syllabic stage. The main reason for this peculiarity lies in
the Chinese language, which---although it was probably once an
agglutinative language---is now isolating
(]{.style_}[i]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}[e]{.style_1}[. without grammatical
terminations or other grammatical forms), monosyllabic and polytonic
(]{.style_}[i]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}[e]{.style_1}[. capable of being
pronounced on a low pitch, on a rising pitch, on a high pitch, and so
on).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ORIGIN OF CHINESE WRITING]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The date of the invention or creation of Chinese writing is uncertain;
we may assume, however, that it was already in existence in the early
second millennium B.C. The earliest Chinese inscriptions extant, written
on bone, belong to the fourteenth century B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The problem of the origin of Chinese writing is also still unsolved.
Direct dependence on the cuneiform writing has been suggested, but this
does not seem probable. There is, however, no doubt that there exist
certain internal similarities between the Chinese and the Sumerian
writing as well as the Egyptian hieroglyphic script.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The theory of the American scholar, A. L. Kroeber, of "idea-diffusion"
or "stimulus-diffusion" provides the most probable explanation of the
origin of Chinese writing as well as of some other ancient scripts. On
this basis it is urged that, after writing had developed in Mesopotamia,
in Elam, in the Indus Valley, and perhaps in some other places still
unknown to us, and when the generic idea reached China, it may well have
induced some great Chinese personality to invent or create a particular
script for the Chinese speech.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000112.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-64}

[[Fig. II---6](#calibre_link-65){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The 214 "keys" of Chinese writing.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000113.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. II--7]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The 300 Chinese primary elements.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is possible, moreover, that prior to the invention of Chinese
writing, there existed in China, as suggested by local traditions, some
primitive devices of communication, such as the mystic trigrams and
hexagrams, or a knot device similar to the ancient Peruvian]{.style_}
[quipus]{.style_1} [(see [Fig.
I---1](#calibre_link-24){.calibre9},]{.style_} [b]{.style_1}
[and]{.style_} [The Alphabet]{.style_1} [p. 26) or the tally sticks (see
[Fig. I---1](#calibre_link-24){.calibre9},]{.style_} [b]{.style_1}[).
Also the typical Chinese gestures ---[Fig.
I---1](#calibre_link-24){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[a]{.style_1}[---ornamentation and ritual symbolism played a not
inconsiderable part in the creation of the Chinese characters. For the
development of Chinese writing see]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1}
[pp. 98--- 119.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-320}

::: calibre5
:::

## [The Maya and Aztec Scripts []{#calibre_link-68 .calibre14}([Figs. II--8](#calibre_link-66){.calibre13} []{#calibre_link-226 .calibre14}and [IX---10](#calibre_link-67){.calibre13}-17)]{.style_2} {#the-maya-and-aztec-scripts-figs.-ii8-and-ix10-17 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Although this story refers primarily to the writings of the peoples
which contributed directly or indirectly over a long period to the
development of our "book", mention must be made of the civilization of
pre-Columbian Central America and Mexico. Its importance is to be viewed
in relation to the general problem of ancient
culture-building.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The other great civilizations of antiquity originated and developed,
roughly speaking, simultaneously, mainly in great river valleys situated
in one more or less continuous land area, within the northern
sub-tropical belt. They appear successively as we travel, east or west,
from the great cradle of civilization, Mesopotamia. Their culture was
based on the knowledge of writing, the employment of metals, the
cultivation of wheat, the domestication of certain animals, the use of
the wheel, and town building. No other area presents this homogeneity in
fundamentals, but at least in some respects, there seems to be one, and
only one, exception---ancient Central America and Mexico.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The time is not within sight when a complete and generally agreed
solution of all the problems connected with this fascinating subject can
be put forward. There is, however, fairly general agreement nowadays
concerning the part played by the Mayas, the Toltecs and the Aztecs in
the cultural development of ancient Central America and Mexico. The
Mayas are regarded as the originators of the highest pre-Columbian
civilization of America; the Zapotecs, Mixtecs, and the Toltecs are
considered the intermediaries between the Mayas and the Aztecs; both the
Toltecs and the Aztecs, belonging to the linguistic group of the Nahuas,
built the ancient civilization of Mexico.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-321}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE MAYAS]{.style_2} {#the-mayas .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Mayas, even nowadays, are one of the most important peoples of
native America. The Old Empire, which probably arose about the beginning
of the Christian Era, and flourished for about four hundred and fifty
years in southern Yucatan, was the Golden Age of Mayan art and culture;
it was the period of the great city of Palenque (now in northern
Chiapas), which was the seat of art, of Copan (now in western Honduras),
which was the main religious and cultural centre, and of various
others.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000114.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-66}

[[Fig. II--8](#calibre_link-68){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Maya and Aztec symbols. a--c, Maya symbols: a, symbols of the months,
according to the Codex Dresden; b, symbols of the days, according to
monuments (upper part) and manuscripts (lower part); c, the highest
number found in a Maya inscription (1,841,639,800 days, corresponding to
over 5,100,000 years); d, Mexican symbols representing the twenty
days]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-322}

## [MAYAN SCIENCE AND ART]{.style_2} {#mayan-science-and-art .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Amongst the Mayas, the mathematical and astronomical sciences seem to
have been far ahead of the contemporary knowledge of any other people.
The Mayas had already a sign for zero: the possibility of using the
principle of position depends mainly on the employment of a separate
symbol for zero, without which we could not distinguish, by reference to
position, between 22, 220, 202, 2002, 2200, 2020, and so on. The Mayan
calendar was even more accurate than the Julian still in use, and is
capable of dealing with periods of time over five million years ([Fig.
II--8](#calibre_link-66){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[c]{.style_1}[).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-323}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE TOLTECS]{.style_2} {#the-toltecs .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Toltecs ("Skilled Workers") were the supposed originators of
Mexico's Golden Age; they were excellent architects; at their
traditional capital, Tollan, they built pyramids, temples, palaces and
storeyed buildings. About the middle of the first millennium A.D. they
seem to have entered Mexico and about A.D. 770 they arrived at the site
of their future capital.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Their culture, which reached its apogee about the end of the ninth
century, was probably borrowed mainly from the Mayas, through the
Zapotecs and Mixtecs, who (though very little is known about the history
of these two peoples) seem to have played the part of cultural
intermediaries between the Maya Empire in the east and the Toltec
"empire" in the west.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-324}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE AZTECS]{.style_2} {#the-aztecs .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Aztecs or Azteca (the "Crane People"), if we are to believe their
own tradition, immigrated from the north about A.D. 1168. According to
the]{.style_} [Mendoza codex]{.style_1}[, in 1325 they founded, on the
salt marshes on the western edge of the Lake Tezcuco or Texcoco, the
town Tenochtitlan, which became the modern Mexico City. About 1430 they
founded a confederacy with two other states and started an
"imperialistic" expansion, which only the Spanish conquest
stopped.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Their culture was a mosaic of elements borrowed from other cultures,
mainly Maya, Zapotec, Mixtec and Toltec. The Aztecs, however, developed
considerable skill in the art of metal working and
architecture.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-325}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MAYA WRITING ([Figs. II--8](#calibre_link-66){.calibre13}, a-c, and IX, 10--12)]{.style_2} {#maya-writing-figs.-ii8-a-c-and-ix-1012 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[How and when the Mayas invented writing we do not know, and we shall
probably never be able to say. As far as it is possible to judge from
present-day knowledge, the Maya script and astronomical and mathematical
sciences were already fully developed at the beginning of the Mayan Old
Empire: this presupposes either a previous evolution of long duration,
of which nothing is known, or some cultural importation, which is hardly
thinkable.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The written material extant consists of (1) three manuscripts (see pp.
425 ff. and Fig. IX, 10--12); (2) numerous beautiful and mainly
well-preserved]{.style_} [stelae]{.style_1} [(huge, vertical monolithic
pillars), carved all over in low relief with glyphs and figures, and
also large oval stones or altars, similarly carved; (3) some polychrome
clay pottery painted with glyphs and figures; as well as (4) carvings
and engravings on metal and bone.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The glyphs or cartouches are highly conventionalized groups of many
picture signs gathered into a single frame, and they have some external,
but undoubtedly casual, resemblance to the Egyptian royal cartouches.
The script is on the whole undeciphered, except for the calendar symbols
and for notation signs ([Fig.
II--8](#calibre_link-66){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[a--c]{.style_1}[).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This fact is the more unfortunate as the knowledge of the Mayan writing
has apparently been lost in the last two and a half centuries only.
According to Spanish sources, records in Mayan hieroglyphic writing
continued to be made as late as the end of the seventeenth century, when
some Spaniards seem still to have known it, but it is not certain that
the script of this period was identical with that of the early
period.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-326}

::: calibre5
:::

## [AZTEC WRITING ([Figs. II--8](#calibre_link-66){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [d]{.style_2} [and IX, 14--17)]{.style_2} {#aztec-writing-figs.-ii8-d-and-ix-1417 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Aztec writing is perhaps a degenerate derivative of the Mayan
script; indeed, from the aesthetic standpoint, there cannot even be a
comparison between the beautiful Mayan glyphs and the crude, barbaric
Aztec picture signs; there is no likeness even in the external form of
the symbols of the two scripts. Nevertheless, while a simple adoption by
the Mexicans of the Maya script is not probable, there can hardly be any
doubt that the Mexican peoples, indirectly at least, received the idea
of writing from the Mayas.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the highly pictographic Aztec script there are numerous instances of
pure ideographic writing; sometimes the script is even more in the
nature of mnemonic aids to be supplemented by oral description than of a
true writing. In some respects, however, the Aztec script is more
advanced; many conventional signs have phonetic value, either as
word-signs or as syllables.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Abstract ideas are represented by signs borrowed from]{.style_}
[homonyms]{.style_1}
[(]{.style_}[i]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}[e]{.style_1}[. words having the
same sound, but a different meaning), even when the homonymy is not
exact. A syllable could be expressed by an object whose name began with
it. The transcription of personal names was facilitated by the use of
the]{.style_} [iconomatic]{.style_1} [system in names
(]{.style_}[e]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}[g]{.style_1}[. "Blue Dog", "Eagle
Star", "Plumed Serpent").]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Aztec script (which was also employed under Spanish domination) is
better known than the Mayan writing. It has been partly deciphered. Many
of the deities have been identified, the personal and place names can be
read, some of the ceremonies are understood, the meaning of some
historical events can be perceived (they were depicted with considerable
ingenuity by means of pictographs accompanied by symbols showing the
place and the year).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Still, we are far from complete victory; in many cases, the
decipherment is a more or less acceptable guess which cannot be either
proved or disproved. See also]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp.
120--35.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-327}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Phonetic or Sound-Writing]{.style_2} {#phonetic-or-sound-writing .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It was a long way from the primitive picture-writing to the alphabet.
In the former there is no connection between the depicted symbol and the
spoken name for it; the latter has become the graphic counterpart of
speech. Indeed, each element (which may be of any shape) in the phonetic
writing corresponds to a specific element
(]{.style_}[i]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}[e]{.style_1}[. sound) in the
language to be represented. Thus, a direct relationship has been
established between the spoken language
(]{.style_}[i]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}[e]{.style_1}[. speech) and the
script, the latter being a representation of the former. Phonetic
writing may be syllabic or alphabetic.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-328}

::: calibre5
:::

## [SYLLABARIES OR SYLLABIC SYSTEMS OF WRITING]{.style_2} {#syllabaries-or-syllabic-systems-of-writing .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[These systems of writing developed more easily and appeared as a
creation more often than did an alphabet. In the systematic syllabaries,
the single symbols represent syllables,]{.style_} [i.e.]{.style_1}
[elementary sound blocks; a combination of signs representing a group of
syllables would convey a spoken word. In many instances a word, if
monosyllabic, would be represented by one symbol.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[For a language that, for reasons of phonetic decay or otherwise, has
multiplied the consonants in a single syllable
(]{.style_}[e]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}[g]{.style_1}[. the English word
"strength"), the syllabary becomes a cumbrous mode of writing,
especially because it generally contains only open syllables
(]{.style_}[i]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}[e]{.style_1}[. consonant + vowel)
or vowels, when these constitute syllables. Thus, for instance, while it
would be easy to represent by a syllabary a word like "fa-mi-ly", the
word "strength" would have to be written]{.style_}
[se-te-re-ne-ge-the,]{.style_1} [or the like, and such a representation
of sounds would be far from adequate. Moreover, syllabaries require a
much greater number of symbols than alphabetic writing.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000115.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-69}

[Fig. II--9]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Japanese syllabaries.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[It must, however, be pointed out that, for example, Japanese, which is
the only important language still employing syllabic systems of writing,
admits no consonant clusters and no syllables, except those closed
with]{.style_} [n]{.style_1} [(such]{.style_} [n]{.style_1} [is
indicated by a special sign).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Apart from the Japanese syllabaries, termed]{.style_} [Hira
gana]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [Kata
[]{#calibre_link-329}kana]{.style_1}[---[Fig.
II--9](#calibre_link-69){.calibre9}---which evolved in accient times
from Chinese scripts, but are still employed (in addition to the
ideographic characters of Chinese origin), the following syllabic
systems of writing may be mentioned: (i) the Assyrian cuneiform writing,
which was at certain times practically a syllabary; (2) the Semitic
script of ancient Byblos (northern Syria); (3) the script of ancient
Cyprus []{#calibre_link-72}([Fig. II--10](#calibre_link-70){.calibre9}),
probably developed from a Minoan script; and (4) some artificial modern
syllabaries which existed or still exist in Western Africa and in North
[]{#calibre_link-73}America---[Fig. II--11](#calibre_link-71){.calibre9}
and 12. See also]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp.
158--85.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000116.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-70}

[[Fig. II--10](#calibre_link-72){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Cypriote syllabary.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-330}

## [THE ALPHABET]{.style_2} {#the-alphabet .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Alphabetic writing is the last, the most highly developed, the most
convenient, and the most easily adaptable system of writing. The
alphabet is now employed by the large majority of civilized peoples; its
use is acquired in childhood with ease. There is obviously an enormous
advantage in the use of letters which represent single sounds rather
than ideas or words or even syllables: it is certainly much easier to
master twenty-two or twenty-four or twenty-six signs of an alphabet than
hundreds or thousands of symbols of ideographic systems of writing (nine
thousand to eighty thousand in Chinese scripts).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000117.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-71}

[[Fig. II--11](#calibre_link-73){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Vai syllabary.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000118.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. II--12]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Cherokee syllabary.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The alphabet may also be passed from one language to another without
much difficulty. Indeed, the same alphabet is used now (with unimportant
changes) for most Indo-European, Finno-Ugrian, Malay-Polynesian,
Negro-African languages and many others.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Thanks to the simplicity of the alphabet, writing has become far more
common; it is no longer the more or less exclusive domain of the
priestly or other privileged classes, as it was in Egypt or Mesopotamia.
Education has become largely a matter of reading and writing, and is
possible for all. It may be said that alphabetic writing, helped by the
introduction of paper, and the invention and diffusion of printing, has
solved the problem of universal illiteracy.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The fact that alphabetic writing has survived with relatively little
change for three and a half millennia, notwithstanding the advent of
printing and the typewriter, and the extensive use of shorthand-writing,
is the best evidence of its suitability for the needs of the whole
modern world. It is this simplicity, adaptability and suitability which
have secured the triumph of the alphabet over the other systems of
writing.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is generally agreed that the alphabet was already in existence
before 1500 B.C., and that it was invented by a north-western Semitic
people of Syria-Palestine. It is also agreed that the many hundreds of
alphabets, those which existed or are still employed in Europe, India,
Arabia, Central Asia, Korea, and so on, the Latin alphabet and its
descendants, the Greek and its descendants, the Runic, and all the
others, are alike descendants of the early North Semitic alphabet,
though the similarities between any two may be quite unrecognizable.
Indeed, each important civilization modifies its script and adapts it to
its language, and time makes its relation to some of its near relatives
indistinguishable.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Alphabetic writing, its origin and its development in its numerous
branches, constitutes a long story in itself. No other system of writing
has had so extensive, so intricate and so interesting a history:
see]{.style_} [The Alphabet]{.style_1}[, particularly pp.
193--576.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-331}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Bibliography]{.style_2} {#bibliography .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[See the works quoted in]{.style_} [The Alphabet]{.style_1}[, 2nd ed.,
London and New York, 1949 (3rd reprint, New York, 1952).]{.style_}
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: {#calibre_link-74 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-9}

::: calibre7
:::

### [CHAPTER III]{.style_2} {#chapter-iii .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

### [CLAY TABLET BOOKS]{.style_2} {#clay-tablet-books .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE history of the book is at a disadvantage in comparison with the
history of writing in that the former is based mainly on perishable
writing material, which could not be expected to endure to our time; the
latter has, of course, at its disposal inscriptions on durable material.
Thus, with few exceptions, very little can be said of "the book" of
ancient antiquity which may as indicated on p. 53 have been written on
wood or leaves as early as the fourth millennium B.C. before the use of
clay tablets.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Elamites, the Cretans, the Hittites, and many other peoples had
their books and their libraries, but, apart from the Mesopotamian
peoples, who wrote on clay tablets (and those who borrowed the custom
from them), ancient nations---with the possible exception of the ancient
Cretans---wrote their books on perishable writing material. Only the
splendid protective covering of the Egyptian sands have, secretly,
preserved for us thousands of books or fragments of books written on
papyrus or (more rarely) on parchment or leather. The papyrus and
parchment books, which are the direct ancestors of our modern "book",
will be dealt with in the next chapters.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[CLAY TABLET LITERATURE]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The literature of the clay tablet books is voluminous, and much more
awaits the archaeologist and philologist, as well as the historian in
all his fields. All types of literature are represented. There are
poetry and prose, myths and epic tales, prayers and hymns, incantations
and hepatoscopy (]{.style_}[i]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}[e]{.style_1}[. the
practice, very popular in Babylonia, of deriving omens from the shape,
size, or condition of the liver), historical, legal, scientific, and
commercial texts. Although a very large number of these books have been
published and annotated, much yet remains to be done to enable students
of history, religion, ethics and law, and of political, economic and
social services, who are not "Assyriologists", to use this vast material
for the benefit of modern culture and learning.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Translations of numerous complete texts are available, and there are
numerous modern books with fragmentary translations, but there is no
complete]{.style_} [corpus,]{.style_1} [and we may have to wait many
years before such will be ready. In Mr. D. J. Wiseman's opinion,
a]{.style_} [corpus]{.style_1} [of cuneiform literature will never be
practical: "A translation of approximately three-quarters of a million
tablets would be impossible to handle and would in its greater part be
worthless, since the majority are economic texts which must be studied
in their context and the remainder would largely duplicate previous
publications." (From a letter to the author.)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Even the orientalist who is not an Assyriologist is not much better
off; he expects from the Assyriologists better, and up-to-date grammars
and interpretation. In particular, the interpretation of Sumerian texts
is still in its infancy. In the present state of our knowledge, any
first translation of unilingual Sumerian texts is largely
tentative.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The first collection of cuneiform tablets was excavated in 1843 by the
French consular agent at Mosul, Paul Émile Botta, in the palace of
Sargon II (721--705 B.C.) at Khorsabad or Dur-Sharrukin ("City of
Sargon"); it arrived in France in 1846. Austen Henry Layard's
excavations, begun in 1845, constitute, however, the main landmark in
this field of knowledge; in 1847 he discovered the great palace of
Sennacherib (704--681 B.C.) at Kuyunjik (part of the site of ancient
Nineveh), and in 1849--50 he found there the first palace library. His
work was continued by Hormuzd Rassam, who in 1853 discovered there the
great library of Ashurbanipal (see p. 109). Some twenty thousand
cuneiform tablets in the British Museum now bear the inventory letter K
(for Kuyunjik) or Rm. (for Rassam). In the hundred years which have
followed these first discoveries, hundreds of thousands of tablets have
been unearthed and brought to the museums of Europe and
America.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[WRITING AND READING IN ANCIENT MESOPOTAMIA]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Ancient Mesopotamia, like Egypt, was a land of scribes
[]{#calibre_link-76}([Fig. III--1](#calibre_link-75){.calibre9}), but in
the opinion of some modern scholars it differed from the sister
civilization in one important respect. In Egypt, the scribe, or educated
man, was essentially an official, and it is very doubtful indeed whether
the general body of the people were able to read or write. In Babylonia,
to write, and consequently to read, was a duty imposed on all, except
the lowest class of people. Amongst the duties imposed upon the parent
was that of having his son taught to write: there is ample proof that
there were regular schools and colleges attached to most of the temples
in Babylonia (see p. 99)---certainly at Borsippa, Nippur and Larsa.
According to eminent Egyptologists, however, literacy was not more
general in Mesopotamia than it was in Egypt.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000120.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-75}

[[Fig. III--1](#calibre_link-76){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Assyrian sculptures from the royal palace at Ashur, representing
scribes. (Above) Scribes in the act of writing; (below) two scribes
writing out lists of booty (see p. 174).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Education was, indeed, as in the Middle Ages, under the direction of
the priests; in the temples of every great city there was a "house of
tablets", or books---in other words, a library (see p. 99). Not only
could books be borrowed from this library, but in the part analogous to
a modern public record office all documents relating to business
transactions, including conveyancing of land and slave ownership, were
filed. Royal decrees and correspondence, lists of taxes and official
chronicles, would probably be placed in a special record office of the
palace.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[With education placed upon a broad basis, it is perhaps not surprising
that letter-writing and record-making covering all transactions were
practised to a remarkable extent. The law required that every business
deal, even down to the smallest transaction, should be in writing and
duly signed by the contracting parties and witnesses.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[At the same time, it must not be assumed that there were no
illiterates. Writing on tablets was far from easy, and we cannot marvel
that, notwithstanding the general duty to learn to write and to read,
not many attempted to master the art. It was so much easier to hire
someone to do the writing than to waste years at school oneself. Is it
too fantastic to suggest, that, with the advent of the shorthand-typist
of today, our modern business leaders may in time be unable to
write?]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[VARIOUS WRITING MATERIALS IN MESOPOTAMIA]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In addition to clay, stone was extensively used by the Mesopotamian
scribe (obelisks, bas-reliefs, statues of bulls and lions, boundary
stones, stone gate sockets, etc.).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Stone was sometimes the main material used for perpetuating a code, or
a legal agreement, or for immortalizing the work of a ruler. Sometimes
the hardest volcanic rocks were employed for the purpose; sometimes
softer stones, especially alabaster and marble, and even stones of
comparative rarity, such as lapis lazuli, were employed. Plaster and
gypsum were occasionally used. Semiprecious stones were cut for
seals.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Metals, too, were used---usually bronze, copper, and antimony. The more
precious metals such as silver and gold---the latter being very
rare---were occasionally inscribed; so was ivory.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[INSCRIBED CLAY TABLETS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The inscribed clay tablets, countless in number and infinitely various
in size, shape and contents, far outweigh in importance all other kinds
of cuneiform inscriptions in existence. Cuneiform writing on clay
tablets was used, indeed, for many centuries, throughout the whole of
ancient western Asia for correspondence, promulgating decrees, recording
history, codifying laws, compiling religious literature, and for all the
needs of a thriving and highly developed society. In Mesopotamia it was
the main and permanent medium of communication and of the transmission
of thought for nearly three thousand years.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[PREPARATION OF WRITING MATERIAL]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The writing material was prepared in the following way. The scribe
would make a tablet or brick of clay of the proper size and thickness.
It had to be moist and soft enough to take the impression of a
broad-headed]{.style_} [stilus]{.style_1} [(consisting of a straight
stick or piece of reed, bone, hard wood or
[]{#calibre_link-78}metal---see [Fig.
III--2](#calibre_link-77){.calibre9},]{.style_} [f]{.style_1}[), but not
so soft that it clung to it and hindered the scribe as he worked.
Assyrian monuments represent scribes holding the stilus in their closed
fist and pressing upon the tablet (see [Fig.
III--1](#calibre_link-75){.calibre9}).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[While the clay was still damp and soft, the scribe impressed the
cuneiform strokes, line by line, with the edge or front of his stilus.
Naturally, the strokes impressed were thick on the top and on the left,
the direction of writing being from left to right, thus giving birth to
a series of wedge-shaped characters. Large tablets, which would require
some considerable time for writing, were kept soft by being wrapped in
damp cloth. The tablet was normally inscribed on both sides.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[To make the tablet durable, it was exposed to the sun and dried hard.
Experience proved, however, that clay dried in the sun was liable to
crumble, and therefore an alternative method of baking in kilns was
introduced, small holes being made in the clay to allow the moisture to
escape and so reduce the risk of breakage: thus, a most durable record
of thoughts and actions was the result. Kiln-baked tablets, however,
appear concurrently with sun-dried ones, the difference being usually
one of subject-matter. Royal annals, law codes and literary works, e.g.
epics, were baked to give extra preservation. Most temporary matter,
such as correspondence, receipts, letters, and so forth, were sun-dried
in all periods.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The writing is sometimes exceedingly minute, though marvellously clear
and sharp; sometimes, however, it is more stereotyped in character.
According to some scholars, whilst the term "stereotyped" could be
applied to styles of writing in all periods, the main variations of
writing in the size of its symbols, and the degree of its cursiveness
are due to the development of the cursive style, the signs being
generally simplified in the later period.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[VARIOUS SIZES AND SHAPES OF CLAY TABLETS ([Fig.
III--2](#calibre_link-77){.calibre9})]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The size and shape of the tablets are sometimes indicative of the
period to which they belong, sometimes of the subject-matter with which
they deal. The earliest tablets so far recovered are mostly rectangular,
either square or oblong, measuring 4--5 cm. in length and cm. in
breadth; the edges are also sharply rectangular and the sides flat,
while the corners are somewhat rounded. In this period, too, oval
tablets occasionally occur. A very early type is also represented by
round tablets ([Fig. III--2](#calibre_link-77){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[a]{.style_1}[). As time goes on, the size of the tablet increases until
one from Uruk measures 11.3 x 10.6 cm. Tablets from Shuruppak are
broader than they are long; they contain lists and inventories of
property.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The commonest type of clay tablet is the rectangular; these tablets are
sometimes square, but more frequently oblong, and varying greatly in
size. The tablets in the Kuyunjík (Nineveh) collection, which represents
the largest, and in one sense the only, Assyrian library yet discovered,
vary from to cm. in length when complete. The tablet on which the
Middle-Assyrian Laws are inscribed (see p. 109) measures cm., and the
text contains 828 lines of writing arranged in eight columns, four on
the obverse and four on the reverse side.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["THE BOOKS"]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A book often consisted of many more than one tablet, just as our books
have many leaves. It was, of course, impossible to sew the clay tablets
together as we bind the leaves of a book, but all the tablets of a
series were numbered. The number of the tablet and the "name" of the
book to which it belonged were written on each tablet. Examples of this
are the seven tablets of the Epic of Creation (see p. 97 ff.). This book
begins with the words, "In the beginning that which is above was not
called the sky"; on every tablet of this book this sentence is
inscribed, followed by "No. 1", "No. 2", and so on. In addition, in many
books the "stamp" of the library is "printed".]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000121.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-77}

[[Fig. III--2](#calibre_link-78){.calibre9} f]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a--e, Cunciform tablets of various shapes; f, Extract from Hammurabi's
Code of Laws showing the stilus.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The books were all carefully indexed and cross-indexed, and arranged on
shelves in convenient and correct order. Unfortunately, as we might
expect, in times of war or other calamities, the tablets would become
separated and lost. Copying texts was considered a pious duty, and many
undertook it in order to obtain remission of sins.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[OTHER CLAY TABLETS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The round tablets dealt mainly with the sale and purchase of land or
were used for school texts ([Fig.
III--2](#calibre_link-77){.calibre9},]{.style_} [a]{.style_1}[). Legal
contracts were inscribed on small oblong tablets, both sides being
slightly concave; these tablets looked like a small narrow pillow. Many
were enclosed in clay envelopes, in order that the original should not
be interfered with; the terms of the contract were copied in duplicate,
and the seals of the contracting parties and of the witnesses were
affixed.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The later (Neo-Babylonian) legal and commercial documents are more
varied in size and shape; they are generally oblong; the smaller ones
contain the text inscribed over the length of the tablet, not over its
breadth; larger legal documents are sometimes written on very thick
tablets.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["ENVELOPES"]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Clay envelopes or cases were used for letters, despatches and other
inscribed tablets, to ensure their preservation. The making of this
envelope was relatively simple: after the tablet had been duly written
and sometimes signed, the scribe would flatten out a moist lump of clay;
then he would take the written document and fold it into the flattened
"sheet". All the excess clay would be removed, leaving enough to cover
the document; the rough edges would be turned in, then smoothed out, and
baked. The "envelope" would thus have the same shape, but be slightly
larger than the original document. The covering was a good protection
against wear and tear, but it had to be broken when the document was
used.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[CLAY TABLETS HAVING CURIOUS SHAPES]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[([Fig. III--2](#calibre_link-77){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[a-e]{.style_1}[, 6,]{.style_} [a]{.style_1}[, and 10,]{.style_}
[right]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Wedge-shaped or nail-shaped or cone-shaped tablets were employed as
foundation-deeds in the walls of the temples (in Babylonia) or of the
fortifications (in []{#calibre_link-86}Assyria)---[Fig.
III--6](#calibre_link-79){.calibre9},]{.style_} [a]{.style_1}[. The
Assyrian kings left complete records of their campaigns and activities,
impressed on hollow cylinders or prisms, with six, seven, eight or even
ten faces, each covered with as much minute writing as it could possibly
hold []{#calibre_link-91}([Fig.
III--10](#calibre_link-80){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[right]{.style_1}[).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Finally, there were tablets of various curious shapes, to meet special
needs, such as liver-shaped tablets for divinatory information---[Fig.
III--2](#calibre_link-77){.calibre9},]{.style_} [b]{.style_1} [(the
famous Etruscan]{.style_} [templum]{.style_1} [of Piacenza has been
compared with this liver-shaped tablet); a paw-shaped bracket ([Fig.
III--2](#calibre_link-77){.calibre9},]{.style_} [e]{.style_1}[), a clay
model of an ox-hoof (Brit. Mus. No. R. 620) inscribed with forecasts; a
clay model of a sheep's liver, also magical in character (Brit. Mus. No.
92668).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A four-sided block of clay, cm. square and 24 cm. high, is inscribed
with lists of the names of fishes, birds, plants, stones, and garments.
Maps ([Fig. III--2](#calibre_link-77){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[d]{.style_1}[) and plans []{#calibre_link-89}([Fig.
III--8](#calibre_link-81){.calibre9},]{.style_} [a]{.style_1}[) were
drawn on circular tablets. Astrolabes or instruments for making
astrological calculations, were also made of clay.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-332}

::: calibre5
:::

## [The Sumerians]{.style_2} {#the-sumerians .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is very difficult to estimate the number of Sumerian tablets and
fragments which have been discovered, some in official excavations and
some in clandestine diggings, but two hundred and fifty thousand would
probably be an underestimate, of which more than ninety-five per cent
are economic in character (contracts, wills, receipts and letters).
Then, there are about six hundred building and dedicatory inscriptions,
which are important historical sources.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THEIR LITERARY PRODUCTIONS []{#calibre_link-83}([Fig.
III--3](#calibre_link-82){.calibre9}--5)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[About three thousand, largely unbaked, tablets and fragments, mainly of
the late third millennium and early second millennium B.C., contain
literary compositions. Only about three hundred of them are in the
British Museum and the Ashmolean Museum. Of the three thousand, about
two thousand one hundred were excavated by the University of
Pennsylvania on the site of Nippur (to the south-east of Babylon) in the
course of four campaigns, 1889--1900. Nippur appears to have been the
Sumerian spiritual centre of the third millennium.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000122.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-82}

[[Fig. III--3](#calibre_link-83){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Sumerian literary catalogue, belonging to the early second
millennium B.C. (University Museum, Philadelphia, No. 29--15--155): it
may be considered as the first example in man's history of a list of
"books"; (below) Sumerian Flood tablet from Nippur (belonging to the
same collection).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000123.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. III--4]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Left) Nippur arechaic cylinder, e. 2400 B.C. (the same collection, No.
8383): the olders known example of a "book"; (right) Nippr grammatical
text, of the early second millennium B.C. (the same collection, No.
4483): earliest "book" other than literary.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The preserved tablets are probably only a small part of a vast, varied,
and highly developed literature, consisting of myths, hymns, prayers,
and epic tales, proverbs and aphorisms, lamentations and love songs.
There are also some historical, economic and legal texts, as well as
very important lexicological texts which contain Sumerian dictionaries
and grammatical material. The Sumerians represented, indeed, the
dominant cultural group of the ancient Near East for more than fifteen
hundred years, namely from the last centuries of the fourth millennium
B.C. until the first centuries of the second millennium.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[These fragments of clay tablets---in contrast with the texts preserved
in later Babylonian or Assyrian recensions, which will be discussed
further on---have come down to us as they were actually written by
Sumerian scribes; generally they are in several copies.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[S. N. Kramer divides this literature into the following groups: (i)
Nine epics, of which six relate the deeds of three Sumerian mythical
heroes, Enmerkar, Lugalbanda, and Gilgamesh (who were supposed to live
in the late fourth or early third millennium B.C.), the remaining three
describing the destruction of the mythical monster Kur. (2) Myths of
Origins, dealing with the Creation of the Universe, and its
Organization, as well as with the Creation of Man; a Paradise myth;
myths of Kur; the Deluge; the Marriage of Martu; an agricultural myth
which Kramer entitles]{.style_} [Inanna Prefers the Farmer;]{.style_1}
[and the Tammuz myth. (3) The divine hymns, consisting of songs of
praise and the exaltation of the deities, as well as the mainly
self-laudatory royal hymns. (4) Lamentations for the destruction of
cities (of Ur, Nippur, Agade) or of the country Sumer as a whole. (5)
Proverbs and aphorisms; fables and didactic compositions.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Extremely interesting is a tablet, of c. 2000 B.C., from the Nippur
collection of the Pennsylvania University Museum, deciphered by Kramer,
and containing a literary catalogue, listing by title one group of
Sumerian literary compositions ([Fig.
III--3](#calibre_link-82){.calibre9},]{.style_} [above]{.style_1}[). The
list contains sixty-two titles; this list and another Sumerian catalogue
of literary compositions give us the titles of nearly ninety different
epics and other literary compositions known in the early second
millennium B.C., but "they do not exhaust the number of Sumerian
literary works of that period, which probably ran into the hundreds"
(Kramer).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[As to the date of the Sumerian literary documents extant, Kramer says:
"We are amply justified in stating that although practically all our
available Sumerian literary tablets actually date from approximately
2000 B.C., a large part of the written literature of the Sumerians was
created and developed in the latter half of the third millennium
B.C."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[BARDS TRANSMITTED SUMERIAN EPICS TO POSTERITY]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The preserved Sumerian texts are but little fragments, broken and
time-worn, recalling to us to some extent the famous songs of Omar
Khayyam and other late poets. There are Sumerian fragments inscribed
with curious poems, relating to local events, which seem to have been
part of other epic poetry. The ancient Oriental was a born singer.
Wandering musicians and bards kept alive most of the hymns and sagas. To
hymn the praise of heroes or the glories of the tribe, to improvise
poems that would thrill and inflame the hearts of men, driving them to
deeds of daring, was often the oriental form of public
speaking.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[How long the bards continued to go from house to house, singing their
songs and praising the national and local heroes, and entertaining the
people in exchange for gifts and the plaudits of their listeners, we
have no means of knowing. Some of the later bards got their names "in
print", otherwise they would never have been known to posterity. At the
end of some of these songs the scribe has added "from the mouth
of\...."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[There is no way of knowing what changes are due to the imaginative
power of the bard, and to the importance of a particular deity or of a
hero in the district in which the poem was sung; the vaudeville
performer of today also varies his "turn" according to his ability and
to the place where it is given. This explains why the same Sumerian
story may differ from one tablet to another.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[BABYLONIAN MAGIC AND DEMONOLOGY A SUMERIAN DERIVATION]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[One of the oldest known religious texts from Babylonia is a Sumerian
incantation copied from a foundation cylinder of the time of the dynasty
of Agadc (twenty-fourth century B.C.). This cylinder was found on the
site of Nippur. Part of nineteen columns of writing remain, and not more
than one whole column of writing is missing. The late Prof. Barton
considered this text as possibly half a century older than the Pyramid
Texts of Egypt (see next chapter). Whatever its exact date, it is
certainly one of the oldest religious expressions that have survived
from any people. It contains a primitive but comparatively refined
strain of religious thought. The text, like some other Sumerian
documents, is written from the animistic point of view: the world was
full of spirits of which people were in terror; but the chief among
these spirits were gods, who, however capricious, were the givers of
vegetation and life.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[All objects in nature were the abodes of spiritual forms, which could
only be controlled by invoking the aid of the more powerful spirits,
such as the dominant spirits of heaven and earth. The text exhibits the
neighbourly admixture of religion and magic. For such a creed, the
natural priesthood would be magicians, who knew the spells and exorcisms
that would compel the spirits to obey. These spells would be gradually
embodied in the form of magical litanies, and form a regular liturgy of
magic and religion.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Thus magic and demonology, which, as commonly thought, were so
characteristic of Babylonian thought, seem to be of Sumerian origin. In
the time of Gudea (end of the third millennium B.C.), we find references
to the dread of witches and others who were turned out of the city when
the king laid the foundation of his temple.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Babylonian astrological omens are contained in a large series of
texts; the most important one, called]{.style_} [Enûma Anu
Enlil]{.style_1}[, contained at least seventy numbered tablets, with a
total of about seven thousand omens, and reached its final form c. 1000
B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Babylonia, more than Egypt, was the home of the black arts---the main
centre of magic and sorcery. It was from the "Chaldacan" soothsayers and
magicians that the Jews (as well as the Persians, the Greeks, the Syrian
Christians, the Mandaeans, the Arabs and others) derived the main
elements of their belief in demons, witches, ghosts and wizards, which
found their way into the New Testament, and, in the Middle Ages, into
Europe, and are still current among some classes of our modern
population.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[When compared with the Egyptian Pyramid Texts, the Sumerian incantation
tablet presents one striking difference. The Pyramid Texts centre around
the king and are concerned with his fortunes as he enters the abode of
the gods; one text even represents the Egyptian king as a cannibal, who
in heaven cats gods to obtain their strength. This Sumerian document, on
the other hand, in a certain way represents the Nippur City-state. If
not the religious expression of a democracy, it represents, at least,
the city leaders.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-333}

::: calibre5
:::

## [APPRAISAL OF SUMERIAN LITERATURE]{.style_2} {#appraisal-of-sumerian-literature .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to Dr. Kramer, "As literary products, these Sumerian
compositions rank high among the creations of civilized man\.... Their
significance for a proper appraisal of the cultural and spiritual
development of the Near East can hardly be over-estimated. The Assyrians
and Babylonians took them over almost]{.style_} [in toto.]{.style_1}
[The Hittites translated them into their own language and no doubt
imitated them widely\.... As practically]{.style_} [the oldest written
literature of any significant amount ever uncovered,]{.style_1} [it
furnishes new, rich, and unexpected source material to the archaeologist
and anthropologist, to the ethnologist and student of folklore, to the
students of the history of religion and of the history of
literature."]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-334}

::: calibre5
:::

::: calibre15
:::

## [GREAT PART OF LITERATURE INHERITED FROM THE SUMERIANS]{.style_2} {#great-part-of-literature-inherited-from-the-sumerians .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Sumerian fragments are not sufficient for the reconstruction of the
literary conditions and the literary productions of the Sumerians in the
days of their independence. How much of the vast literature and learning
of the Akkadians (see p. 96 ff.) had been created or initiated by the
Sumerians and how much by the Akkadians themselves we do not know;
probably much more by the former than by the latter.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-335}

::: calibre5
:::

## [HAMMURABI'S CODE OF LAWS (eighteenth century B.C.)]{.style_2} {#hammurabis-code-of-laws-eighteenth-century-b.c. .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Consider, for instance, the codes of laws. It is well known that the
Babylonians, the Assyrians, the Hittites and other ancient nations had
regular legal codes for maintaining the social order. Several such codes
have been found. The best known is the code of Hammurabi. Modern Old
Testament scholars have been astonished to see to what extent it
anticipated, and in some respects even surpassed the much later Mosaic
legislation. It also shows that the Romans had been anticipated in the
legal field by two thousand years.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This code of laws, one of the oldest in the world, was inscribed by
order of Hammurabi on a block of black diorite nearly eight feet in
height and set up in Babylon, but at a later time, an Elamite conqueror
took this pillar away as a trophy to his capital, Susa, where it was
discovered in the de Morgan excavations during the winter of 1901--2.
The laws are written in Semitic Babylonian (or Akkadian). It is obvious
that they were not invented or created by Hammurabi, great though he
was.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Hammurabi, indeed, tells us that he received his laws from the god of
justice, and in the upper part of the pillar he is represented in the
act of receiving them from this god. He codified the already existing
customs, and no doubt used codes which had already been reduced to
writing. In his endeavour to unify the laws of his vast empire, he
probably sanctioned some Sumerian laws and customs, and rejected or
modified others. See also]{.style_} [The Alphabet]{.style_1}[, Fig. 21,
1.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-336}

::: calibre5
:::

## [EARLIER CODES OF LAW]{.style_2} {#earlier-codes-of-law .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[A Sumerian code of law []{#calibre_link-85}([Fig.
III--5](#calibre_link-84){.calibre9},]{.style_} [a]{.style_1}[) compiled
under the reign of Lipit-Ishtar (thus antedating Hammurabi's Code by
more than a century and a half), has been reconstructed by Dr. F. R.
Steele, of the University of Pennsylvania, from seven clay tablets and
fragments, found mainly at Nippur. Tablets containing another
pre-Hammurabi code (the Laws of the kingdom of Eshnunna) have been
recently excavated at Tell Abu Harmal, to the east of Baghd d.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-337}

::: calibre5
:::

## [GILGAMESH EPIC]{.style_2} {#gilgamesh-epic .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[There are certain works in which the original authorship of the
Sumerians may be assumed as more or less proved, notwithstanding the
numerous additions, cancellations, and other changes of the later
editors of these works. Such is the case of at least a part of the
famous Gilgamesh Epic, which is one of the most ancient and most
interesting poems in the world. Its theme is essentially a secular one.
It describes the mythical wanderings and adventures of a hero,
Gilgamesh, one of the earliest kings of Erech.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This Babylonian Epic consisted of twelve tablets or sections, but it is
Generally believed that this sub-division is late. The eleventh tablet
(which is the longest, consisting of over 300 lines), contains what is
now known as the Babylonian account of the Deluge: [Fig.
III--6](#calibre_link-79){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[c]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This Epic is of great antiquity; it originated, partly at least, with
the Sumerian, perhaps in the fourth millennium B.C. Indeed, fragments of
a Sumerian account of the Deluge are extant, which seem to have belonged
to this Epic: [Fig. III--3](#calibre_link-82){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[below]{.style_1} [and 5,]{.style_} [b.]{.style_1} [Also the latter
tablet was found at Nippur; it is inscribed on both sides, with three
columns to the side. S. N. Kramer has pointed out that there are sixteen
Sumerian fragments available which are part of the same poem. Besides,
illustrations of various episodes of the Gilgamesh Epic are found upon
inscribed seal cylinders and other objects belonging to the third
millennium B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000124.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-84}

[[Fig. III--5](#calibre_link-85){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a. Fragments of the Lipit-Isthar Law Cook- belonging to the same
collection as [Fig III--3](#calibre_link-82){.calibre9}--4 to the lest
law-code in man's history; a- Sumerian tablet from ppur with the Story
of the Creation and the Deluge the same collection.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Prof. E. A. Speiser points out, however, that Tablet XII is not of a
piece with the other eleven tablets of the poem, but is instead a
literal translation from the Sumerian. "The epic proper, on the other
hand, while utilizing certain motifs which are featured in Sumerian
poems, does so largely in the course of developing a central theme that
has no Sumerian prototype. In other words, the first eleven tablets . .
. constitute an instance of creative borrowing which, substantially,
amounts to an independent creation."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[That this Epic is, partly at least, of Sumerian origin, very well
illustrates how the loss of independence did not mean the end of
Sumerian history; how political decay did not prevent the continuation
of Sumerian culture and supremacy. It also shows, with numerous other
instances, that the Semitic victors not only adopted the script of the
Sumerians and their religious and literary language, but borrowed a
considerable part of their literature and even transmitted it to other
nations.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Indeed, apart from the Sumerian fragments, the Gilgamesh Epic is
represented by three Akkadian tablets of the early second millennium
B.C.; by fragmentary editions, discovered in Boghazköy (the site of the
capital of the Hittite Empire), written not only in Akkadian but also in
Hittite and in Hurrian; by an Assyrian tablet found at Ashur; by the
numerous tablets and fragments of tablets now preserved in the British
Museum, which were made in the seventh century B.C. for the Royal
Assyrian Library at Nineveh (Sin-liqi-unni(n)ni is named as one of the
editors); and by some small neo-Babylonian fragments.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-338}

::: calibre5
:::

## [The Akkadians (]{.style_2}[i.e]{.style_2}[. The Babylonians and the Assyrians)]{.style_2} {#the-akkadians-i.e.-the-babylonians-and-the-assyrians .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[THEIR LITERARY PRODUCTIONS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The two greatest periods of vigour in Assyro-Babylonian history, that
of Hammurabi, eighteenth century B.C., in Babylonia, and that of the
ninth-seventh centuries B.C. in Assyria, were marked by a corresponding
activity in literature and especially in book writing and book
production. Hammurabi's dynasty was the Golden Age of Babylonian
literature and science; practically all the preserved Babylonian
literature was written down in that period.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Sumerian people had been completely conquered by the militarily
stronger but culturally weaker Amorite invaders. With the coming of
these Semites a great change would seem to have taken place in the
literary activity though not in the literary conditions of Babylonia. It
is one of the ironies of history that the people who would seem to have
given a death blow to the ancient Sumerians gave the signal for a great
literary activity and for the collection of everything which could be
preserved for later ages. The Babylonians made the study of Sumerian
their basic discipline; they compiled dictionaries and interlinear
translations of Sumerian works; the transition from the Sumerian to the
Semitic culture in the First Dynasty of Babylon was gradual and largely
by absorption.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The total number of Babylonian tablets which have reached museums has
been estimated to be at least 500,000; there are many more still to be
unearthed in the ruins of Mesopotamian cities.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-339}

::: calibre5
:::

## [AKKADIAN MYTHS AND EPICS]{.style_2} {#akkadian-myths-and-epics .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[With that adaptive faculty which Semitic peoples have exhibited in many
lands and all ages, the new rulers began to collect, or, at least, to
edit the various myths, and form them into cycle or epic poems. Of these
compilations there are many, but two are of considerable length, and
fortunately well preserved. These are the Gilgamesh Epic---already
referred to---and the Cosmic or Creation Epic.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-340}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE CREATION Epic (Fig. III-6,]{.style_2} [b]{.style_2} [and 8,]{.style_2} [b]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#the-creation-epic-fig.-iii-6-b-and-8-b .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Creation Epic contains the Babylonian legendary story of the
creation of the world. This myth, too, may be partly of Sumerian origin,
but according to the majority of scholars, in the First Dynasty of
Babylon (mainly during the eighteenth century B.C.) it was given the
form in which it was to be told for the next thousand years, and,
interestingly enough, in the form in which it is most familiar to us.
"This poem was recited with due solemnity on the fourth day of the New
Year's festival, and it was the most significant expression of the
religious literature of Mesopotamia" (Speiser).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest fragments of this epic were found in Ashur and belong to
c. 1000 B.C.; others, found in the Royal Library of Nineveh, belong to
the seventh century B.C.; and still others to the sixth and later
centuries B.C. Despite the relatively late date of these tablets, and
despite their composite character, due to the handiwork of more than one
editor, it is generally agreed that the poem originally consisted of
about 1,000 lines, and that, at an early period, it was divided into
seven tablet books. The epic, known also from its two opening words,
as]{.style_} [Enûma elish]{.style_1} [("When on high") has been compared
with]{.style_} [Genesis]{.style_1} [i, 1 - ii, 3, but the differences
are far more striking than the similarities.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000125.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-79}

[[Fig. III--6](#calibre_link-86){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a, Cone inscribed with the name and titles of Ur-Bau, governor of
Lagash; second half of the third millenium B.G. (British Museum, No.
91,061); b, the Fourth Tablet of the Assyrian account of the Creation
and the Flood (British Museum, No. 93,016) c, fragmentary tablet
containing the Babylonian account of the Deluge (British Museum,
K.3375).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[On one tablet ([Fig. III---8](#calibre_link-81){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[b]{.style_1}[) there is an account of the creation of Man which has
been compared, wrongly, with]{.style_} [Genesis,]{.style_1} [ii, 7; it
contains, however, a tradition similar to that of]{.style_}
[Genesis,]{.style_1} [that God formed Man from clay.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-341}

::: calibre5
:::

## [RELIGIOUS AND SECULAR LITERATURE]{.style_2} {#religious-and-secular-literature .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[There are also the Adapa (=Adam?) Myth, the myth of Nergal and
Ereshkigal, the epic poems of Atrahasis (="Exceeding Wise"), the Zu
Myth, the myths of the Nether World and those describing the creation of
man out of clay mixed with the flesh and blood of a slain god, the
secular legends of the kings Etana and Sargon. There are, of course,
rituals, such as those for the daily sacrifices of Uruk, for the New
Year's festival at Babylon, and many others. There are hymns and prayers
(to the Moon-god and the Sun-god, to Ishtar, to Marduk, and to other
gods); there are fables, proverbs and "wisdom" literature.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-342}

::: calibre5
:::

## [TEMPLE SCHOOLS AND LIBRARIES ([Fig. III---8](#calibre_link-81){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [c]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#temple-schools-and-libraries-fig.-iii8-c .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Leading Semitists have suggested that there were in ancient Mesopotamia
two main types of schools: (1) the writing school, known as the "tablet
house", where boys and presumably also girls learned to read and write,
and (2) the "house of wisdom", where higher education was imparted; the
latter included linguistics, theology, magic arts and medicine,
astronomy and mathematics. The main temples had their schools and
libraries, which generally were filled with literary productions of the
most varied character, including copies of the great epics just
mentioned. Their section of learned books would include religious and
magical literature, linguistic and grammatical texts (such as
[]{#calibre_link-88}syllabaries---[Fig.
III---7](#calibre_link-87){.calibre9},]{.style_} [right]{.style_1}[---or
dictionaries, explaining cuneiform signs with their Sumerian and
Akkadian values, as well as bilingual grammars), numerous and very
important historical texts (including chronicles ---[Fig.
III---7](#calibre_link-87){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[left]{.style_1}[---lists of dynasties and kings, tables of
chronological events, descriptions of campaigns and battles,
self-laudatory inscriptions of kings, and biographies), magico-medical
works (medical texts, descriptions of diseases and of healing herbs and
potions), technical books (such as instructions for working in metals),
and books in the various fields of science.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000126.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-87}

[[Fig. III--7](#calibre_link-88){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Left) Babylonian Chronicle, from 744 to 668 B.C. (British Museum, No.
92,502); (right) Babylonian syllabary or spelling biik, dated 455 B.C.
(British Museum, No. 92,693).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-343}

## [BOOKS OF SCIENCE ([Fig. III---2](#calibre_link-77){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [c]{.style_2} [and]{.style_2} [d]{.style_2}[; and 8,]{.style_2} [a]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#books-of-science-fig.-iii2-c-and-d-and-8-a .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[There are maps, indicating the courses of rivers and the positions of
seas (one dating back well into the third millennium, and thus of
Sumerian origin, which was discovered quite recently, must have been
used to establish the exact boundaries of an estate) as well as plans of
cities; there are also codes of law, such as those of Eshnunna and of
Hammurabi, lists of plants, stones, birds, fishes and insects (see pp.
87 and 93 f.).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is commonly but wrongly held that the majority of Babylonian
documents are concerned with religion, magic or number mysticism; in
fact the overwhelming majority of cuneiform texts extant concern
economic items, "some even including computations of compound interest"
(Neugebauer).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Mathematics]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Babylonians had already formulated the fundamental laws of
mathematics; a very important feature of Babylonian numerical notation
is the existence of special signs for and , and these fractions
undoubtedly played an important part in the arrangement of metrological
units. Occasionally, a strictly decimal notation is to be found in these
texts, while the sexagesimal system was the basis of Babylonian
numerical computations. There are tables of quadratic equations, squares
and square roots, of cubes and cube roots, of the sums of squares and
cubes. According to an authoritative hypothesis, certain multiplication
tables alone, as they existed]{.style_} [c.]{.style_1} [1800 B.C., would
put the Babylonians ahead of all numerical computers in antiquity.
However, cuneiform tablets with mathematical contents have come down
mostly from the so-called "Old Babylonian" period,]{.style_}
[c.]{.style_1} [1800 to 1600 B.C., and these texts show the highest
level ever attained in Babylonia. Mathematical texts for the succeeding
thirteen hundred years are lacking, and those from the Seleucid period
are scarce, but the latter suffice to prove that Babylonian mathematical
knowledge was always highly developed. "In both mathematical and
astronomical texts of the Seleucid period appears a special sign for
zero" (Neugebauer).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Astronomy and Astrology]{.style_1} [([Fig.
III---2](#calibre_link-77){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[c]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Their astronomical and astrological knowledge was also considerable,
but no astronomical texts of any scientific significance belong to the
early period; the tablets extant belong instead to the period of the
renaissance of Babylonian learning under the Seleucid dynasty (see pp.
103 and 112). In earlier times, however, the Babylonians did
computations concerning the duration of day and night, and the movement
of the moon and Venus. The preserved early Babylonian cuneiform texts
show two systems of computations. The older one, according to B. L. van
der Waerden, probably originated before 1000 B.C. It is represented by
the circular astrolabe, the fourteenth tablet of the great omen series
known as]{.style_} [Enûma Anu Enlil]{.style_1} [(see p. 92), and two
other texts. In this system, the spring equinox is on the fifteenth of
the Babylonian twelfth month, the longest day is on the fifteenth of the
third month, "and the proportion of the longest day to the shortest
night is 2 : 1. The year is divided into twelve schematical months of
thirty days each. The months are connected with the heliacal rising of
certain fixed stars; there is no mention of the zodiac" (van der
Waerden). The later system is assigned to]{.style_} [c.]{.style_1} [700
B.C., and is represented for example by the ivory prism discovered in
Nineveh and now in the British Museum (56---9---3, 1136). In this
system, the spring equinox is on the fifteenth of the first month, the
longest day on the fifteenth of the fourth month, and the proportion of
the longest day to the shortest night "is sometimes assumed as 2 : 1,
sometimes in the same text as 3 : 2", but the latter is "not mentioned
in computations. The year is again divided into twelve schematic months
of thirty days each, but the months are now related to a division of the
zodiac into four parts in such a way that the sun dwells three months in
each of the parts\.... In the Seleucid era these simple rules were
replaced by more accurate ones" (van der Waerden).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000127.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-81}

[[Fig. III---8](#calibre_link-89){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a, List of eleven estates with measurements and statistics, from Ur, of
the late third millennium B.C. (British Museum. No. 18,039); b,
fragmentary tablet containing part of the Babylonian account of Creation
(British Museum, No. 93,017); c, Master and disciples as represented on
an Assyrian relief.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Babylonians developed methods for the computation of lunar and
planetary movements, which by modern astronomers are classed among the
great achievements of ancient science, comparable with the work of the
Greeks. The oldest preserved clay tablets seem to represent three
regions in the sky, each with twelve parts, giving thus thirty-six
spaces. In each of these there is the name of a constellation and a
number, which seems to be connected with some, still unknown, calendar
scheme. Modern astronomers consider the Babylonians as the first to
develop astrology systematically; this provided some stimulus to a
further study of astronomy. "More and more it becomes clear, how closely
interrelated Babylonian and Greek astronomy and Hellenistic astrology
are" (van der Waerden).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Results from Modern Research]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[There is scarcely another chapter in the history of science---states
Prof. Neugebauer---where an equally deep gap exists between the
generally accepted description of a period, and the results which have
slowly emerged from modern scientific research. For instance, magic,
number mysticism, astrology, are still ordinarily considered to be the
guiding forces in Babylonian science, while modern research has proved
that mathematical theory played the major role in Babylonian astronomy
as compared with the very modest role of observations, whose legendary
accuracy also appears more and more to be only a myth. Early Babylonian
astronomy appears to have been crude and merely qualitative, while the
later theories---of the last three centuries B.C.---proved to be of the
highest level, fully comparable to the corresponding Greek systems, and
of truly mathematical character.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000128.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-90}

[Fig. III---9]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a, Hittite law-text in cuneiform writing; b, tablet from Ugarit written
in cuneiform alphabetic script.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-344}

## [CONCLUSION]{.style_2} {#conclusion-1 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The importance of the Babylonian contribution to the development of
civilization will be particularly clear if we take into due
consideration the view which has been expressed that Babylonian
astronomy is the most important force in the development of science
since its origin, some time around 300 B.C., to the sixteenth and the
seventeenth centuries (Copernicus, Tycho Brahé, Galileo,
Kepler).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-345}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Diffusion of Learning in Ancient Western Asia]{.style_2} {#diffusion-of-learning-in-ancient-western-asia .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Apart from the work of the Sumerians and Akkadians, very little can be
said about the diffusion of book writing and book making in ancient
Western Asia. The quantity of clay tablets recovered shows that
throughout Bronze-Age Western Asia writing was commonly employed in
business and social transactions as well as in private correspondence,
diplomatic relations and international trade. It is, however, not easy
to determine how many people could read and write, because the majority
of the tablets were written by professional scribes.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[At the same time it must be emphasized that there may be writing
without book writing, i.e. literature, in the same way as there may be
literature without writing (see Chapter I). However, there can be no
doubt that under the influence of the ancient Babylonians literature,
learning, and bookmaking spread out to northern Mesopotamia, Syria, and
Asia Minor. This suggestion is confirmed by various
discoveries.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[AMORITES]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the 1935---8 excavations of the ruins of Tell el- arîri (the site of
the ancient capital city of Mari), on the Middle Euphrates, not far from
the Syro-Iraq border, amongst some 20,000 clay tablets recovered, there
are fragments which show that the Babylonian mythical-historical
literature was known among the Amorites (a north-western Semitic
people).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[HURRIANS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[From other tablets it is evident that the Gilgamesh Epic was translated
into both Hurrian and Hittite. An Old Babylonian myth known as
"Toothache Incantation" is preserved only in a Hurrian text: "it
attributes toothache to a worm that had obtained the permission of the
gods to dwell among the teeth and gums" (E. A. Speiser). The Hurrians
were a non-Semitic people of N.-W. Mesopotamia and N.-E.
Syria.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[HITTITE LITERARY PRODUCTIONS []{#calibre_link-346}([Fig.
III---9](#calibre_link-90){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[a]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Almost all Hittite "books" come from the archives of their capital
Hattusa, represented by the ruins near the village Boghazköy (Anatolia).
Various myths have been preserved, for example, the Telepinus Myth, the
Illuyankas Myth and the Ullikummis Myth.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[There are prayers, such as the daily prayers of the kings, the prayers
of the kings Muwatallis, Arnuwandas, Mursilis; the prayers of
Pudu-Lepas, the queen-consort of Hattusilis, the son of Mursilis; the
prayer of Kantuzilis. Characteristic are the Hittite rituals against
pestilence, against impotence, against domestic quarrels; rituals for
purification, for erection of a new house or of the royal palace; ritual
before battle and the soldiers' oath; there are omens to placate the
anger of the gods. There are a few surviving historical texts and a
Hittite code of law ([Fig.
III---9](#calibre_link-90){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[a]{.style_1}[).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[CANAANITES (see [Fig. III---10](#calibre_link-80){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[left]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Canaanite population of Syria and Palestine of the middle second
millennium B.C. knew the Babylonian myths of Adapa and Ereshkigal; this
is shown by clay tablets found among the Tell el-Amarna letters.
However, from the point of view of the history of "the book", the
contribution of these peoples is certainly not comparable with that of
the Sumerians, or the Akkadians,]{.style_} [i.e.]{.style_1} [the
Babylonians and Assyrians, or the Egyptians. From the standpoint of
bookmaking, these people have made no contribution whatsoever, as they
followed the clay tablet book pattern of the Mesopotamians.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-347}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE UGARIT LIBRARY ([Fig. III---9](#calibre_link-90){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [b]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#the-ugarit-library-fig.-iii9-b .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In Syria, as in Mesopotamia and Egypt, literature and learning seem to
have been the prerogative of the priestly classes. In Syria, too,
schools were attached to the most important temples. A school for
scribes, containing two schoolrooms with rows of benches, remarkably
preserved, has been unearthed at Mari; but the most important discovery,
outside Mesopotamia and Egypt, in relation to the history of ancient
literature and learning was made at Ugarit.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This epoch-making discovery was made by pure chance in 1929 at Ras
esh-Shamrah (Fennel Head), which is about half a mile inland from the
little bay of Minet el-Bey (White Port), on the Syrian coast opposite
the most easterly cape of Cyprus. It was revealed as the site of the
ancient and important city of Ugarit, mentioned in Egyptian and Hittite
inscriptions and in the Tell el-Amarna letters. Ugarit reached great
heights of influence and prosperity; it was not only a flourishing
commercial centre; it was also a thriving centre of culture.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In 1929 and the following years, C. F. A. Schaeffer, G. Chenet and Ch.
Virolleaud, excavating this site, found the Late Bronze Age remains of
what had evidently been an extensive school and library, where priests
and scribes were trained to read and write. This building was situated
between the city's two great temples, one dedicated to Baal and the
other to Dagon.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Of revolutionary importance was the discovery of hundreds of clay
tablets recovered in the library, dating from the fifteenth and early
fourteenth centuries B.C., which proved to be of inestimable value in
many fields of research such as epigraphy, philology and the history of
religion. They are written in a script previously quite unknown; but,
within a few months of its publication, it was deciphered; it is
evidently the earliest-known alphabet written with wedge-shaped signs
(see]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp. 202---4).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The tablets are, as mentioned, of clay, and vary in height from one and
a half inches to ten inches. Some of them contain as many as eight
columns. The great majority of the tablets are written in the local
language, now known as Ugaritic, which is closely related to biblical
Hebrew and Phoenician, and is considered by Professor Albright as
substantially identical with the language spoken in contemporary
Canaan.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[There are also, however, tablets written in other languages; some
contain "syllabaries" or dictionaries written in two or three languages
(Ugaritic, Akkadian and Sumerian); the fourth language is Hurrian (see
p. 106).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Most of the texts written in Ugaritic are poetic in form, and there are
astonishingly close parallels between this poetry and the poetry of the
Hebrew: for instance, Ugaritic poetry exhibits the same characteristic
feature of parallelism as does Hebrew poetry. Most remarkable is a group
of mythological epics and religious texts, which deal at length with
religious rituals, ancient traditions and myths concerning Canaanite
gods and heroes; there are also the great mythical epic of Ba'al and
'Anat, the legend of King Keret, and the Tale of Aqhat (previously known
as the Epic of Daniel or Danel, Aqhat's father). We are confirmed in the
view that the religion of the Canaanites was centred to a great degree
in interest in the fertility of the soil. Their study throws light on
several religious beliefs and practices reflected in the Hebrew Bible;
for instance, the connection between the Psalms and the Ugaritic poems
is much closer than a mere similarity of language and ideas. The epic of
'Aleyan Ba'al, the legend of Keret, and other poems show that the
Canaanites had their own rich mythology.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Various other books were found, among them a veterinary manual, dealing
with the treatment of sick horses.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-348}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ASSYRIAN LITERARY PRODUCTIONS]{.style_2} {#assyrian-literary-productions .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The libraries of the Assyrian kings contained many tens of thousands of
clay tablets. Astrology, astronomy, history, religion, lists of gods,
hymns, prayers, mythology, magic, omens, medicine, mathematics, books of
science, law, lexicography and grammar were all well represented in
these libraries. Many of the texts are copies of older Babylonian
literature made by Assyrian scribes, and stored away in the royal
archives. Some of the texts are bilingual, the top line giving the
Sumerian ideographic version, and the lower line the Assyrian
translation, and these bilinguals together with the "syllabaries" have
enabled scholars to unravel and elucidate, at least to some extent, the
Sumerian language.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Among the larger rectangular clay tablets are those containing
"syllabaries", i.e. they are a kind of dictionary. They are larger and
more complete than the Babylonian "syllabaries" ([Fig.
III---7](#calibre_link-87){.calibre9}), and contain very fine examples
of lexicography. Owing to changes in shape, and especially to the
simplification which the cuneiform characters underwent in the course of
ages, the Assyrian scribes found it necessary to make lists of the
Sumerian symbols, adding what they believed to be the late Assyrian
equivalents. Most of the Assyrian syllabaries consist of three
columns---the left giving the Sumerian symbol; the middle, the
corresponding Assyrian sign; the right, either the Assyrian meaning or
the name for the sign, occasionally both.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Other large rectangular tablets are of a historical nature; they are
inscribed with lists of the principal events under different kings, and
are obviously of immense importance for the reconstruction of
Mesopotamian history. One tablet deals with Tiglath-Pileser III's
building operations and conquests, and mentions as one of his vassals
Ahaz, King of Judah. The largest tablet of the Nineveh library measures,
in its fragmentary condition, about 38 cm. in length, and contains a
list of the names and titles of various gods.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Middle Assyrian Laws are preserved to us on tablets found in Ashur
(modern Qal'at Shergat) during the German excavations from 1903 to 1914.
These tablets date from the time of Tiglath-Pileser I (twelfth century
B.C.), "but the laws on them may go back to the fifteenth century" (T.
J. Meek).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Systematic observations of astronomers to the kings were reported from
700 B.C. onwards.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-349}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ASHURBANIPAL]{.style_2} {#ashurbanipal .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Few persons in the history of mankind have done so much for the history
of "the book" as the last great king of the Assyrian Empire,
Ashurbanipal (669---633 B.C.), the Sardanapulus of the Greeks. His
extensive and successful military campaigns, and also his cruelty, are
as famous as the high level of culture his country reached under his
rule. Ashurbanipal's early interest in learning is evidenced from his
inscriptions: "I, Ashurbanipal, learned the wisdom of Nabu, the entire
art of writing on clay tablets\.... I received the revelation of the
wise Adapa, the hidden treasure of the art of writing\.... I considered
the heavens with the learned masters\.... I read the beautiful clay
tablets from Sumer and the obscure Akkadian writing which is hard to
master. I had my joy in the reading of inscriptions on stone from the
time before the flood. . . ."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Like other young sons of emperors, he had been originally prepared for
the priesthood; he probably studied in the temple school of Nabu, at
Nineveh, where a library had already been in existence for at least half
a century. Ashurbanipal, however, established a great royal library,
which was discovered exactly a hundred years ago in the British Museum
excavations under the direction of Sir Henry Rawlinson (see p.
80).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Ashurbanipal sent scribes throughout Mesopotamia to copy and to
translate into the Assyrian language and script all the books they could
find, and thus tens of thousands of clay tablets were brought to the
Royal Library. Much of what we know of Babylonian
literature---historical, scientific, economic, religious,
mythological---comes from the copies of Babylonian texts found in this
great library. Many of these books may be seen in the British Museum.
Ashurbanipal's library contained also a collection of proverbs in two
languages, arranged as reading lessons for students. One of these
proverbs says, "Writing is the mother of eloquence and the father of
artists."]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-350}

::: calibre5
:::

## [NEO-BABYLONIAN BOOKS]{.style_2} {#neo-babylonian-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In 625 B.C., with the fall of the Assyrian Empire and the capture of
Nineveh by the Medes, Babylon's independence was again asserted. Thus
began the Neo-Babylonian Empire, which revived the ancient glory of
Babylonia. Babylonian learning, which was dimmed during the previous
centuries, flared up again under the New Empire. The Babylonians were
generally far more cultured and produced far more books "than their
warlike neighbours, the Assyrians. The children were sent to school at
an early age; and it is astonishing what a large proportion of them
learned to read and write\.... Some of the clay school-books have been
recovered, and they show what care and pains were taken in teaching the
student to acquire his knowledge as easily and as speedily as
possible\.... The old Sumerian authors were read both in the original
and in Semitic translations; and there would be commentaries to explain
archaic forms and obsolete terms" (C. Clark).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Nearly all the Neo-Babylonian literary texts are copies or translations
of Sumero-Akkadian books. There are, however, numerous original
historical texts. There is an interesting tablet, preserved in the
British Museum, which contains Neo-Babylonian laws. Of the original
sixteen paragraphs, only nine are well preserved; "the script,
orthography and wording, all clearly indicate a date in the
Neo-Babylonian Period" (Meek).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-351}

::: calibre5
:::

## [NEBUCHADREZZAR]{.style_2} {#nebuchadrezzar .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Numerous clay tablets have been found of the reign of Nebuchadrezzar II
(commonly known as Nebuchadnezzar), king of the Neo-Babylonian Empire,
from 605 to 562 B.C. He is familiar to all Bible readers because of his
destruction of the kingdom of Judah. Before he ascended the throne, he
defeated Pharaoh Necho in the decisive battle at Carchemish. Later, he
invaded and conquered Egypt. He rebuilt Babylon, and the excavations of
the German Oriental Society under the direction of Robert Koldewey (1899
onwards) have revealed a magnificent palace, a vast system of
fortifications, splendid town planning, canals, and temples. With
Nebuchadrezzar departed the glory of Babylon. The greater part of this
king's writings deal rather with his extensive building operations than
with his military successes.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Nabonidus and Belshazzar]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[As to Nabonidus, a king set up by the priests, some of his "books" deal
with historical, antiquarian, and political subjects, while others are
religious in character. Nabonidus' son, Belshazzar, mentioned in the
Book of Daniel, left clay cylinders containing prayers and "books"
dealing with other matters.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-352}

::: calibre5
:::

## [END OF THE CLAY TABLET BOOKS]{.style_2} {#end-of-the-clay-tablet-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The gradual displacement of the cuneiform writing by the Aramaic
alphabetic script, due no doubt to the simplicity of the latter in
comparison with the complexity of both the cuneiform writing and the
Egyptian scripts, coincides with the increasing influence of the Aramaic
language and the progressive employment as writing materials of papyrus
and leather or parchment.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000129.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-80}

[[Fig. III---10](#calibre_link-91){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Historical sources: (left) letter written by Abdi-Khiba, ruler of
Jerusalem, to Akhnaton (fourteenth century B.C.): one of the 360 or so
letters (written by vassal princes and governors in Syria and Palestine)
found at Tell el-Amarna, the site of Akhetaton, which was the new
capital founded by Akhnaton; (right) baked clay prism of Sennacherib,
king of Assyria (705---681 B.C.), inscribed with account of his invasion
of Palestine and the siege of Jerusalem.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-353}

## [SPREAD OF THE ARAMAIC LANGUAGE AND ALPHABET]{.style_2} {#spread-of-the-aramaic-language-and-alphabet .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[There is ample evidence of the considerable extent to which the Aramaic
language and script, as well as leather as a writing material, came into
use in Assyria from the end of the eighth century B.C., owing partly, no
doubt, to the Assyrian policy of transplanting masses of Aramaeans as of
other conquered populations. At the end of the seventh century B.C., all
Syria and a great part of Mesopotamia became Aramaized. Aramaic (and its
script) became the]{.style_} [lingua franca]{.style_1} [of the day, and
under the Persian Achemenidae it became one of the official languages of
the Empire and the principal speech of traders from Egypt and Asia Minor
to India.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Nevertheless, the habit of writing in cuneiform character on clay
tablets lingered on to the Christian Era, kept alive by some
conservative priests, soothsayers and magicians, astrologers and
astronomers. Indeed, private and business correspondence was the first
to abandon it; letters in this script, numerous before the Persian
conquest, ceased at the beginning of the fifth century B.C., as the
spoken Babylonian language fell into disuse, being replaced by Aramaic.
At the end of the same century, legal contracts and similar documents
ceased to be written in cuneiform characters.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[But clay tablet books written in cuneiform were still employed; indeed,
during the third to the first century B.C., as already mentioned, there
was a period of renaissance of ancient science and learning, in which
cuneiform writing seemed to come into fashion again; this was due to the
favour of the Seleucid dynasty (312---64 B.C.), with its pro-Greek and
anti-Aramaic policy. The latest record extant of a cuneiform clay tablet
is a specimen of the sixth year B.C. After this, the script (and its use
on clay tablets) vanished and was forgotten by man, for sixteen hundred
years.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-354}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BIBLIOGRAPHY]{.style_2} {#bibliography-1 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[See the works quoted in]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp. 56
f.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. B. Pritchard (ed.),]{.style_} [Ancient Near Eastern
Texts,]{.style_1} [etc., Princeton, N. J., 1950, and the numerous works
quoted.]{.style_}
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: {#calibre_link-92 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-10}

::: calibre7
:::

### [CHAPTER IV]{.style_2} {#chapter-iv .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

### [PAPYRUS BOOKS]{.style_2} {#papyrus-books .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE supposedly static character of Egyptian culture has been explained
by the fact that there was no other country in the ancient world where
cultivated life was maintained through so many centuries in relative
peace and security; "by and large, peace in Mesopotamia or Greece must
have been as exceptional a state as war in Egypt"
(Neugebauer).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The general reader may find useful the following sketch of Egyptian
chronology. It must be remembered that no complete system of Egyptian
chronology can as yet be formulated. The "high" system, which placed the
beginning of the First Dynasty in the first half of the sixth millennium
B.C., and also the system which placed it in the fifth
millennium---systems which have been followed by well-known
Egyptologists such as Petrie---can now be disregarded, and even the
"low" chronology has been progressively brought down from the second
half of the fourth millennium B.C. to the thirtieth or the twenty-ninth
century B.C. Even nowadays, Egyptian chronology is in a state of flux,
particularly for the period of the Old Kingdom.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The dates here given are mainly in terms of the nearest round number,
and represent a chronology which is fairly widely accepted.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Early Dynastic Period (Dynasties I and II), the thirtieth, or
twenty-ninth to the twenty-eighth centuries B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Old Kingdom (Dynasties III-VI), 2700-2200 B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[First Intermediate Period (Dynasties VII-X), twenty-second century
B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Middle Kingdom (Dynasties XI and XII), 2150-1775 B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Second Intermediate Period, including the so-called "Shepherd Kings" or
Hyksos (1725--1575 B.C.), 1775--1575 B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[New Kingdom (Dynasties XVIII--XX), 1570-1090 B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Dynasties XXI--XXV, 1090-663 B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Saite Period (Dynasty XXVI), 663-525 B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000131.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-93}

[Fig. IV--1]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Egyptian scribes. a, The Scribe of the Louvre, known in French as the
Scribe accroupi (Louvre Museum. Salle du Scribe): this statuette---only
5.3 cm. high---found by Mariette at Saqqarah in a tomb belonging to the
period of the Fifth Dynasty, is considered as one of the bfinest objects
that art has ever produced; b, scribes depicted in a tomb of the period
of the Old Kingdom: they squat on the papyrus rolls near them; the strip
of the papyrus on which they are writing is held by their left hand, the
reed-pen in their right hand, a reed-pen in reserve is behind the ear;
c, Egyptian limestone relief of the Eighteenth Dynasty, depiting four
scribes with papyrus rolls and reed-pens.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Persian Period (Dynasties XXVII-XXXI), 525-332 B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Alexander the Great.)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Ptolemaic Period (thirteen Ptolemies, followed by Cleopatra and her
son, Ptolemy XIV), 323-30. B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Roman Conquest, 30 B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Moslem Conquest, A.D. 640.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-355}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Egyptian Science, Learning and Literature]{.style_2} {#egyptian-science-learning-and-literature .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[As Mesopotamia may be considered the cradle of writing, so may Egypt be
considered the cradle of "the book". From the earliest ages the
Egyptians had the greatest veneration for books, writing and learning
[]{#calibre_link-356}(see [Fig.
IV--1](#calibre_link-93){.calibre9}).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[When the wise Khety (or Akhthoy), the son of Duauf, voyaged up the
Nile, with his son Pepy, to place him in the Writing School, i.e. in the
government secretarial training college, he admonished him thus: "I
shall make thee love writing more than thy (own) mother; (thus) I shall
make beauty enter before thy face."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Khety concludes his introduction thus:]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["Behold, I have set thee on the way of god. The Renenut of a scribe is
on his shoulder on the day of his birth. He reaches the halls of the
magistrates, when he]{.style_} [has become a man.]{.style_1} [Behold!
there is no scribe who lacks food, from the property of the House of the
King---life, prosperity, health! Meskhenet is (the source of) the
scribe's welfare, he being set before the magistrates. His father and
his mother praise god, he being set upon the way of the
living.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["Behold these things I (]{.style_}[have set them]{.style_1}[) before
thee and thy children's children.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["It has come to a happy ending in success. . . ."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This instruction comes from a book probably written in the Middle
Kingdom or earlier. The preserved copies of the book, mostly belonging
to the Nineteenth Dynasty (1320--1200 B.C.), are]{.style_} [Papyrus
Sallier II,]{.style_1} [British Museum, 10182
[]{#calibre_link-120}([Fig.
IV--12](#calibre_link-94){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[a]{.style_1}[);]{.style_} [Papyrus Anastasi VII,]{.style_1} [British
Museum, 10222 []{#calibre_link-96}([Fig.
IV--2](#calibre_link-95){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[above]{.style_1}[);]{.style_} [Papyrus Chester Batty XIX,]{.style_1}
[British Museum, 10699, besides numerous ostraca, and a writing tablet,
most of these documents being fragmentary. The text is commonly, but
wrongly, known as the]{.style_} [Instruction of Duauf.]{.style_1} [The
present translation is that of Prof. J. A. Wilson, in]{.style_} [Ancient
Near Eastern Texts,]{.style_1} [Princeton, 1950.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It has already been mentioned that the practice of writing in Egypt
goes back to the thirtieth century B.C. It is not unreasonable to
suppose that the writing of books began roughly at the same time.
"Chapter xxx B" of the "Book of the Dead" (see p. 144 ff.), according to
an Egyptian tradition was composed by Thoth (the god of writing, of
wisdom, and of priestly lore), and it was "found" by Hertataf, a son of
Khufu, or Cheops (Fourth Dynasty,]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 2700 B.C.);
according to another tradition, it was "found" in the reign of
Semti-Hesepti, a king of the First Dynasty (perhaps]{.style_}
[c]{.style_1}[. 2900 B.C.).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000132.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-95}

[[Fig. IV---2](#calibre_link-96){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Papyrus Anastasi VII (British Museum, 10222), half of sheet 6,
recto; (below) Rhind Mathematical Papyrus (British Museum, 10057 and
10058).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Furthermore, King Djoser of the Third Dynasty
(]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. twenty-eighth century B.C.) is said to have
been already a patron of learning and literature, and his minister
I-em-hotep (or Imhotep) was one of the famed sages of Egypt, and was
deified; some modern scholars call him the Aesculapius of the Egyptians.
Other traditional or legendary Egyptian sages were Har-dedef or
Djedef-Hor, a son of King Khufu, Ka-iris (or Kairos), Ptah-em-Djedhuty,
Nofry, Khety (see above), Kha-kheper-Reseneb (or Kha'kheperra'sonb), Ke'
gemni (of the late Third or early Fourth Dynasty; see p. 141) and the
Vizier Ptah-hotep (see p. 141). They were credited with the earliest
Egyptian books of wisdom.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Egyptians valued learning mainly because of the power achieved by
the learned men; indeed, they had very little interest in pure
scholarship, however much they valued literature for aesthetic reasons.
No fragment of a lexicon or of a systematic grammar has yet been found
in any Egyptian papyrus, though there are word-lists and explanatory
glosses. The Egyptians never succeeded in making a final definitive text
of their sacred writings. Although there must have been official
chronicles, and there are preserved lists of kings, copies of treaties
and other historical records, it is doubtful whether the Egyptians
possessed a complete written history.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[CALENDAR]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The twelve-division of day-time and night-time, and the calendar are
among the Egyptian main contributions to civilization. The Egyptian
calendar---consisting of twelve months of thirty days each and five
additional days at the end of each year---is "the only intelligent
calendar which ever existed in human history" (Neugebauer).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Egyptian priesthood thus laid the foundations of our calendar. Some
scholars even think that the earliest Egyptian calendar was based on the
heliacal rising of Sothis (=the Dog Star, Sirius), and it shows the
existence of astronomical activities as far back as the fourth
millennium B.C., but this contention has been disproved by Neugebauer,
who emphasizes the basically non-astronomical character of the Egyptian
calendar. It is known, however, that the Egyptian priests tried to keep
strictly to themselves all the astronomical and similar knowledge
acquired, and this may to some extent account for the lack of any
Egyptian treatise on astronomy.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ASTRONOMY]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[That they knew the crude elements of astronomy is certain, but (in
contrast with the records of Chinese and Mesopotamian astronomy in which
many accounts of observations have been found) no Egyptian record of an
observation has so far been discovered. Many observations for ceremonial
date fixing and the orientation of monuments were no doubt made, but not
recorded.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Such observations must have been made in very ancient times, as is
shown by the orientation to the sun of such early monuments as the
temples and the pyramids. A whole modern literature of nonsense has been
built up around the measurements and other "mysteries" of these
structures, and especially the Pyramid of Khufu.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Egyptian priests alone possessed an elementary knowledge of
astronomy, and they alone performed the valuable function of predictors
for the Nile floods, which irrigated and fertilized the whole country.
Some scholars credit them with the ability to predict eclipses, which
could be of great value for impressing the masses of the population, but
the only Egyptian eclipse record known concerns a solar eclipse of A.D.
601 !]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Most of our knowledge of early Egyptian astronomy has been derived from
inscriptions and representations on the ceilings of tombs and on coffin
lids of the Middle Kingdom and the New Kingdom (which apparently also
represent the rising and setting of star groups), but little or nothing
from books; still, astronomical books must have existed.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Two demotic documents of the Copenhagen Carlsberg collection
(]{.style_}[Papyrus]{.style_1}[,]{.style_} [I]{.style_1}[, and No. 9),
recently published, represent older Egyptian methods. The first,
probably written at the beginning of the Christian Era, is a translation
of, and commentary on, a much older hieratic text whose hieroglyphic
replica is still preserved in the tomb of King Seti I (about 1300 B.C.)
; its subject is the description of the travel of the "decans" over the
body of the sky goddess. At the time of its discovery, the papyrus
contained the picture of the sky goddess with all the constellations and
their dates of rising and setting, but when the text reached Copenhagen
the picture was gone. The other papyrus, also belonging to the Roman
period, deals with the Egyptian twenty-five-year cycle, which was well
known and often used in Hellenistic astronomy.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, none of the early Egyptian "astronomical" texts contain
mathematical elements; they are crude observational schemes, partly
religious, partly practical in purpose. Only with the beginning of the
second century B.C. do mathematical-astronomical and astrological papyri
appear; and later also horoscopes and planetary texts, written in Greek
or in Demotic or both; they are based on computations. Therefore, it
becomes increasingly clear from recent researches "that the date of
origin of the Egyptian true astrological lore must be fixed to the
Ptolemaic period", and this lore "thus appears as a truly Hellenistic
creation" (Neugebauer).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[MATHEMATICS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Their mathematics was never at a very high level; its two leading
principles were simple addition and the extensive use of "natural
fractions". They knew still less of geometry than they did of
arithmetic. On the whole, it may be said that their theoretic knowledge
of science was much inferior to that of the Babylonians.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The famous]{.style_} [Rhind Mathematical Papyrus]{.style_1} [([Fig.
IV---2](#calibre_link-95){.calibre9},]{.style_} [below]{.style_1}[) was
obtained by Mr. A. H. Rhind at Thebes c. 1858, and in 1864 it was bought
by the British Museum. This roll, about seventeen feet long, covers a
large part of the arithmetical knowledge and practice of the Egyptians
under the Old and Middle Kingdoms. It is a copy made under one of the
Hyksos kings (eighteenth to sixteenth century B.C.) of an older work,
and is a collection of specimen examples of all kinds of arithmetical
and geometrical problems. It seems to have been found together with a
mathematical leather roll (see next chapter), which suggests that the
house they were found in, may have belonged to a mathematician or to an
accountant. Another large mathematical papyrus is preserved in
Moscow.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[SUPERSTITIONS, MAGICAL SPELLS AND MEDICAL LORE]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[There is, on the other hand, a comparatively large literature on
superstitions. The idea that it is lucky to undertake a particular
affair on some days, but unlucky on others, and the belief that there
were words and actions by which men could produce an effect on the
powers of nature, upon every living being, upon animals, and even upon
gods, appears prominently in ancient Egyptian writings, and is not
limited to their funeral ceremonies and worship. Hence, the origin of
the magical formulae of all kinds, of amulets worn by the dead and by
the living, of the magical remedies for sicknesses, and so
forth.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[An Egyptian tradition associates King Semti- esepti, of the First
Dynasty, with a recipe in a book of medicine which is said to have been
written or edited in his reign. The magical spells and medical
prescriptions preserved in the great]{.style_} [Papyrus,
Ebers]{.style_1} [(it measures nearly sixty-seven
[]{#calibre_link-98}feet), [Fig. IV---3](#calibre_link-97){.calibre9},
and in the Berlin Papyrus 3038, are assigned to the period of Usaphais,
a king of the First Dynasty, and those preserved in the British Museum
Papyrus 10059 are assigned to Khufu's time. (It is known, however, that
the Egyptians often invoked the authority of ancient times in order to
popularize their own works.) The]{.style_} [Papyrus, Ebers]{.style_1}
[is assigned to the early Eighteenth Dynasty; in 1873, it was bought in
Luxor by G. Ebers, and is now (or was before the last war) preserved in
the University Library, at Leipsic.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000133.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-97}

[[Fig. IV---3](#calibre_link-98){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Papyrus Ebers, belonging to the period of the early Eighteenth Dynasty
(University of Leipsic), p. 2.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[These "medical" or "surgical" papyri are far from being scientific
treatises. Indeed, they are "a curious mixture of science and
super-stitution---and magic" (J. A. Wilson,]{.style_} [Journal of Near
Eastern Studies,]{.style_1} [1952), as can be exemplified by the recipe
for a fractured skull, which included an ostrich egg, to be ground up
and applied to the fracture. This recipe is given in the]{.style_}
[Edwin Smith Surgical Papyrus,]{.style_1} [otherwise containing a
serious and scientific treatise; it is written in a beautiful hieratic
hand; the papyrus formerly belonged to the New York Historical Society,
but in December, 1948, it was presented to the New York Academy of
Medicine.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-357}

::: calibre5
:::

## [EGYPTIAN LITERATURE]{.style_2} {#egyptian-literature .calibre12}

[]{#calibre_link-358}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MYTHS AND TALES]{.style_2} {#myths-and-tales .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[A comparatively large number of myths and tales have come down to us
from the various periods of Egyptian history.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The myth of "The Creation by Atum" is known from a hieroglyphic
inscription carved inside the pyramids of Mer-ne-Re and Pepi II, or
Nefer-ka-Re, of the Sixth Dynasty (twenty-third century B.C.), as well
as from later texts, such as the hieratic papyrus Chester Beatty
IX,]{.style_} [recto,]{.style_1} [viii, 3---21, of the thirteenth
century B.C. The text of another myth of Creation is inscribed on four
wooden coffins from el-Bersheh (Middle Egypt), and is dated to the
Middle Kingdom (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 2000 B.C.).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A hieratic papyrus of the period of Ramses II (]{.style_}[c.]{.style_1}
[1301---1234 B.C.) describes Thebes as the site of Creation. Two
hieratic papyri of the Nineteenth Dynasty (1350---1200 B.C.) tell us
"how the supreme god Re had many names, one of which was hidden and was
thus a source of supremacy" (J. A. Wilson).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The deliverance of mankind from destruction is the theme of a myth
inscribed on the walls of Theban royal tombs of the fourteenth to
twelfth centuries B.C., "although the language used and the corrupted
state of the text show that it followed an older original" (J. A.
Wilson). A myth describing an amusing contest of Horus and Seth is given
in a Theban hieratic papyrus of the twelfth century B.C. There are
various other myths which have come down to us in Egyptian
manuscripts.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-359}

::: calibre5
:::

## [SHORT STORIES]{.style_2} {#short-stories .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Some scholars consider the Egyptians as the inventors of the short
story.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the period of the Middle Kingdom, the Egyptians seem to have been
especially fond of stories of travel, in which the hero relates his own
adventures. Other books are in the nature of historical romances. One of
the earliest stories written on papyrus in the Hyksos period (and now in
the Berlin Museum) relates the wonderful deeds of magicians in King
Khufu's time,]{.style_} [i.e.]{.style_1} [about the twenty-seventh
century B.C. This]{.style_} [Tale of Cheops and The Magicians]{.style_1}
[is assigned by Sir Alan Gardiner to the Hyksos period.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Another romance, written about the close of the Nineteenth Dynasty (end
of the thirteenth century B.C.), deals with the beginning of the Hyksos
wars; and another, of the same period, with Tut-mose III's occupation of
the town of Joppa:]{.style_} [Papyrus Harris 500,]{.style_1} [now
British Museum No. 10060,]{.style_} [verso,]{.style_1} [i-iii. There are
a few "once upon a time" fairy-tales.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The]{.style_} [Story of Si-nuhe]{.style_1} []{#calibre_link-100}[([Fig.
IV---4](#calibre_link-99){.calibre9}) seems to have been a "best
seller"; it is represented by five papyri and at least seventeen ostraca
(belonging to the period running from the late Twelfth
Dynasty,]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 1800 B.C., to the Twenty-First
Dynasty,]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 1000 B.C.). It is a classic and its
literary style is considered as the best among Egyptian]{.style_}
[belles-lettres.]{.style_1} [Some other stories---such as the]{.style_}
[Shipwrecked Sailor,]{.style_1} [which is the shortest, and
the]{.style_} [Eloquent Peasant,]{.style_1} [as well as panegyrics,
songs, hymns, royal "Teachings", and "Wisdom" literature, belong to this
period.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[As to the literary activities of the New Kingdom, Sir Alan Gardiner
mentions the]{.style_} [Tale of the Two Brothers,]{.style_1} [a hieratic
papyrus of]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 1225 B.C., the]{.style_} [Doomed
Prince,]{.style_1} [and particularly the]{.style_} [Story of, Wenam
ûn,]{.style_1} [a hieratic papyrus of the Moscow Museum, dated to the
eleventh century B.C. (see also p. 151).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The books of the Middle Kingdom were considered by ancient Egyptians to
be patterns of classical grace, and in the official school-texts of the
New Kingdom their heavy style and antique phraseology were imitated,
although such imitations were far from light reading.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000134.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-99}

[[Fig. IV--4](#calibre_link-100){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Portion of a copy of the Story of Si-nuhe (Berlin Papyrus 3022, Twelfth
or Thirteenth Dynasty).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-360}

## [DIDACTIC AND WISDOM LITERATURE. MODEL LETTERS]{.style_2} {#didactic-and-wisdom-literature.-model-letters .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest Wisdom literature has already been referred to. The
schoolbooks which date from the Middle Kingdom are intended not only to
teach wise living and good manners, but also to warn against a frivolous
life. The instructions of the New Kingdom, which are couched in the form
of letters from teacher to pupil, harp wearisomely upon the same idea:
"It is a misfortune to be a soldier, and a misery to till the ground,
for the only happiness for mankind is to turn the heart to books during
the day and to read during the night!"]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[One of the best examples of literature of the New Kingdom is
the]{.style_} [Anastasi Papyrus I]{.style_1} [(now British Museum
10247); it probably comes from Memphis, and is assigned to the late
Nineteenth Dynasty (end of the thirteenth century B.C.). It is a
complete book, and consists of a sarcastic epistle sent by a high
official to a royal scribe. Such "letters" were not intended to convey
news, but merely to show off the writer's fine wit and graceful style in
a literary dispute. The same letter is preserved, in addition to
the]{.style_} [Anastasi Papyrus,]{.style_1} [on other written documents,
from the Nineteenth and Twentieth Dynasties (three fragmentary papyri
and about forty ostraca, all being schoolboy exercises). This book gives
us a wonderful glimpse into the taste and life of the]{.style_}
[literati]{.style_1} [in the New Kingdom.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[For the]{.style_} [Book of Dead,]{.style_1} [which was a sort of
liturgical Baedeker, see pp. []{#calibre_link-105}144---47. [Fig.
IV--6](#calibre_link-101){.calibre9} and 7.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-361}

::: calibre5
:::

## [POETRY]{.style_2} {#poetry .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Charming are the Egyptian ballads and love songs. As to lyric poetry,
the hymns, which have come down to us in great numbers, are mostly in
the form of litanies in praise of the power of the gods, including the
king-gods. Comparatively speaking, the best amongst these religious
poems are the hymns to the Sun, the hymns to the Nile, a hymn to
Amon-Re, and the beautiful hymns of Akhenaton. Various prayers have also
come down to us. A prayer (to the Sun-god Atum Re-Har-Akhti) is found in
a manuscript of model texts for schoolboys:]{.style_} [Papyrus Anastasi
II]{.style_1} [(British Museum No. 10243,]{.style_} [recto,]{.style_1}
[x, 1---xi, 2); it is probably from Memphis, and dates from the late
Nineteenth Dynasty.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Various poems dealing with death have also come down to US.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[There is only one example extant of epic poetry---it is even doubtful
whether it is an epic---a poem on the great battle which Ramses II
fought with the Hittites at Kadesh; although this story is in poetic
style, it is difficult to say whether its form is truly
poetic.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[There are numerous historical texts, but these are mainly inscribed
on]{.style_} [stelae]{.style_1} [or other monuments of hard material. No
Egyptian code of law has come down to us.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-362}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Manufacture of Papyrus Books]{.style_2} {#manufacture-of-papyrus-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Although the ancient Egyptians employed various materials for writing,
such as wood, linen (see Chapter I), leather (see Chapter V), stone for
inscriptions, and wooden tablets and ostraca for short notes, papyrus
(prepared from the plant of that name) was their chief material for
writing books. Indeed, it was not only employed in Egypt, but for a
thousand years it was the chief writing material for the Graeco-Roman
world (see pp. 151---54), and was used both for literary and for
ordinary purposes, such as legal documents, receipts, petitions, notices
of birth, and official and private letters.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The term "papyrus", from Greek]{.style_} [papýros]{.style_1}
[(]{.style_}[papúros]{.style_1}[), is of Egyptian origin, and various
theories have been suggested with regard to its original meaning, such
as "the growth of the River (Nile)" or "the (one) belonging to the River
(Nile)", or else "the (stuff) belonging to Pharaoh" as a royal monopoly,
but none of these opinions is final. However, the word "papyrus" gave us
the terms "paper" (in English),]{.style_} [papier]{.style_1} [(in
French),]{.style_} [Papier]{.style_1} [(in German),]{.style_}
[papier]{.style_1} [(in Polish),]{.style_} [papka]{.style_1} [(in
Russian), and similar words in other languages. On the other hand, the
Greek word]{.style_} [khárt s,]{.style_1} [meaning a "leaf" of papyrus
(generally, papyrus prepared for writing but not yet written upon was
called]{.style_} [khárt s]{.style_1}[), appears in Latin]{.style_}
[charta]{.style_1}[, and in English "cartaceous", "chart", "charter",
"chartered" as well as in "card", in Italian]{.style_}
[carta,]{.style_1} [in Polish]{.style_} [karta,]{.style_1} [and other
words in various languages.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Another Greek word,]{.style_} [biblos,]{.style_1} [from]{.style_}
[býblos]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[búblos]{.style_1}[), meaning the "pith
of the papyrus stalk", gave the Greek word]{.style_}
[biblion,]{.style_1} [which was the common word for "papyrus scroll" or
"papyrus roll"; its plural was]{.style_} [biblía]{.style_1}[, "papyrus
rolls", and]{.style_} [tà biblía,]{.style_1} ["the scrolls" or "the
books" came to indicate "the Books",]{.style_} [par excellence,
i.e.]{.style_1} [the Sacred Scriptures. See also p. 34 f.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Our modern word "volume" derives from the Latin term]{.style_}
[volumen]{.style_1} [(the Latin word for "roll", or rather "a thing
rolled up"), a derivative of the verb]{.style_} [volvere,]{.style_1}
["to roll" (]{.style_}[sc]{.style_1}[. the papyrus),]{.style_}
[volumen]{.style_1} [being parallel to Greek]{.style_}
[kýlindros]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[kúlindros]{.style_1}[), "cylinder";
the Latin term]{.style_} [evolvere]{.style_1}[, "to unroll", was often
used in the sense of "to read" (a book). The word "explicit" is
interesting, since it is equivalent to "the end (of the roll)", probably
a contraction from]{.style_}
[explicit]{.style_1}[(]{.style_}[us]{.style_1}[)]{.style_} [est
liber,]{.style_1} ["the book is (unrolled) to the end". In Roman times
the term]{.style_} [volumen,]{.style_1} [like]{.style_}
[liber,]{.style_1} [was in common use for "book". Only one book was
included in a "volume", so that a work generally consisted of as many
volumes as books.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[PAPYRUS FACTORIES]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The best papyrus factories were in Alexandria, hence the "Alexandrian
papyrus" was known all over the Greek and Roman worlds.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is generally assumed that papyrus was imported into Greece, Italy
and the other Mediterranean countries, already manufactured; and it is
doubtful whether any native papyrus grew in any of these countries. The
Greek geographer, Strabo (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 63 B.C.---A.D. 25),
says that papyrus was found in Lake Trasimene and other lakes of Etruria
(now Tuscany), but the accuracy of this statement has been
disputed.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[On the other hand, it is known that manufacture of papyrus
(]{.style_}[e.g]{.style_1}[. the]{.style_} [Charta Fanniana]{.style_1}[)
was carried on in Rome---also Pliny (xiii, §77) records that papyrus was
manufactured at Rome (as well as at Alexandria and elsewhere)---but it
is held that it was a "re-manufacture" of imported material. Apparently,
the more brittle condition of the Latin papyri, as compared with the
Greek papyri, found at Herculaneum (see p. 253 ff.) is due to the effect
of this "re-manufacture". However, it is known that Rome had great
storehouses for papyrus, called]{.style_} [horrea chartaria.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[In Schubart's opinion, papyrus was put on the wholesale market, not in
sheets or rolls, but in bales, which were cut by the retailer into rolls
and single sheets.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-363}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MANUFACTURE OF PAPYRUS []{#calibre_link-103 .calibre14}([Fig. IV---5](#calibre_link-102){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#manufacture-of-papyrus-fig.-iv5 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Papyrus was made from the stems of the papyrus plant ([Fig.
IV--5](#calibre_link-102){.calibre9},]{.style_} [a]{.style_1}[), called
in Latin]{.style_} [Papyrus antiquorum or Cyperus papyrus]{.style_1}
[(Linnaeus), which in ancient times grew abundantly in the marshy
districts of Lower Egypt. It was so characteristic of this region that
it became emblematic of the north, and was used for the armorial bearing
of Lower Egypt, while the flowering rush, characteristic of the South,
was employed for Upper Egypt. It also grew, but in small quantities, in
northern Palestine.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000135.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-102}

[[Fig. IV---5](#calibre_link-103){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a. Egyptian papyrus plant; b, Egyptian reeds; c, the gathering of
papyrus, as depieled in the tomb of Puyemre (Eighteenth
Dynasty).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Nowadays, it grows only in the Sudan, Abyssinia, and particularly in
Sicily, near Syracuse, where it was probably introduced during the Arab
occupation, and where it is still utilized for making a special kind of
paper. It is reared as a curiosity in many botanical gardens, some in
England, where, however, it needs to be removed to cover in the autumn.
Its leafless stem rises from four to fifteen feet above the water, and
it has an umbrella-like top of delicate green rays. The root lies
obliquely, and is about the thickness of a man's wrist; the section of
the stalk is triangular, and it tapers gracefully upwards towards the
extremity. In ancient times it grew in six feet of water or less. It is
described by Theophrastus (Aristotle's successor as head of the Academy
of Athens, 323---]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[.288]{.style_}
[B.C.)]{.style_1}[---]{.style_}[Hist. Plant.,]{.style_1} [iv, 8.3 ---and
particularly by Pliny (see below).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This plant appears in Egyptian art from the earliest times ([Fig.
IV---5](#calibre_link-102){.calibre9},]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[). We see
here how the great papyrus shrubs lift up their beautiful heads high
above the height of man, while their roots are bathed in water, and
their feathery tufts wave on their slender stalks. With the help of
other reeds and water plants they formed an impenetrable thicket---a
floating forest.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This odd plant was a real friend to the ancient Egyptians. It formed a
substitute for wood, which was never plentiful in Egypt. From it boats,
vessels, canoes, mats, ropes and sandals were made by weaving its stalks
together; blankets and clothes were produced from its bark. It was used
as fuel, and, according to some scholars, even cooked for eating, and
sweet drinks were made of its juice.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[But above all, it supplied the main material for writing, and as such,
it formed one of the chief articles of export. It seems to have been a
government monopoly in Egypt; Sir Frederic Kenyon mentions a Tebtunis
papyrus (No. 308) containing a receipt for 20,000 papyrus stems. In
Roman times, it became an imperial monopoly. Firmus, the imperial
pretender in A.D. 273, is said to have "boasted that he could keep a
whole army on the proceeds of the revenue from the papyrus trade". He
may, however, have possessed large papyrus factories. Papyrus was also a
state monopoly under the Byzantine rule and under the Arabs, and the
first sheet of each roll or bale was stamped with the state-seal stamp
(in Moslem times, in Greek and Arabic), which proved that the duty was
paid.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[An account---although not completely clear---of the way in which the
papyrus was treated in the Egyptian "paper" factories is given by the
great Roman naturalist, Pliny, in]{.style_} [Naturalis
historia,]{.style_1} [xiii, 11f. (A.D. 23---79). "Paper is made from the
papyrus, by splitting it with a needle into very thin leaves, due care
being taken that they should be as broad as possible. That of the first
quality is taken from the centre of the plant, and so in regular
succession, according to the order of division. . . . All these various
kinds of paper are made upon a table, moistened with Nile water; a
liquid which, when in a muddy state, has the peculiar qualities of
glue." The last statement is not exact:]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["Although the Nile water at flood time is thick, and may even be
slightly slimy from the finely divided clay it contains, yet this clay
was certainly not the adhesive used" (A. Lucas); and what material was
employed---whether gum, glue, or starch, to mention the three most
likely substances---has not been determined. In the opinion of some
scholars, the Egyptians made a kind of glue from flour, hot water, and a
little vinegar.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-364}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PAPYRUS ROLLS]{.style_2} {#papyrus-rolls .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

["This table," continues Pliny, "being first inclined, the leaves of
papyrus are laid upon it lengthwise, as long indeed as the papyrus will
admit of, the jagged edges being cut off at either end; after which a
cross layer is placed over it\.... When this is done, the leaves are
pressed together, and then dried in the sun; after which they are united
to one another, the best sheets being always taken first, and the
inferior ones added afterwards. There are never more than twenty of
these sheets to a roll (]{.style_}[scapus]{.style_1}[)."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This last statement should not be misunderstood. Pliny is probably
referring to the length of the papyrus rolls as they were customarily
placed on the market; this does not mean that papyrus rolls never
contained more than twenty sheets. Assuming that individual sheets had
the usual width of 9 inches, a roll of twenty sheets would have been 15
feet long. If a book was of greater length, the scribe could glue on a
second roll to the first; if it did not reach the length of a roll of
twenty sheets, he could cut off the superfluous material. Sir Frederic
Kenyon, the foremost student of this subject, pointed out that there are
several Egyptian liturgical rolls of 50 feet and over, such as
the]{.style_} [Nu Papyrus,]{.style_1} [(British Museum 10477, [Fig.
IV--6](#calibre_link-101){.calibre9},]{.style_} [a]{.style_1}[), 65
feet; the]{.style_} [Ani Papyrus,]{.style_1} [(British Museum 10470,
[Fig. IV--6](#calibre_link-101){.calibre9},]{.style_} [b]{.style_1}[),
"probably the finest extant Egyptian book", 76 feet; the]{.style_}
[Nebseni Papyrus,]{.style_1} [77 feet, and some others; a few even
exceed 100 feet; the]{.style_} [Greenfield Papyrus]{.style_1} [(a fine
hieratic manuscript, preserved in the British Museum, No. 10554, is 123
feet long, and one---which is not liturgical but panegyrical---is known
to be of 133 feet; it is the]{.style_} [Great Harris Papyrus]{.style_1}
[]{#calibre_link-108}[([Fig.
IV--8](#calibre_link-104){.calibre9},]{.style_} [abode).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[This important manuscript, also known as]{.style_} [Papyrus, Harris
I,]{.style_1} [now in the British Museum (No. 10053), was found with
several others in a tomb behind Medinat Habu, at Thebes, and at once
purchased by Mr. A. C. Harris of Alexandria. When unrolled, it was found
to be 133 feet long and 16 inches broad, containing seventy-nine "pages"
of very large size, which are now divided and laid down on cardboard.
The manuscript relates to the achievements and benefactions of Ramses
III, and is a kind of comprehensive manifesto, written by order of
Ramses IV immediately after the death of Ramses III
(]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 1164 B.C.). The document refers to---and is
our only source for that period---the chaotic state of Egypt, in
the]{.style_} [interregnum]{.style_1} [between the end of the Nineteenth
Dynasty (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 1205 B.C.) and the beginning of the
reign of Ramses III's father, Set-nakht (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 1197
B.C.), and gives the details of what Ramses III himself had done for the
temples of his country during the thirty-one years of his
reign.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Of great importance is the recently published]{.style_} [Wilbour
Papyrus]{.style_1} [(A. H. Gardiner,]{.style_} [The Wilbour
Papyrus,]{.style_1} [3 vols., Oxford, 1948). Although not as long as the
rolls just referred to---its original total length appears to have been
nearly thirty-five feet---"in the bulk of the matter it contains it has
surely no equal" (Gardiner). It consists of two texts, one written in
102 columns containing 4,500 lines, the other, written on the]{.style_}
[verso]{.style_1} [in twenty-five broad pages, contains 723 lines. As
Prof. Edgerton has remarked, this papyrus contains more columns, more
lines, and perhaps more words than any other Egyptian text. Its contents
is "a unique record of holdings in land, comparable in some degree with
our Domesday Book" (Gardiner). In 1928 or 1929 the papyrus---then
consisting of three separate rolls---was brought to the Cairo Museum by
a Luxor dealer. After protracted negotiations it was bought by the
Brooklyn Museum out of the resources bequeathed by the family of the
American Egyptologist Charles Edwin Wilbour (1833---96): hence its
name]{.style_} [Wilbour Papyrus.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The scholiasts speak of Thucydides and Homer being written each in one
long roll. The roll of Thucydides is estimated at the incredible length
of 378 columns, or nearly 100 yards. A roll 120 yards long was said to
have been in existence at Constantinople. These are abnormal instances.
We have also been told, with more probability, of rolls 150 feet long,
which would contain the whole]{.style_} [Iliad]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[Odyssey.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, such rolls were too cumbrous for ordinary reading (hence the
saying attributed to Callimachus, librarian at the
Alexandrina,]{.style_} [méga biblíon, méga kakón,]{.style_1} ["great
\[or rather 'large'\] book, great evil") and Greek literary rolls
seldom, if ever, exceeded thirty-five feet---a length which is
sufficient for a single book of Thucydides or one of the longer Gospels,
or else, two or three "books" of the]{.style_} [Iliad]{.style_1} [or two
books of Plato's]{.style_} [Republic]{.style_1}[. Such a roll, when
rolled up, would be about two and a half inches thick, and it was thus
suitable to be held in one hand.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000136.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-101}

[[Fig. IV--6](#calibre_link-105){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a, The Nu Papyrus (British Museum, 10447); b, the Ani Papyrus (British
Museum, 10470); c, Book of the Dead (British Museum, 10257).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000137.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. IV---7]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Book of the Dead written in the so-called cursive hieroglyphs,
belonging approximately to the Eighteenth Dynasty (Trinity College
Library, Dublin).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Indeed, in contrast to the huge roll of Homer, which was supposed to
have existed, there is extant a papyrus roll of the twenty-fourth book
of the]{.style_} [Iliad,]{.style_1} [found at Elephantine, so that the
complete]{.style_} [Iliad]{.style_1} [could have been in twenty-four
"volumes". A British Museum fragmentary roll, "the handsomest specimen
of Greek book production", containing a portion of]{.style_} [Odyssey
iii,]{.style_1} [would have been seven feet, if it contained only this
book, or twenty-one feet if it contained books i-iii.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In other preserved Greek papyri the length of the rolls varies from
fourteen feet (British Museum, No. 132: Isocrates,]{.style_} [Peri Eirén
s]{.style_1}[) to thirty-four feet (]{.style_}[Pap.
Oxyrh]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [224:]{.style_1} [Euripides,]{.style_}
[Phoenissae]{.style_1}[) and thirty-five feet (]{.style_}[Pap.
Grenf]{.style_1}[. 4:]{.style_} [Iliad]{.style_1} [xxi-xxiii). Some
books, however, appear to have been]{.style_} [c.]{.style_1} [fifty feet
long]{.style_} [(Pap. Petrie 5,]{.style_1} [third century B.C.:
Plato]{.style_} [Phaedo;]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [Pap. Oxyrh.
225,]{.style_1} [first century B.C.: Thucydides, ii), but Kenyon
suggests that originally such a book could have occupied two rolls;
indeed, Berlin Pap. No. 911 (first half of]{.style_}
[Genesis]{.style_1}[) confirms the probability of this suggestion.
Generally speaking, the length of the rolls seems to have varied
according to taste and convenience.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The width was limited by the length of the strips of pith; ten inches
was the usual width of rolls employed for works of literature, but
specimens exist which are as wide as fifteen inches (the]{.style_} [Ani
Papyrus]{.style_1}[) ; the]{.style_} [Great Harris Papyrus,]{.style_1}
[measuring seventeen inches in width, and the]{.style_} [Greenfield
Papyrus,]{.style_1} [of nineteen inches, are exceptionally
wide.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The rolls recovered at Herculaneum (see Chapter VI) are two to three
inches in diameter and about six inches in width. The width of the
columns varies from two and a half inches to four inches in the Greek
manuscripts, while in the main Latin manuscript it is nearly eight
inches. Many rolls have about 100 columns and from 2,000 to 3,000 lines;
the largest manuscript contains about 160 columns.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-365}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PAPYRUS SHEETS]{.style_2} {#papyrus-sheets .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Single sheets (]{.style_}[kollémata]{.style_1}[) were also on sale;
they would suffice for short writings---such, for instance, as the
second and third]{.style_} [Epistles]{.style_1} [of St. John---letters
or documents. They were made in a variety of sizes (see p. 134); papyri
are extant of less than two inches to over fifteen inches in height; the
fine and large sheet was in Rome called]{.style_}
[macrocollum;]{.style_1} [the average size was nine to eleven inches in
width and six to nine inches in length.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[There is evidence to show that the scribe did not usually write on
separate sheets which were later glued together to form a roll (see,
however, p. 138f), but he wrote on the roll already made up before he
started writing on it; indeed, the writing frequently ran over the
junction of two sheets.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Kenyon records the width of the sheets of a few of the finest Egyptian
books, preserved in the British Museum: the]{.style_} [Nu
Papyrus,]{.style_1} [15 inches; the]{.style_} [Ani Papyrus,]{.style_1}
[12--13 inches; the]{.style_} [Hunefer Papyrus,]{.style_1} [10- inches;
in some fine papyri, however, the sheets are much narrower: inches, for
instance, in the]{.style_} [Greenfield Papyrus]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is noteworthy that the sheets of the fine Greek papyri are much
smaller than the Egyptian. Even if we omit the pocket rolls containing
poetry, such as the]{.style_} [Mimes]{.style_1} [of Herodas or the
third-century B.C.]{.style_} [Hibeh Papyrus]{.style_1} [containing
comedy, which are about 5 inches wide---the smallest papyrus roll known
(Berlin Pap. 10571; it contains epigrams) being less than 2 inches
wide---we have British Museum Pap. 128]{.style_} [(Iliad),]{.style_1}
[whose sheets measure × 5-6 inches; British Museum Pap. 134
(Hyperides,]{.style_} [In
Philippidem]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[,]{.style_1} [inches; a Bacchylides
papyrus, × 8-9 inches (Bacchylides of Ceos, fifth century B.C.). There
are, however, exceptions such as British Museum Pap. 736]{.style_}
[(Iliad),]{.style_1} [which is inches wide;]{.style_} [Pap. Oxyrh.
843]{.style_1} [(Plato,]{.style_} [Symposium)]{.style_1} [and]{.style_}
[844]{.style_1} [(Isocrates,]{.style_}
[Panegyricus]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[,]{.style_1} [both inches wide, and
a few others; the widest being British Museum Pap. 268 (a tax-register),
× 5 inches long.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[On the whole, the papyrus sheets for literary works rarely, if ever,
exceeded 13 × 9 inches; and 10 × inches apparently was the common size
for books of moderate pretensions.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-366}

::: calibre5
:::

## [QUALITY GRADES]{.style_2} {#quality-grades .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The finished papyrus varied considerably in quality (just as we have
many grades of paper), in some instances being coarse and in others of
very fine texture. In Rome, there were about ten sorts or qualities of
papyrus. The best grade (made of the heart of the stalk), in which the
papyrus strips are the longest, and thus the width of the sheet is
greater, was called by the Egyptians]{.style_} [hieratica]{.style_1} [or
"sacred", because they used it in writing their sacred books.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[By the Romans the]{.style_} [hieratica]{.style_1} [was sometimes
called]{.style_} [regia]{.style_1} [("royal") ---so, for instance,
Catullus (Valerius Catullus, 87 -]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[.54 B.C.)
mentions the]{.style_} [chartae regiae]{.style_1} [as the best-grade
papyri; afterwards it was termed]{.style_} [Augusta,]{.style_1} [in
honour of the Emperor Augustus; it was thirteen digits, about nine to
ten inches wide, and was prepared for writing on one side only; it was
thin and semi-transparent. The second grade was sometimes called, in
Rome,]{.style_} [Livia,]{.style_1} [from the name of Livia, the wife of
Augustus. Under the governorship of Cornelius Gallus, a fine-quality
papyrus, called]{.style_} [Corneliana,]{.style_1} [was manufactured.
Other grades of papyrus were named after the location of its factory
(]{.style_}[amphitheatrica, Saïtica, Taeniotica).]{.style_1} [In Rome
---as already mentioned---a grade called]{.style_} [Fanniana]{.style_1}
[was used, which was manufactured in the factory belonging to a certain
Fannius.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In Claudius' time, the]{.style_} [Augusta]{.style_1} [papyrus was
improved upon, and was then called]{.style_} [Claudia;]{.style_1} [this
was a foot wide, thicker than the best papyrus of an earlier date, and
prepared for writing on both sides.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The commoner kinds of papyrus, when used for accounts or literary
purposes, were sometimes used over again for schoolboys' exercises or
rough notes. Sometimes the]{.style_} [verso]{.style_1} [(see below) of
the papyrus was used for these purposes; at other times, the original
writing was sponged out, as in a parchment palimpsest (see pp. 215 ff),
and the]{.style_} [recto]{.style_1} [of the papyrus was used over again.
The coarse papyrus, generally used for wrapping up parcels or
merchandise, was called]{.style_} [emporetica,]{.style_1} ["merchants'
papyrus".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[These were the quality grades of the Roman market; it is probable that
similar classification existed in Egypt, but we have no evidence to
prove it, and the various grades cannot be identified in the papyri
which have been recovered.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-367}

::: calibre5
:::

## [WRITING COLUMNS OF PAPYRUS ROLLS]{.style_2} {#writing-columns-of-papyrus-rolls .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The text was written in a column or a series of columns, called (in
Greek)]{.style_} [selídes]{.style_1} [or (in Latin)]{.style_}
[paginae]{.style_1} [(hence, the word "page"), running, of course, from
left to right; the "columns" do not correspond with the "sheets" (sec p.
133 f.). The lines of writing generally ran parallel to the long sides
of the roll, i.e. the top and bottom.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In poetry, the width of the column is adapted to the length of the
lines, and when large letters are used, its width may even reach inches
(or inches, including the margin, in a sumptuous Homer)---for
instance,]{.style_} [Iliad,]{.style_1} [Bodleian Library, Oxford, Gr.
class A, i or British Museum Pap. 742---or be only 4 to inches
(including the margin), as for instance in Bacchylides papyri
[]{#calibre_link-169}([Fig.
VI---6](#calibre_link-106){.calibre9}]{.style_} [above).]{.style_1} [In
the Timotheus papyrus---in Berlin---which belongs to the fourth century
B.C., and is the earliest preserved Greek literary document
[]{#calibre_link-163}([Fig. VI---3](#calibre_link-107){.calibre9})---the
length of the lines varies between and 10 inches.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In Greek prose texts, the lines are much shorter. In some papyri, the
lines are (]{.style_}[Pap. Oxyrh. 666)]{.style_1} [or (British Museum
Pap. 134) inches wide, including margins; in others, the length of the
lines varies between and 4 inches, including margins; for
instance,]{.style_} [Pap. Oxyrh. 842]{.style_1} [is 4 inches.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000138.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-104}

[[Fig. IV---8](#calibre_link-108){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Portion of the Great Harris Papyrus or Papyrus Harris I
(British Museum, 10053); (below) earliest known fragments of hieratic
Papyri (Cairo Museum).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The normal width is between two and three inches. There are, however,
exceptions, especially when the text is written in a non-literary hand,
for instance, the]{.style_} [Athení n Politeia,]{.style_1} [or
"Constitution of Athens", by Aristotle []{#calibre_link-167}([Fig.
VI---4](#calibre_link-109){.calibre9}), in which the lines of one column
are eleven inches wide (see p. 157 f).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Moreover, the number of lines in a column and the number of letters in
a line of prose vary greatly; they even vary---though not very much in
the former instance---in the columns of a given papyrus, or in the lines
of a given column. Most have between twenty-five and forty-five lines to
a column, and eighteen to twenty-five letters to a line. However, there
is hardly a manuscript with less than sixteen letters to a line. Of
seventy pagan manuscripts examined by Milne, forty-seven have from
twenty-five to forty-five lines to a column; twelve have less than
twenty-five lines, and three (all poetry) less than twenty; eleven have
more than forty-five, and only six more than fifty (of which, three are
in poetry, and only three in prose). The right-hand edge is generally
uneven, mainly because of the rules fixing the division of words between
lines.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The margins between the columns were not large; they varied between
about half an inch and one inch, in the more elegant books; so that the
columns were close together. The upper and the lower margins also
varied; in the more elegant books, the former was about inches, and the
latter inches. In the common books, the margins were curtailed. Lines or
words omitted in the text were sometimes written in these margins, and
an arrow indicates the place where they should be inserted.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[What is probably a survival of the parallel columns of writing on
papyri is seen in the earliest vellum codices (see p. 195 ff), with
their writing of three or four columns to a page.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to the Latin historian Suetonius]{.style_} [(c.]{.style_1}
[A.D. 75---160),]{.style_} [De vita Caesarum, Iulius,]{.style_1} [56,
down to the time of Caesar it was the custom to write official
documents]{.style_} [transversa charta, i.e.]{.style_1} [the reverse
way, that is, across the whole width of the roll, so that the lines of
the writing were at right angles to the long sides of the
roll.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-368}

::: calibre5
:::

## [RECTO AND VERSO]{.style_2} {#recto-and-verso .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Ordinarily only one side of the papyrus was used for writing, and as a
rule only one side was used in books meant for sale; this side was
the]{.style_} [recto,]{.style_1} [usually the side in which the fibres
ran in a horizontal direction. In some rolls, called]{.style_}
[opistógrapha]{.style_1} [or "opistographs", especially in those which
were for private use or in the nature of rough copies, the]{.style_}
[verso]{.style_1} [was also used,]{.style_} [i.e.]{.style_1} [the side
of the papyrus in which the fibres ran vertically.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Egyptian papyri, however, are often written on both sides; examples in
which the texts on the]{.style_} [verso]{.style_1} [are earlier than
the]{.style_} [recto]{.style_1} [are not limited to any one period.
Sometimes this is the result of washing out earlier texts on
the]{.style_} [recto]{.style_1} [(information by Prof.
Edgerton).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[On the other hand, not many Graeco-Roman preserved literary texts show
such practice, though various ancient writers refer to them
(Lucian,]{.style_} [Vit. Auct.]{.style_1} [9;]{.style_}
[Ezekiel,]{.style_1} [ii, 10; Pliny,]{.style_} [Ep.,]{.style_1} [iii,
5.17; Juvenal, i, 1.5). The magical roll British Museum Pap. 121 is an
outstanding example of an opistograph. Such rolls mark either the
poverty of the writer or the excess of his matter. In some instances,
papyrus rolls already written on their]{.style_} [recto]{.style_1} [have
been again used, and the new text is inscribed on the]{.style_}
[verso;]{.style_1} [for example, the]{.style_} [Ath naíõn
Politeía]{.style_1} [([Fig.
VI---4](#calibre_link-109){.calibre9}),]{.style_} [Pap. Oxyrrh.
841]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [842,]{.style_1} [British Museum Papyrus
1532. Such copies were generally for private use, but sometimes they
were produced for the cheap market. Since the writing on the]{.style_}
[recto,]{.style_1} [as mentioned, almost invariably precedes that on
the]{.style_} [verso]{.style_1}[---though there are a few exceptions in
the third century B.C.---valuable evidence for dating may be obtained
from such documents.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-369}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PREPARATION OF PAPYRUS BOOKS]{.style_2} {#preparation-of-papyrus-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the early stage of the employment of papyrus for literary purposes
in Greece and Rome, the papyrus rolls apparently consisted of sheets
fastened or sewn together by strings. The damage caused by this
procedure, where the material was so frail as papyrus, led to the
invention (or rather introduction) of paste or glue. There is no doubt,
however, that the Egyptians knew the value of glue in early times---see
p. 129---but in the Graeco-Roman world the "invention" of glue, or
binder's paste, was ascribed to Phillatius. It is even said that the
Athenians erected a statue to his memory (see Olympiodorus). Of the use
of glue for this purpose among the Romans, Cicero (iv, 4) has left a
proof, and Pliny confirms it. Pollux (in Cicero, vii, 32) also mentions
writers and vendors of books, and the glueing of them.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Usually, prepared rolls were used for writing upon, but sometimes the
columns or pages were written first, and afterwards pasted together into
a roll by slaves called]{.style_} [glutinatores]{.style_1}[. The first
operation of the Greek and Roman]{.style_} [glutinatores]{.style_1}
[and, later, of the]{.style_} [bibliopegi]{.style_1} [("the
bookbinders"), was to cut the margins]{.style_} [(frons)]{.style_1} [of
the papyrus above and below perfectly even, and the rolls at the
beginning and end square. They then gave the edges and the exterior of
the roll the most perfect polish possible by means of pumice-stone, with
which substance the scribes had previously smoothed the interior.
Horace, Pliny, Martial, Ovid, and Catullus (see Chapter VI) all bear
testimony to this use of pumice, which to the present day is used by
hand-bookbinders in some of their operations. The edges at each end of
the roll were coloured just as are the edges of some modern books: for
instance, Ovid (]{.style_}[Tristia]{.style_1}[, i, 2.8) describes a roll
with black edges.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Then, a projecting label (in Greek,]{.style_} [síllybos)]{.style_1} [of
papyrus or vellum, with the]{.style_} [titulus]{.style_1} [(hence, our
word "title") was affixed to the roll, usually at the end, but sometimes
in the middle of the edge of the roll. The]{.style_} [titulus]{.style_1}
[corresponded not only to our title-page, but sometimes also to the
"lettering-piece" and contents-table combined; sometimes it bore the
total number of pages, verses or lines. Thus Josephus reckons 60,000
lines at the end of his twentieth book of]{.style_}
[Antiquities]{.style_1}[, and Justinian gives to the]{.style_}
[Digests]{.style_1} ["centum quinquaginta paene milia vcrsum".
The]{.style_} [titulus]{.style_1} [sometimes also contained the price.
The title was generally coloured, often of a red tinge---see also p.
159.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Roman frescoes []{#calibre_link-280}([Fig.
XI---2](#calibre_link-110){.calibre9}) show rolls with their labels
hanging out. The British Museum papyrus fragment containing poetry by
Bacchylides has still the label inscribed]{.style_} [Bakkhylidou
Dithyramboi;]{.style_1} [this fragment, probably belonging to c. 50
B.C., was found in Egypt in 1897.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Instead of the label with the]{.style_} [titulus,]{.style_1} [sometimes
the papyrus roll had a title which was written at the end of the book.
The fact that the title was appended at the end, seems to imply that
when a roll had been read it was left with its end outside, and a
newcomer---before taking the trouble to re-roll it in order to bring the
beginning to the outside---would see the title of the book at the
exposed end of the roll.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-370}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ROLL RODS]{.style_2} {#roll-rods .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The roll was fastened to---although, according to T. Birt, it was only
wound round---a wooden rod, so that it could be rolled from one end to
the other. This rod was called]{.style_} [omphalós]{.style_1} [in Greek,
and]{.style_} [umbilicus]{.style_1} [in Latin; the term]{.style_}
[omphalós]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [umbilicus]{.style_1} [is said to
derive from the fact that when the manuscript was rolled up, the rod
would be in the centre. The same sort of]{.style_} [umbilicus]{.style_1}
[is used today for rolled maps kept on shelves, whereas the Hebrew
ritual Bible scrolls have two rods (with ornamented ends), one attached
to the beginning and the other to the end of the scroll. The Roman rod
was of various shapes or colours, was ornamented at its ends, and had
sometimes projecting ornamental knobs or bosses, termed]{.style_}
[bullae]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [cornua]{.style_1} [("horns"); in time
the two terms]{.style_} [umbil cus]{.style_1} [and]{.style_}
[cornua]{.style_1} [became interchangeable, especially when used
figuratively to indicate the end of a book. The rod was sometimes made
of tightly folded papyrus. Moreover, some Roman rods seem to have been
of ebony, ivory, or even gold.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In order to read a roll (the procedure was similar to, but not
identical with, the reading of the modern Hebrew ritual scrolls), the
rod had to be taken in the right hand. The roll was then opened with the
left hand, and the reader began with the first column; as he proceeded
further and further towards the right, he rolled up with his left hand
the portion he had already read. Thus, when he had gone through the
book, the beginning of the text was innermost, so that the roll, for the
next reader, had to be re-rolled from right to left. A Pompeii fresco,
preserved in the Naples Museum of Antiquities, shows a young lady
holding in both hands an open roll; similarly, another Pompeii fresco,
preserved in the same museum, shows a young lady reading a book; but she
had forgotten to roll up the portion she had already read.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Birt, the foremost German expert on the ancient book, pointed out that
whenever a person is represented in ancient sculptures or paintings as
holding a roll in his right hand, we must understand that he is about to
read it; whereas, if the roll be in his left hand, we may infer that he
has finished the reading, and is pondering about it, or is about to
address an audience on it. It is uncertain whether Birt is right; a
Vatican statue represents Poseidippus (one of the main representatives
of the Greek "New" Comedy) holding a roll in his right hand, but he
seems to have just]{.style_} [finished]{.style_1} [reading.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[What we do know about the rollers, comes from ancient literary sources;
as a matter of fact, no specimens of rollers appear to have yet been
discovered. On the other hand, in some cases the ends of the roll are
strengthened by an extra thickness of papyrus, and some papyrus rolls
had quills attached to one end, to serve as rollers.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-371}

::: calibre5
:::

::: calibre15
:::

## [History of Book Writing on Papyrus]{.style_2} {#history-of-book-writing-on-papyrus .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Papyrus was used in Egypt as far back as the third millennium B.C., if
not earlier. The earliest preserved papyrus---though
non-inscribed---seems to go back to the period of the First Dynasty. The
earliest hieratic papyri, acquired by Naville in 1893 in Cairo, and now
mainly preserved in Geneva, Cairo ([Fig.
IV--8](#calibre_link-104){.calibre9}), and in the British Museum, are
attributed to the period of King Issy or Izezi of the Fifth Dynasty.
Apparently they come from a temple near Abusir, where also a few other
fragments---belonging to the same period---were found in the excavations
of the German Oriental Society, and are in Berlin. Berlin Papyrus 9874
is reproduced []{#calibre_link-114}on [Fig.
IV---9](#calibre_link-111){.calibre9},]{.style_} [a.]{.style_1}
[Fragments, apparently found in the family archives of the Governor of
Elephantine, and assigned to the period of the Sixth Dynasty, were
acquired in 1896 in Aswân and Luxor. They are partly in Berlin (Pap.
9010, 8869, 10523), and partly in Strasbourg and in other collections.
Berlin Pap. 9010 is partly reproduced on [Fig.
IV---9](#calibre_link-111){.calibre9},]{.style_} [b,]{.style_1} [and
completely on Fig. 10,]{.style_} [left.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Moreover, some hieratic papyri of the Middle Kingdom---such as
the]{.style_} [Papyrus Prisse]{.style_1} [(see below)---contain copies
of much more ancient documents, dating even from the First to the Fourth
Dynasties (see p. 117). Furthermore, the fact that such documents were
commonly employed during the Old Kingdom]{.style_} [(c.]{.style_1}
[twenty-eighth to twenty-third centuries B.C.) is evidenced by the
constant appearance on Egyptian funerary monuments of this period of the
figure of the scribe with his rolls, his pens and his ink palette ([Fig.
IV---1](#calibre_link-93){.calibre9}). See []{#calibre_link-279}also
[Fig. XI---1](#calibre_link-112){.calibre9}]{.style_} [a,]{.style_1}
[representing ancient Egyptian writing palettes.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, even the papyri from the Middle Kingdom are not too plentiful.
An important specimen is the]{.style_} [Papyrus Prisse]{.style_1}
[]{#calibre_link-115}[([Fig. IV---11](#calibre_link-113){.calibre9}). It
was purchased from a native of Western Thebes by the French scholar, E.
Prisse d'Avennes, who was making excavations there. In 1847 it was given
by him to the Royal Library in Paris, now the National Library, where it
is preserved (Egypt., 183--94). The papyrus was written in hieratic
characters under the Eleventh or Twelfth Dynasty, the former date being
preferred by the editor of the]{.style_} [Papyrus Prisse]{.style_1} [(G.
Jéquier), the latter date by other experts, such as G.
Moeller.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It supplies us with a copy, more or less accurate, of the text of two
"wisdom" treatises supposed to have been compiled by Ke'gemni, who is
said to have lived in the reign of uni, of the Fourth Dynasty]{.style_}
[(c.]{.style_1} [2650 B.C.), and by Pta - otep, the vizier of King
Izezi, of the Fifth Dynasty (c. 2450 B.C.). It is thus one of the chief
collections of Egyptian moral and religious teachings, written in the
early second millennium B.C., and the works contained in it, if we are
to believe their own statements, were composed respectively in the first
half of the third millennium, and c. 2450. Later copies of this work,
belonging to the Eighteenth Dynasty, are the British Museum Papyri
10371, 10435, and 10509.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000139.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-111}

[[Fig. IV---9](#calibre_link-114){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Hieratic papyri. a. One of the earliest documents. Fifth Dynasty
(Berlin Papyrus 9874); b, portion ol Berlin Papyrus 9010, attributed to
the period of the Sixth Dynasty; c. Berlin Papyrus 3024 attributed to
the period of the Middle Kingdom ; d. Berlin Papyrus 3033 (Early New
Kingdom).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000140.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. IV--10]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Berlin Papyrus 8523, attributed to the period of the Late New
Kingdom; (left) Elephantine Papyrus belonging to the period of the Sixth
Dynasty (Berlin Papyrus 9010).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-372}

::: calibre15
:::

## [THE "BOOK OF THE DEAD" ([Fig. IV---6](#calibre_link-101){.calibre13} and 7)]{.style_2} {#the-book-of-the-dead-fig.-iv6-and-7 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The preservation of many Egyptian manuscripts---which have lain buried
in hermetically sealed tombs and jars for thousands of years, and only a
few generations ago have been brought to the light of day again---is
mainly due to the fact that the Egyptians looked upon death as a
continuation of this life, and believed that magical formulae,
the]{.style_} [glorifications,]{.style_1} [as they called them, when
buried with the deceased individual, would secure eternal happiness for
him. They served as a kind of guide book, as a Baedeker, so to say, for
his safe guidance to the gates of Amenti (the Egyptian underworld), and
contained instructions as to prayers, "negative confessions", and
magical formulae, including denials of guilt in various enumerated
crimes and shortcomings, to be uttered when confronted with the monsters
and demons who guarded the sacred portals, or before a posthumous
court.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest recension of such texts is the so-called Pyramid-text or
"Pyramid Recension"; these texts are found carved in the pyramids at
Saqqârah of Unis (the last king of the Fifth Dynasty, twenty-fifth
century B.C.) and Nefer-ka-Re or Pepi I, of the Sixth Dynasty
(twenty-fourth century B.C.). From the use of archaic phraseology, it is
not unreasonable to suppose that these texts must have been written much
earlier than the Fifth Dynasty; and it is very probable that they were
written on some perishable material before being carved on
stone.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The massive sarcophagi prepared for kings, queens, and persons of rank
or wealth were also carved with scenes and inscriptions, in relief or
intaglio, chiefly containing ritual texts of magical formulae. Under the
Middle Kingdom the inside of the sarcophagi and especially of the wooden
coffins was closely inscribed with such texts, and the inner coffins
were generally similarly inscribed all over.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In later times, when these mortuary texts increased more and more in
number, they had not room enough for them on the sides of the coffin.
Under the New Kingdom, therefore, they were written out on rolls of
papyrus, which were decorated with vignettes, and bound up inside the
bandages of the mummy, or placed in painted wooden figures representing
divinities, or in cavities of the stands, which were buried with the
dead. These texts had been collected by modern scholars under the name
of the]{.style_} [Book of the Dead]{.style_1}[---be it noted,
incidentally, that this name is entirely modern.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000142.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-113}

[[Fig. IV--11](#calibre_link-115){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Page 1 of Papyrus Prisse (National Library, Paris, Nos. 183-194): this
extremely important manuscript is variously attributed to the period of
the eleventhy or to that of the Twelfth Dynasty.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest papyrus copy extant of the]{.style_} [Book of the
Dead]{.style_1} [is assigned to the early Eighteenth Dynasty (second
quarter of the sixteenth century B.C.); it contains the "Heliopolitan
Recension". At the same time, or slightly later, there appear papyri
inscribed with selections of texts known as the "Theban
Recension".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Fine copies of these papyri vary in length from fifteen feet to ninety
feet, and in width from twelve to eighteen inches. The texts are written
in black ink in vertical columns of hieroglyphics, separated by black
lines, but the titles, the first words of the chapters, and the
"rubrics", are written in red ink. There are also designs or vignettes,
traced in black outline, and partly copied from earlier coffins. On the
other hand, hardly any original literary work of that period has been
preserved.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The most famous papyrus of the Eighteenth Dynasty (1570---]{.style_}
[c.]{.style_1} [1350 B.C.) is the]{.style_} [Papyrus of Ani,]{.style_1}
[already referred to. It is a long roll of fine papyrus about fifteen
inches wide; the writing is enclosed within a double border composed of
two lines of colour, the inner one of brick-red, the outer of dull
yellow. The text is arranged in vertical columns, inch wide; it is
adorned at intervals with brightly coloured and well-drawn pictures and
vignettes, illustrating the passage of the deceased (Ani, a royal scribe
and overseer of granaries at Thebes) and his wife to the abode of bliss,
and with representations of many strange gods. The papyrus, obtained in
1888 by E. A. W. Budge, is preserved in the British Museum (10470); it
has been reproduced in facsimile by Sir P. Le Page Renouf, 1890, and
re-edited by Sir E. A. W. Budge in 1913. See [Fig.
IV--6](#calibre_link-101){.calibre9},]{.style_} [b.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The copies of the]{.style_} [Book of the Dead]{.style_1} [of the
Nineteenth Dynasty (1319---1205 B.C.) are also beautifully decorated;
the vignettes are painted in very bright colours, but the texts are
sacrificed to the illustrations as shown, for instance, by the
splendid]{.style_} [Hunefer Papyrus.]{.style_1} [Sec also the
forthcoming book on]{.style_} [Illumination and Binding.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Under the Twenty-first and Twenty-second Dynasties (c.
1150---]{.style_} [c.]{.style_1} [750 B.C.) the decline of Egypt set in
fully; it is noticeable, too, that the artistic and calligraphic work of
the]{.style_} [Book of the Dead]{.style_1} [greatly deteriorated. Papyri
with inaccurate texts became more and more common. "It became customary
to write in hieratic and to trace the vignettes in outline in black ink.
Some papyri measure about fifty feet by one foot six inches, but in
others the dimensions are considerably less" (Budge).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-373}

::: calibre5
:::

## [LATE EGYPTIAN BOOKS]{.style_2} {#late-egyptian-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[After Ashurbanipal's invasion of Egypt, a brief period of revival was
at hand. Psamtik I (or Psammetichus), c. 663---609 B.C., of Saïs,
succeeded in establishing a new dynasty: the Twenty-sixth. With the
political, religious and artistic renaissance, Egypt enjoyed a revival
of literature.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The]{.style_} [Book of the Dead]{.style_1} [was re-edited and partly
re-arranged (possibly by an assembly of priests). More important,
however, is the "Ptolemaic Recension", in which the chapters have a
fixed crder. The text is written, as in the earliest recension, in long,
vertical columns of hieroglyphics (which have, however, a purely
conventional form), separated by black lines. The vignettes are traced
in outline in black and, with a few exceptions, occupy small spaces at
the top of the text.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Small portions of this recension were written upon papyri a few inches
square and buried with the dead. The most primitive formulae and
practices, however, continued to be the basis of religious ceremonies,
and there is sufficient evidence to show that the knowledge of the old
recensions of the]{.style_} [Book of the Dead]{.style_1} [was not quite
forgotten even in the early centuries after Christ.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Egyptian (including Coptic) book illustration will be treated more
fully in the volume on]{.style_} [Illumination and Binding.]{.style_1}

[]{#calibre_link-374}

::: calibre5
:::

## [LANGUAGES AND SCRIPTS USED ON PAPYRI]{.style_2} {#languages-and-scripts-used-on-papyri .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[([Figs. IV---2](#calibre_link-95){.calibre9}---4, 6---18; VI---1---6,
9, 11)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Egyptian papyri are written in hieratic ([Fig.
IV---2](#calibre_link-95){.calibre9}---4, 8---11), hieroglyphic ([Fig.
IV---6](#calibre_link-101){.calibre9}---7), demotic and Coptic
[]{#calibre_link-123}([Fig. IV---14](#calibre_link-116){.calibre9}).
There are also papyri written in other languages and scripts: Aramaic
[]{#calibre_link-124}([Fig.
IV---15](#calibre_link-117){.calibre9},]{.style_} [c]{.style_1} [and
17,]{.style_} [above),]{.style_1} [Greek ([Figs.
IV---12](#calibre_link-94){.calibre9}, 13, 15, 18
[]{#calibre_link-160}and [VI---1](#calibre_link-118){.calibre9}---6, and
9), Latin []{#calibre_link-121}([Fig.
IV---13](#calibre_link-119){.calibre9},]{.style_} [bottom,]{.style_1}
[15,]{.style_} [g]{.style_1}[, 16; VI---11), Persian ([Fig.
IV---15](#calibre_link-117){.calibre9},]{.style_} [e]{.style_1}[),
Arabic ([Fig. IV---15](#calibre_link-117){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[f]{.style_1}[), Hebrew ([Fig.
IV---12](#calibre_link-94){.calibre9},]{.style_} [b]{.style_1}[,
15,]{.style_} [d,]{.style_1} [and 17,]{.style_} [below)]{.style_1} [and
Syriac ([Fig. IV---15](#calibre_link-117){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[b).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Papyrus was known also in Assyria, but in Prof. G. R. Driver's opinion
the word by which "papyrus" is known, seems to be first mentioned in a
text of the Assyrian king Sargon (721---705 B.C.).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-375}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ARAMAIC AND HEBREW PAPYRI ([Fig. IV---12](#calibre_link-94){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [b]{.style_2}[, 15,]{.style_2} [c]{.style_2} [and]{.style_2} [d]{.style_2}[, and 17)]{.style_2} {#aramaic-and-hebrew-papyri-fig.-iv12-b-15-c-and-d-and-17 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Nearly a hundred official and private documents, written on papyri,
dated in the fifth century B.C., were found in 1903 on the island of
Elephantine at the First Cataract in Egypt. The documents, coming from a
Jewish military colony settled there, are written in Aramaic
(the]{.style_} [lingua franca]{.style_1} [of the ancient Near East of
the day), and give us valuable information of a religious and economic
nature concerning this colony. The earliest Aramaic papyrus found in
Egypt seems to belong to 515 B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000143.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-94}

[[Fig. IV---12](#calibre_link-120){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Hieratic, Greek, and Hebrew papyri. a, Papyrus Sallier II (British
Museum, 10182), Col. IX; b, Nash Papyrus (University Library,
Cambridge); c, one of the few documents extant written in the Doric
dialect.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000144.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-119}

[[Fig. IV---13](#calibre_link-121){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Greek and Latin papyri: a, fragment of a lost Greek tragedy (written in
a broad rather sloping uncial character))with scholia written in a
cursive hand, third century A.D. (British Museum, Papyrus 695); b,
fragment of a lost philosophical work, third century B.C. (Bodleian
Library, MS. Gr. Class., e, 63); in the middle, Greek fragment dated to
the seventh year of Nero; bottom, Latin papyrus, belonging to the first
century A.D.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[There are not many Hebrew papyri extant, and they are mainly late. Some
of them are in the British Museum, some in the Bodleian Library, at
Oxford, and in other collections. An extremely interesting Hebrew
papyrus codex has been preserved at the Cambridge University Library
[]{#calibre_link-126}([Fig.
IV---17](#calibre_link-122){.calibre9},]{.style_} [below]{.style_1}[).
It has been dismantled to facilitate the reading of its
contents.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000145.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-116}

[[Fig. IV---14](#calibre_link-123){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Papyrus Q: Oldest Coptic Gospel (St. John). Fourth century A.D. Bible
House Library, London.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The celebrated]{.style_} [Nash Papyrus]{.style_1} [([Fig.
IV---12](#calibre_link-94){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[b]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[,]{.style_1} [containing the Hebrew Decalogue
and]{.style_} [Shema]{.style_1}[', and assigned by some scholars to the
first or the second century B.C., is also preserved in the Cambridge
University Library.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-376}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Papyrus, the Main Writing Material for Books of the Graeco-Roman World]{.style_2} {#papyrus-the-main-writing-material-for-books-of-the-graeco-roman-world .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Although there is hardly any doubt that papyrus-roll books were used in
Greece in very early times, the date of the introduction of papyrus into
that country is uncertain. Curiously enough, on Greek soil there are
only two references to papyrus before Alexander the Great; one, on an
inscription in Athens of the late fifth century B.C., and the other, on
an inscription in the Peloponnese, of the fourth century B.C. In
addition, a beautiful fifth-century Attic relief on a tomb, now
preserved at Grottaferrata, near Rome, represents a boy reading from a
roll, which is obviously a papyrus roll.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[On the other hand, the passage of Herodotus (v. 58) may be taken as
evidence that by the middle of the fifth century B.C. papyrus was the
only writing material for the books of all civilized peoples. It also
shows that in earlier times some other writing material
(]{.style_}[i.e]{.style_1}[. leather) was used only under the pressure
of necessity.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Papyrus, then, was not only in general use in the Greek lands at least
from the sixth century B.C. onwards, but its use also covers at least
the period of the lyric poets (see Chapter VI), and there is no reason
why it should not be carried back even to the beginning of Greek
literature. Furthermore, if there was writing in the days of Homer and
Hesiod, it is a probable corollary that the material used was
papyrus.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This last suggestion may be confirmed by the explanation of the origin
of the word]{.style_} [biblíon,]{.style_1} [the Greek term for "book".
Indeed, the Egyptian]{.style_} [Story of Wenamûn,]{.style_1} [written on
papyrus]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 1100 B.C. (see p. 122) is strictly
connected with the ancient city of Byblos, in northern Syria, though Sir
Alan Gardiner is probably right in his statement that "It is often
confidently asserted that the actual Greek words for 'papyrus-reed'
(]{.style_}[býblos]{.style_1}[) and for 'book'
(]{.style_}[biblíon]{.style_1}[) are derived from the name of the said
Phoenician city,]{.style_} [Gublu]{.style_1} [in Babylonian,
and]{.style_} [Kupni]{.style_1} [in Egyptian. Perhaps a more plausible
view is that the Greek form of that place-name was in part due to the
assonance, and in part to the knowledge of the role played by Byblus in
the diffusion of papyrus." However, the fact must be duly considered
that from the tenth century onwards, Byblos declined and was replaced as
the leading city of Phoenicia by Tyre and Sidon. Therefore, from the
Greek usage of the place-name Byblos to indicate "papyrus-reed" and
"book", we may assume that the Greeks knew papyrus before the tenth
century B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000146.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-117}

[[Fig. IV---15](#calibre_link-124){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Miscellanea: a. Euripides, Melanippe (Berlin, Papyrus 5514); b, Syriac
papyrus of the sixth century A.D. (Berlin Papyrus 8285); c, Aramaic
papyrus (Berlin Papyrus 3206); d, Hebrew papyrus of the seventh or
eighth century A.D. (Berlin Papyrus 8280); e. Persian papyrus attributed
to c. 619---29A.D. (Berlin Papyrus 8354); f, Arabic papyrus of the early
eighth century A.D. (Berlin Papyrus 7901); g, Latin letter dated 7th
October, 167 A.D. (British Museum, Papyrus 730.)]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[At any rate, it is probable that the Greeks employed papyrus from the
tenth century B.C. onwards. There can be no doubt that at least from the
seventh century B.C. onwards, the papyrus roll was the regular material
for book production in Greece; it continued to be so throughout the
classical, Hellenistic and Graeco-Roman periods up to the fourth century
A.D.,]{.style_} [i.e]{.style_1}[. for over a millennium, and it lingered
on as writing material down to about the year A.D. 1000. From the
classical period, however, no specimens are extant. With very few
exceptions, the material now available comes from Egypt, which from the
late fourth century B.C. onwards became more or less completely
Hellenized.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[For the papyri unearthed at Herculaneum, see pp. 251---58.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A number of literary and non-literary papyri---poorly preserved ---were
found in 1937, in southern Palestine, during the excavations at 'Auja
el-Hafir (the site of ancient Nesana) by the American Colt
Archaeological Expedition. The find included three manuscripts of the
New Testament---fragments of papyrus codices written in uncials or
capital letters, of the seventh or eighth century; and two fragments of
Latin papyrus manuscripts---a Latin-Greek glossary of Virgil's]{.style_}
[Aeneid]{.style_1} [and fragments of]{.style_} [Aeneid,]{.style_1}
[ii---vi, both attributed to the sixth century A.D. See L. Casson and E.
L. Hettich,]{.style_} [Excavations at Nessana]{.style_1}[, Princeton,
1950, Vol. II:]{.style_} [Literary Papyri.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[ROME]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[As to the employment of papyrus by the Romans, it will suffice here to
quote two eminent scholars; in Chapter VI the subject will be dealt with
in greater detail. "The form in which literature was preserved and
circulated during the earlier period of the history of Rome did not
differ from that which prevailed in the Greek world" (M. R. James).
"Egypt supplied the whole Roman Empire, from Hadrian's Wall to the
Euphrates and from the Danube to the First Cataract, and papyrus was
used as naturally by Irenaeus in Gaul, as by Origen in Alexandria" (C.
H. Roberts).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[To sum up, although at no time in the ancient world was papyrus as
writing material manufactured outside Egypt it was for many centuries
the chief material for writing in the Greek and Roman worlds, both for
literary and for all ordinary purposes, such as legal documents,
receipts, notices of birth, and official and private letters.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000147.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. IV---16]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Latin papyrus written on both sides: (left) obverse. Military document
of A.D. 163---72; (right) reverse, Fragment of an unknown grammatical
treatise of the early third century A.D.: Museum of Archaeology,
University of Michigan (Papyrus 4649).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-377}

## [THE ALEXANDRINA]{.style_2} {#the-alexandrina .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The establishment of the great Alexandrian Museum and Library ---see p.
268 ff.---led to improvements in the manufacture of papyrus and its
increased production. The deep influence exercised by the Alexandrian
scholars "in establishing the texts and often the authenticity of
classical works has always been recognized", and there can be no doubt
that these scholars did their work with skill and thoroughness (C. H.
Roberts).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The labours of the Alexandrian scholars of the third and second
centuries B.C. were fruitful in separating authentic from spurious
writings, in the revision of texts of, and commentaries upon, the best
Greek poets and writers, in useful selection of the best texts from the
enormous mass of literature which had come down to them. These
Alexandrian scholars were eminent in letters as well as in
science.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Zenodotus of Ephesus, the head of the Alexandrian Library in the reign
of Ptolemy Philadelphus (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 282---247 B.C.),
published a Homeric and a Hesiodic recension and glossary; his
successor, Callimachus of Cyrene (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 246---235
B.C.), the Father of Bibliography, composed the famous]{.style_}
[Pinakes]{.style_1}[, a catalogue in 120 books of the chief writers in
every branch of literature; his successor, Eratosthenes
(]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 230---195 B.C.), was the author of
mathematical, astronomical, geographical, poetical, philosophical,
historical and critical works, and dealt also with theatres, scenery,
actors, dresses, and poetical styles. Aristophanes of Byzantium
(195---180 B.C.), who succeeded Eratosthenes, was a great librarian and
critic; he published an edition of Aristophanes, the best representative
of the Greek Old Comedy (see p. 233), and drew up a list of the great
Greek poets. Aristarchus of Samothrace (flourished in the middle of the
second century B.C.) was the last head of the Alexandrina who was a
giant in scholarship and librarianship. He is generally considered as
the greatest critic of the Alexandrian scholars, and indeed of
antiquity, and as the greatest scholar of antiquity. He wrote
commentaries on Homer, including the mythology, archaeology and
topography of the poems. He also wrote twenty-four books on]{.style_}
[Historical Monuments]{.style_1}[. Aristarchus is mainly known from
the]{.style_} [Epitome]{.style_1} [of Didymus---the last famous scholar
of Alexandria (flourished]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 30 B.C.), who
himself was a grammarian and critic.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[See also Chapter VI.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-378}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PAPYROLOGY]{.style_2} {#papyrology .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The importance of the papyrus as the chief writing material of the
ancient Graeco-Roman world and of the papyri discovered in the last
seventy-five years is so great, that it resulted in the emergence of a
whole department of humanistic science, known as]{.style_}
[papyrology]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the widest sense of the word, papyrology is the science of the use
of papyrus; it should thus deal with the growth of the plant and with
its manufacture, as well as with the production of books made of
papyrus, as employed by the Egyptian and by other peoples of antiquity.
In the conventional sense, however, papyrology treats of the writings
which happen to have come down to us on papyrus, especially in Greek,
and belong particularly to the period in which Egypt was more or less
completely under Hellenic influence, and Greek was its main cultural
language. The beginning of this period may be fixed at 322 B.C.,
corresponding with the conquest of Egypt by Alexander the Great, and the
end with the Arabic conquest of Egypt in A.D. 641.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The number of the preserved Greek papyri is estimated at about 30,000.
The majority of these manuscripts are of slight interest to the world at
large, being principally collections of]{.style_} [magical
formulae]{.style_1}[, monetary accounts, leases, legal documents, wills,
and other private documents; but here and there works of classical
literature have been recovered (see Chapter VI), though always in a more
or less fragmentary state. Thanks to papyrology, however, we have at our
disposal a wealth of detailed information of so great a variety that
there is no region and no period in antiquity of which we know so well
the full daily life as Gracco-Roman Egypt. Modern literature, Biblical
criticism, classical philology, palaeography, political administration,
economic and legal history, and other fields of knowledge, have
benefited largely from these documents.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Papyrology is one of the best-organized fields of modern studies; an
unusual spirit of collaboration between classical scholars and
specialists in law, sciences, economics, agriculture, history of
religion, anthropology, and other branches of knowledge, has made
possible the publication of numerous texts with translations,
commentaries and glossaries, as well as of handbooks. On the other hand,
there are a great many papyri that have not yet been published,
especially those of the smaller collections, and there is a great number
of fragments, which have disappeared from excavations, are stowed away
in private or small public collections, and are rapidly disintegrating
into dust, as their preservation in climates less favourable than that
of Egypt requires greater care than they are given.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The word papyrology itself seems to have made its appearance in 1898.
Still, the first written papyrus brought (by the commercial traveller
Nicholas Schow) from Egypt to Europe in modern times, the]{.style_}
[Papyrus Schow]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [Charta Borgiana]{.style_1}
[(preserved in Naples), reached the Italian cardinal Stefano Borgia in
1778. During the next century, only about 175 texts were published; but
in 1877 thousands of documents were brought to light from the Greek
rubbish heaps of Arsinoë (Medinet el-Fayyûm).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-379}

::: calibre5
:::

## [GRAECO-ROMAN PAPYRUS BOOKS]{.style_2} {#graeco-roman-papyrus-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The real emergence of papyrology into a place of paramount importance
dates from the last decade of the last century. This period was marked
by a succession of notable events: Flinders Petrie's excavation of the
Ptolemaic cemetery at Gurob (near the mouth of the Fayyûm) in the winter
1889---90; the papyri discovered were published in 1891; F. G. Kenyon's
identification (on 26.2.1890) of Aristotle's treatise]{.style_} [Athénaí
n Politeía]{.style_1}[; the discovery in 1893 of a considerable group of
fourth-century (A.D.) documents; the 1895---6 expedition (under B. P.
Grenfell, A. S. Hunt, and D. G. Hogarth) of the Egypt Exploration Fund,
for the discovery of papyri; and, especially, the most rewarding
excavations (from 11.1.1897 onwards) of Grenfell and Hunt in the rubbish
mounds of the ancient town of Oxyrhynchus; all these events are
milestones in the early development of this branch of
knowledge.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-380}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ATHENAION POLITEIA ([Fig. VI---4](#calibre_link-109){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#athenaion-politeia-fig.-vi4 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Greek manuscript containing Aristotle's]{.style_} [Ath naí n
Politeía]{.style_1} [("Constitution of Athens"), repeatedly referred to,
had been lost for many centuries, and was known to scholars only by
short quotations. The discovered manuscript---published in 1891 by F. G.
Kenyon---contains thirty-seven columns, written on four separate rolls
(the last being in fragments) of rather coarse papyrus, the cross fibres
and the joinings of the pages of which are distinctly visible. The rolls
measure respectively 7 feet inches, 5 feet inches, 3 feet and 3 feet.
The width of the rolls is about 11 inches, except the last which is
about 10 inches wide. The papyrus is of a dull brown colour.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Four different handwritings appear in the manuscript, all probably
belonging to the late first or early second century A.D. The manuscript
is a sort of palimpsest (see the following chapter): the Aristotle is
written on the]{.style_} [verso]{.style_1} [(that is, on the back),
while the accounts of the under-manager of an Egyptian farm are written
on the]{.style_} [recto]{.style_1}[; these accounts are dated to the
years corresponding to A.D. 78 and 79.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-381}

::: calibre5
:::

## [EARLIEST BIBLICAL PAPYRI]{.style_2} {#earliest-biblical-papyri .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Most interesting are the fragments of a papyrus roll now preserved in
the John Rylands Library, at Manchester (]{.style_}[Pap. Gr.
458]{.style_1}[): []{#calibre_link-170}see [Fig.
VI---9](#calibre_link-125){.calibre9},]{.style_} [above]{.style_1}[.
They are from the book of]{.style_} [Deuteronomy]{.style_1} [and are
assigned to the second century B.C., thus being the earliest extant
manuscripts of the]{.style_} [Septuagint]{.style_1}[. Also the oldest
existing fragments of the New Testament are preserved in the John
Rylands Library (]{.style_}[Pap. Gr. 457]{.style_1}[): see [Fig.
VI---9](#calibre_link-125){.calibre9},]{.style_} [below]{.style_1}[.
They are from the]{.style_} [Gospel of St. John]{.style_1} [(Ch. xviii),
and are assigned to the first half of the second century A.D.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-382}

::: calibre5
:::

## [GREEK SCIENCE]{.style_2} {#greek-science .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The importance of papyrology for our knowledge of Greek science is due
to the fact, emphasized by Neugebauer, that the majority of manuscripts
on which our knowledge of Greek science is based, are Byzantine codices,
written between five hundred and fifteen hundred years after the
lifetime of their authors. Hence, the importance of every scrap of
papyrus from a scientific or astrological treatise, of originals which
were written during the Hellenistic period itself, not yet subject to
the selective editing of later centuries.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-383}

::: calibre5
:::

## [TEXTS WRITTEN ON PAPYRUS]{.style_2} {#texts-written-on-papyrus .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

["Different materials encourage different sorts of pen stroke in the
quick writer and set different artistic ideals before the calligrapher."
Although "In the Timotheus papyrus (see [Fig.
VI---3](#calibre_link-107){.calibre9}) the irregular epigraphic forms
have not succumbed to the soft material, and the books of the third
century had not yet settled down to the typical papyrus hand, yet
fourth-century cursive must certainly have grown out of any such
awkwardness, for a long development lies behind such a hand as" the
cursive document of 255---4, B.C. published in]{.style_} [Pal. Soc.,
ii]{.style_1}[, 142 (Minns).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It has been observed in]{.style_} [The Alphabet]{.style_1} [(p. 64)
that in Egypt, in drawing on papyrus, which was mainly used for cursive
writing, the brush-pen naturally gave to the signs a bolder, more
cursive form, and little by little, alongside the hieroglyphic system a
cursive form was developed, in which the signs lost more and more their
original pictorial character. From the seventh century B.C. onwards a
highly cursive derivative of hieratic, known as demotic (see]{.style_}
[The Alphabet]{.style_1}[, p. 67), gradually developed.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In Greece and Rome while the classical alphabets were always retained
as the monumental scripts, more cursive forms, all of them being
developments from the classical alphabets, were employed in writing on
papyrus, and later on parchment. It was the pen, with its preference for
curves, which eliminated the angular forms; it was papyrus, and still
more parchment, which made these curves possible. Thus, both in Greece
and Rome, from the classical alphabets there sprang the Greek uncial,
cursive and minuscule scripts, and the Latin uncial, semi-uncial,
cursive and minuscule hands.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In Greek and Latin papyrus texts, words are generally not divided and
initials are not marked, though in more cursive hands there may be an
unconscious division; these divisions are sometimes very misleading, a
new word beginning in the middle of a ligature. In some cases, however,
when there might be ambiguity, a dot or inverted comma was used as a
separation mark. Accents and breathings are rarely used, being commonest
in epic or lyric poetry; generally they have been added by a different
hand. Punctuation is seldom used; it is never full and systematic; it is
most uncertain and arbitrary; it may consist either of a single point,
mostly placed on the level with the top of the letter, or of a short
stroke called]{.style_} [parágraphos]{.style_1} [(hence our word
"paragraph"), which is placed under last line of a clause, below the
first letters of this line. Sometimes there is a short blank space
before the new paragraph. Ends of metrical divisions are sometimes
indicated by a]{.style_} [coronis]{.style_1} [or hook placed before
the]{.style_} [parágraphos]{.style_1}[. The]{.style_}
[coronis]{.style_1} [often assumed fanciful shapes, as for instance in
the Timotheus papyrus, where it is in the form of a bird ([Fig.
VI---3](#calibre_link-107){.calibre9}). Titles of the books are
sometimes placed at the end of the roll. Some collections of poems have
titles of individual poems; these titles are prefixed to the poems, but
they are later additions. See also p. 139.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Sir Frederic Kenyon doubts whether in Graeco-Roman times there were
organized corps of scribes such as those of the Middle Ages (see p. 205
ff.), though the libraries of Alexandria, Pergamum, and so on, probably
had]{.style_} [scriptoria]{.style_1} [similar to those of the medieval
monasteries. However, while some preserved papyri obviously were written
by skilled scribes (the errors having been corrected), others are the
work of more or less bad copyists, and contain numerous scribal errors.
Greek scribes never attained the meticulous accuracy of the copyists of
the Hebrew Scriptures. Finally, there are so many variations in the
handwritings of the papyri extant that only in rare instances can close
resemblances be found between two manuscripts.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000148.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-122}

[[Fig. IV---17](#calibre_link-126){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Aramaic papyrus from Elephantine (a Jewish military colony in
Upper Egypt), attributed to the fifth century B.C.; (below) Hebrew
papyrus codex now dismantled of the eighth or ninth century A.D.
(University Library, Cambridge).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-384}

## [PAPYRUS CODICES ([Fig. IV---17](#calibre_link-122){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [below]{.style_2}[, and 18; VI---1,]{.style_2} [c]{.style_2}[, and 11)]{.style_2} {#papyrus-codices-fig.-iv17-below-and-18-vi1-c-and-11 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Until twenty years ago, it was supposed that as a "book" the papyrus
roll was employed almost, if not quite, exclusively up to the time when
papyrus was superseded by vellum (fourth century A.D.). It is now known
that this is only partly true; it is, indeed, mainly true for pagan
writings, but is less true for early Christian writings.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The roll was somewhat inconvenient, especially for books so much used
for reference as those of the Bible. There was no easy way to collect
information from a number of different works, or to refer to particular
passages in larger rolls; to find a given section might necessitate
unrolling the book to the very end. Consequently, those engaged in any
kind of literary research were induced to transcribe extracts from books
on the]{.style_} [pugillares]{.style_1} [(see Chapter I). These were
fastened together in a]{.style_} [codex]{.style_1} [(see p. 35), as in a
modern book. At a somewhat later period, the]{.style_}
[pugillares]{.style_1} [were replaced by leaves of papyrus.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[How early the codex form of papyrus books was in use we cannot say, but
it was certainly in use among the Christians from the early part of the
second century. Indeed, some early codices are assigned to the second
century A.D.; these are,]{.style_} [e.g.,]{.style_1} [a fragmentary leaf
of the Fourth Gospel, two leaves of an unknown Gospel, and a fragmentary
codex of]{.style_} [Numbers]{.style_1} [and]{.style_}
[Deuteronomy;]{.style_1} [another important specimen extant in codex
form is a papyrus leaf from Egypt of the third century A.D. containing
the]{.style_} [Sayings of Jesus]{.style_1} [(see p. 2.45,
[]{#calibre_link-128}and [Fig.
IV---18](#calibre_link-127){.calibre9}).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The employment of the codex may, perhaps, go back to the first century
B.C. An inscription found at Priene, belonging to the beginning of the
first century B.C., makes mention apparently of]{.style_}
[codices]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[teúkh]{.style_1} [) both of papyrus and
of parchment, in which the public acts of the city had been transcribed,
and, at Rome in 52 B.C., the]{.style_} [codices librariorum]{.style_1}
[formed part of the pyre which an angry mob kindled under the corpse of
Clodius. These]{.style_} [codices]{.style_1} [were probably transcripts
of official documents, like those of Priene. Furthermore, Martial (late
first century A.D.) mentions a text of Virgil, which was probably a
codex (Martial, xiv, 186).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, the earliest extant papyrus codex belongs to the middle second
century A.D. Together with ten other papyrus codices, attributed to the
third to fifth centuries A.D., it was bought in Egypt by A. Chester
Beatty in 1931. All contain Christian literature, though mainly from the
Old Testament. The Berlin Museum Pap. No. 217 is also a second-century
(A.D. codex.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Of great importance is the fragmentary codex, containing portions of
thirty-three leaves, of the]{.style_} [Minor Prophets]{.style_1}[, now
preserved in the Freer Collection, at Washington. It is known
as]{.style_} [Cod. V]{.style_1}[, and is assigned to the second half of
the third century A.D. Another early codex is the]{.style_} [Berlin
Genesis]{.style_1} [(State Library, Berlin,]{.style_} [Gr. fol.
66]{.style_1}[, 1, 11), containing portions of thirty-two leaves, and
assigned to the early fourth century A.D.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[With regard to secular literature, we may mention a papyrus codex, of
the third century A.D., containing]{.style_} [Iliad]{.style_1}[,
ii---iv, and written on one side only of each leaf, which is preserved
in the British Museum (Pap. 126, [Fig.
VI---1](#calibre_link-118){.calibre9},]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[).
Several books of magic, belonging to the fourth century, are preserved
in the British Museum and in Paris. A fragmentary manuscript, of the
fourth century, containing parts of]{.style_} [Aetia]{.style_1}
[and]{.style_} [Iambi]{.style_1} [by Callimachus, comes from
Oxyrhynchus. Interesting Christian codices of the seventh century are
preserved in Heidelberg, Dublin and Paris. There are several Coptic
papyrus codices extant, of which the most important, containing four
plays by Menander, was discovered in 1905, and is attributed to the
fifth century A.D.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[An examination of all the manuscripts discovered in Oxyrhynchus up to
1926, has given the following results: There are no earlier papyrus
codices than the third century A.D. From this century onwards the
figures---which are supported by the discoveries from other sites---are
given in the table.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000149.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[It is evident from this table and from what has been said previously
that if the codex form of the papyrus book was not actually a Christian
invention, it was most promptly employed by the Christian community, and
it was the growth of this community which brought it into prominence.
Indeed, whereas the roll continued to be commonly used for works of
pagan literature during the second and third centuries A.D., the
majority of Christian works were already in codex form.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-385}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ARRANGEMENT OF PAPYRUS CODICES]{.style_2} {#arrangement-of-papyrus-codices .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The papyrus codices were bound like our modern book in groups of sheets
or quires---a sheet of papyrus was folded in the middle, thus forming
two leaves or four pages; by fastening together a number of such quires,
a codex could be formed; or, a number of such sheets could be laid one
on top of another and the whole folded so as to produce a multiple-quire
codex. Examples are extant composed of as many as fifty-nine such
sheets, or 118 leaves. This form must have been very inconvenient, and
ultimately it was found that quires of about ten or twelve leaves was
the more convenient form. As a result of the gradual change, from rolls
to codices, the narrow columns of short lines have been widened, and
while there are papyrus codices which have two columns on a page---the
columns being only about two inches wide---the great majority of the
preserved papyrus codices have only one column.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Unlike the vellum codices---to which stabbed binding was not
suited---the papyri codices were mainly stabbed, "that is to say, the
rectangular pages were kept in position by a binding cord laced through
holes pierced sideways, right through the entire of the back of the
book. The marks of these holes can often be seen along the inner margins
of ancient papyri, and they also show in many instances of rebound
copies of our early English printed books" (C. Davenport).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Another essential difference is that while a large sheet of vellum was
usually folded in both directions, vertically and horizontally, and thus
formed quires of two, four, eight or sixteen leaves, papyrus was not
tall enough to be folded in more than one direction, and it was not
flexible enough to be folded more than once. Hence, the codex was formed
either of single-sheet quires, or of multiple quires consisting of
sheets folded only once. Indeed, some papyrus codices formed, as said,
single quires, containing as many as 118 leaves or 236 pages, though
other codices consisted of quires of four, five or six sheets,
respectively forming eight, ten or twelve leaves.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In making up the codex, the sheets were usually arranged with
the]{.style_} [recto]{.style_1} [side (]{.style_}[i.e]{.style_1}[. the
side having its fibres vertical) uppermost; thus in the first half of
the quire the]{.style_} [verso]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[i.e]{.style_1}[.
the side having its fibres horizontal) would precede the]{.style_}
[recto]{.style_1}[, and in the second half the]{.style_}
[recto]{.style_1} [would precede the]{.style_} [verso.]{.style_1} [There
are, however, codices in which]{.style_} [recto]{.style_1}
[faces]{.style_} [recto,]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [verso]{.style_1}
[faces]{.style_} [verso.]{.style_1} [While all the Greek codices are
arranged in one way or another, the Coptic codices, such as British
Museum Or. 5000 and 5001 appear to be arranged irregularly.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000150.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-127}

[[Fig. IV---18](#calibre_link-128){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Sayings of Jesus, fragment of a papyrus codex found at Oxyrhynchus
and preserved in the Bodleian Library, at Oxford ; attributed to the
third century A.D.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The dimensions of the papyrus codices vary greatly. While some Chester
Beatty manuscripts measure between 8 × 7 inches, or , and 11 × 7, the
pages of the great Menander codex at Cairo measure inches and the Cyril
at Paris and Dublin measures 12 × inches. Coptic codices are even
larger; Or. 5984 of the British Museum, containing the]{.style_}
[Sapiential Books,]{.style_1} [measures as much as inches; on the other
hand, a Coptic]{.style_} [Gospels of St. John]{.style_1} [measures only
10 × 5 inches. Unusually tall and narrow is a Chester Beatty codex,
measuring 14 × 5 inches.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-386}

::: calibre5
:::

## [LAST STAGE OF EMPLOYMENT OF PAPYRUS]{.style_2} {#last-stage-of-employment-of-papyrus .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The papyrus codex does not seem to have enjoyed great popularity. The
relative fragility of the papyrus, especially in climates less
favourable than that of Egypt, and its tendency to crack when folded,
precluded it from being widely used in codex form. Although, when made,
it is of about the same consistency as paper, it does not stand the
damp; and, if kept dry, becomes very brittle with age (as dead leaves
do).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[There were some other causes which produced the ultimate victory of the
vellum codex over papyrus roll and codex. The vellum codex form was much
more convenient especially for collections of laws and for Sacred
Literature (see p. 203 ff.).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Furthermore, with the growth of Christianity, and the increasing need
that was felt for a more durable writing material, parchment or vellum
came into prominence, though for some centuries papyrus did not wholly
go out of use. Throughout the third to the sixth centuries A.D. all the
three forms of books were employed: papyrus roll, papyrus codex, and
vellum codex (and even, though rarely, parchment roll), but by the
fourth century the papyrus roll was superseded by the parchment codex as
the main form of book, especially as far as it concerns Christian
literature.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The following table, based on C. H. Oldfather's research, may give a
rough survey---which should be treated with caution, as it is not quite
up to date---of the papyri and vellum codices recovered in Egypt and
dealing with secular or pagan subjects (see also the table on p.
162).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is evident from this table that the decline of papyrus is definitely
to be dated from the fourth century, but its use lasted through the
early Middle Ages. In Egypt it was eventually superseded by really
excellent paper. The manufacture of papyrus would seem to have ceased
about the middle of the tenth century.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000151.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Though by the fourth century A.D., papyrus had ceased to be used as the
main writing material for books, its use lingered on in Europe for
documents of daily life until the eleventh century. In the Papal
chancery, following the usage of the Byzantine imperial court, papyrus
was employed until the second half of the eleventh century; its last
recorded use is in 1057, under Pope Victor II.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-387}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BIBLIOGRAPHY]{.style_2} {#bibliography-2 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Mathematical Papyrus Rhind,]{.style_1} [ed. by Eisenlohr, 1877; by T.
E. P. Peet, London, 1923; by Chace, Bull, Manning, and Archibald, 2
vols., Oberlin (Ohio), 1927---9.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. Naville,]{.style_} [Das aegyptische Todtenbuch,]{.style_1} [etc., 3
vols., Berlin, 1886;]{.style_} [The Funeral Papyrus of
Iouiya]{.style_1}[, London, 1908;]{.style_} [Papyr. funéraires de la
XXI]{.style_1}[e]{.style_3} [dynast]{.style_1}[., Paris, 1912
onwards.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. P. Mahaffy,]{.style_} [The Flinders Petrie Papyri]{.style_1}[, 3
vols., Dublin, 1891--- 1905;]{.style_} [A History of Egypt]{.style_1}[,
etc., London, 1899;------and W. A. Goligher,]{.style_} [Hellenistic
Greeks]{.style_1}[, London, 1928.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. M. Flinders Petrie,]{.style_} [Ten Years' Digging in
Egypt]{.style_1}[, London, 1892;]{.style_} [Ancient
Egyptians,]{.style_1} [London, 1925;]{.style_} [Egyptian Tales
translated from Papyri]{.style_1}[, 4th ed., London, 1926;]{.style_}
[The Making of Egypt]{.style_1}[, Oxford, 1939.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Aegyptische Urkunden aus den Museen zu Berlin]{.style_1}[, 8 vols.,
Berlin, 1893--- 1933.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[British Museum,]{.style_} [Autotype Facsimiles of Greek
Papyri]{.style_1}[, 3 vols., London, 1893---1907.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. G. Kenyon (and H. J. Bell),]{.style_} [Greek Papyri in the British
Museum]{.style_1}[, London, 1893 (and 1917);]{.style_} [The Palaeography
of Greek Papyri]{.style_1}[, Oxford, 1899;]{.style_} [Fifty Years of
Papyrology]{.style_1}[, "Actes du V]{.style_}[e]{.style_4} [Congr.
Intern. de Papyr.", 1938. See also Bibliography to Chapters V and
VI.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. H. S. Davies,]{.style_} [The Egyptian Book of the Dead]{.style_1}[,
New York, 1895.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[National Library, Vienna,]{.style_} [Corpus papyrorum Raineri
Archiducis Austriae:]{.style_1} [i.]{.style_} [Griechische
Texte,]{.style_1} [etc., Vienna, 1895;]{.style_} [Series
Arabica,]{.style_1} [I/1, Vienna, 1924.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[B. P. Grenfell and A. S. Hunt,]{.style_} [The Oxyrhynchus
Papyri,]{.style_1} [London, 1898 onwards;]{.style_} [Greek
Papyri,]{.style_1} [Oxford, 1903;]{.style_} [The Hibeh
Papyri,]{.style_1} [London, 1906;]{.style_} [Hellenica
Oxyrhynchia,]{.style_1} [etc., Oxford, 1909;---------,---------, and D.
G. Hogarth,]{.style_} [Fayûm Towns and their Papyri,]{.style_1} [London,
1900;------; ------, and others,]{.style_} [The Tebtunis
Papyri,]{.style_1} [London, 1902---38.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. Ll. Griffith,]{.style_} [The Petrie Papyri. Hieratic Papyri from
Kahun and Gurob,]{.style_1} [London, 1898;]{.style_} [The Demotic
Magical Papyrus,]{.style_1} [etc., London, 1904---9;]{.style_} [The
Adler Papyri,]{.style_1} [London, 1939.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. A. W. Budge,]{.style_} [The Book of the Dead,]{.style_1} [etc.,
London, 1899 (2nd ed., New York and London, 1949);]{.style_} [Facsimiles
of Egyptian Hieratic Papyri in the British Museum,]{.style_1} [London,
1910; 2nd ser., 1923;]{.style_} [The Greenfield Papyrus,]{.style_1}
[etc., London, 1912;]{.style_} [The Teaching of Âmen-em-âpt,]{.style_1}
[etc., London, 1924.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. Vitelli and D. Comparetti,]{.style_} [Papiri fiorentini,]{.style_1}
[3 vols., Milan, 1906---15.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[L. Mitteis,]{.style_} [Griech. Urkunden d. Papyrussamml. zu
Leipzig,]{.style_1} [Leipsic, 1906;------and U. Wilcken,]{.style_}
[Grundzuege u. Chrestomathie d. Papyruskunde,]{.style_1} [2 vols.,
Leipsic and Berlin, 1912.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. H. Breasted,]{.style_} [Ancient Records of Egypt,]{.style_1} [5
vols., Chicago, 1906---7;]{.style_} [The Conquest of
Civilization,]{.style_1} [New York, 1926 (new ed., 1938).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[P. Jouguet,]{.style_} [Papyrus grecs (Univ., Lille),]{.style_1} [Paris,
1907---8.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. H. Gardiner,]{.style_} [Liter. Texte d. Mittleren
Reiches,]{.style_1} [2 vols., Leipsic, 1908---9;]{.style_} [The
Admonitions of an Egyptian Sage, etc.,]{.style_1} [Leipsic,
1909;]{.style_} [Literary Texts of the New Kingdom. Egyptian Hieratic
Texts (Berlin),]{.style_1} [Leipsic, 1911;]{.style_} [Egyptian Letters
to the Dead,]{.style_1} [etc., London, 1928;]{.style_} [Desscription of
a Hier. Papyr. (Chester Beatty Papyri, No.]{.style_1} [1),]{.style_}
[Oxford,]{.style_1} [1931;]{.style_} [Late Egyptian Stories,]{.style_1}
[Brussels, 1932;]{.style_} [The Attitude of the Ancient Egyptians to
Dead,]{.style_1} [etc., Cambridge, 1935; ed.,]{.style_} [Hieratic Papyri
in the British Museum,]{.style_1} [3rd ser., London, 1935;]{.style_}
[Late Egyptian Miscellanies,]{.style_1} [Brussels, 1937; ed.,]{.style_}
[The Wilbour Papyrus,]{.style_1} [3 vols., London, 1941---8;]{.style_}
[Ramesside Admin. Documents,]{.style_1} [London, 1948.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[K. Sethe,]{.style_} [Die altaegyptischen Pyramidentexte,]{.style_1} [4
vols., Leipsic, 1908---22;]{.style_} [Die Totenliteratur der alten
Aegypter,]{.style_1} [Berlin, 1931.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Guide to the Egyptian Collections in the British Museum,]{.style_1}
[London, 1909.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. Moeller,]{.style_} [Hieratische Palaeographie,]{.style_1} [4 vols.,
Leipsic, 1909---36;]{.style_} [Die beiden Totenpapyrus Rhind d. Museums
zu Edinburgh,]{.style_1} [Leipsic, 1913.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. Wessely,]{.style_} [Papyrorum scripturae graecae specimina
isagogica,]{.style_1} [Leipsic, 1910;]{.style_} [Die aelt. griechischen
u. latein. Papyri Wiens,]{.style_1} ["Stud. z. Palaeogr. u. Papyrusk.",
vol. XV.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. Schubart,]{.style_} [Papyri Graecae Berolinenses,]{.style_1} [Bonn,
1911;]{.style_} [Einfuehrung in die Papyruskunde,]{.style_1} [Berlin,
1918;]{.style_} [Die Papyri als Zeugen antiker Kultur,]{.style_1}
[Berlin, 1938.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. de M. Johnston, V. Martin, and A. S. Hunt,]{.style_} [Catal. of the
Greek Papyri in the John Rylands Library,]{.style_1} [2 vols.,
Manchester, 1911---15.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. Vitelli,]{.style_} [Papiri greci]{.style_1} [e]{.style_}
[latini,]{.style_1} [10 vols., Florence, 1911---32.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. Maspero,]{.style_} [Papyrus grecs,]{.style_1} [etc.]{.style_}
[(Cairo),]{.style_1} [Cairo, 1911---16.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. Meyer,]{.style_} [Der Papyrusfund von Elephantine,]{.style_1}
[Leipsic, 1912.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Ebers Papyrus:]{.style_1} [German ed., by W. Wreszinski, Leipsic,
1913; English ed., by B. Ebbell, Copenhagen, 1937.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[P. M. Meycr,]{.style_} [Griechische Texte aus Aegypten,]{.style_1}
[Berlin, 1916.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[T. E. Peet,]{.style_} [The Antiquity of Egyptian
Civilization,]{.style_1} ["Journ. of Egypt. Archaeol.", 1922;]{.style_}
[The Great Tomb-robberies of the Twentieth Egyptian Dynasty,]{.style_1}
[Oxford, 1930;]{.style_} [A Comparative Study of the Literatures of
Egypt, Palestine, Mesopotamia,]{.style_1} [London, 1931;]{.style_} [The
Present Position of Egyptological Studies,]{.style_1} [Oxford,
1934.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Egypt Exploration Fund,]{.style_} [Guide to a Special
Exhibition,]{.style_1} [etc., London, 1922.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Erman,]{.style_} [Die Literatur der Aegypter,]{.style_1} [Leipsic,
1923;]{.style_} [The Literature of the Ancient Egyptians]{.style_1}
[(transl. by A. M. Blackman), London and New York, 1927;]{.style_} [Die
Welt am Nil,]{.style_1} [Leipsic, 1936.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. E. Cowley,]{.style_} [Aramaic Papyri of the Fifth Century
B.C.,]{.style_1} [Oxford, 1923.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Grohmann,]{.style_} [Corpus Papyrorum Raineri. Allgemeine
Einfuehrung in die arabische Papyri,]{.style_1} [Vienna, 1924; also
numerous articles in "Archiv Orientální", Prague.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. Spiegelberg,]{.style_} [Demotische Grammatik,]{.style_1}
[Heidelberg, 1925.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. Preisigke,]{.style_} [Woerterbuch d. griech]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}
[Papyrusurkunden,]{.style_1} [Berlin, 1925.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[S. Eitrem,]{.style_} [Magical Papyri,]{.style_1} [Oslo, 1925.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[U. Wilcken, ed.,]{.style_} [Urkunden d. Ptolomaeerzeit,]{.style_1}
[Berlin and Leipsic, 1927 onwards;]{.style_} [Ueber den Nutzen d.
latein. Papyri,]{.style_1} ["Atti d. IV Congr. intle. di papirol.",
Milan, 1936.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[P. Collomp,]{.style_} [La papyrologie,]{.style_1} [Paris,
1927;]{.style_} [La critique des textes,]{.style_1} [Paris, 1931;
ed.,]{.style_} [Papyrus grecs de la Bibl. Nat. et Univ. de
Strasbourg,]{.style_1} [Paris, 1948.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[K. Preisendanz,]{.style_} [Die griech. Zauberpapyri.]{.style_1} ["Arch.
f. Papyrusforschung", 1927; also, Leipsic, 1928---31;]{.style_} [Papyri
Graecae,]{.style_1} [Leipsic, 1931;]{.style_} [Papyrusfunde und
Papyrusforschung,]{.style_1} [Leipsic, 1933.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Calderini,]{.style_} [Papiri milanesi,]{.style_1} [Milan,
1928;]{.style_} [Manuale di papirologia antica greca e
romana,]{.style_1} [Milan, 1938;]{.style_} [Papiri latini,]{.style_1}
[etc., Milan, 1945.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[M. Norsa,]{.style_} [Papiri greci,]{.style_1} [etc., Rome,
1928---46.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Edwin Smith Surgical Papyrus,]{.style_1} [ed. by J. H. Breasted,
New York, 1930.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Moscow Mathematical Papyrus,]{.style_1} [ed. by W. Struve, "Quell. u.
Stud. z. Gesch. d. Mathem.", 1930.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Michigan Papyri,]{.style_1} [Ann Arbor (Mich.), 1933.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. I. Bell and T. C. Skeat, ed.,]{.style_} [Fragments of an Unknown
Gospel,]{.style_1} [etc., London, 1935.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. Grapow,]{.style_} [Sprachliche und schriftliche Formung aegypt.
Texte,]{.style_1} [Glueckstadt, 1936;]{.style_} [Zur
Erforschungsgeschichte des Demotischen,]{.style_1} ["Orient. Lit.
Zeit.", 1937.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. Ranke,]{.style_} [The Art of Ancient Egypt,]{.style_1} [Vienna,
1936.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. A. Wilson,]{.style_} [The Present State of Egyptian
Studies,]{.style_1} ["The Haverford Symposium", New Haven (Conn.), 1938;
see also J. B. Pritchard (1950).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Development of the Book,]{.style_1} ["Bull. of the Princeton
Library", 1938.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[S. R. K. Glanville,]{.style_} [Catal. of Demotic Papyri in the
B.M.,]{.style_1} [London, 1939; ed.,]{.style_} [The Legacy of
Egypt,]{.style_1} [Oxford, 1942;]{.style_} [The Growth and Nature of
Egyptology,]{.style_1} [Cambridge, 1947.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Volten,]{.style_} [Kopenhag. Texte zum demotischen
Weisheitsbuch,]{.style_1} [Copenhagen, 1940;]{.style_} [Das demotische
Weisheitsbuch,]{.style_1} [ibid., 1941.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. O. Lange and O. Neugebauer,]{.style_} [Papyrus Carlsberg
I,]{.style_1} [etc., Copenhagen, 1940.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[O. Neugebauer,]{.style_} [The Origin of the Egyptian
Calendar,]{.style_1} ["Journ. of Near East. Studies", 1942.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. Steindorff and K. Seele,]{.style_} [When Egypt Ruled the
East,]{.style_1} [Chicago, 1942.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. Peremans and J. Vergote,]{.style_} [Papyrologisch
Handboek,]{.style_1} [Louvain, 1942.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. erný, in "Annales du Service des Antiquit. de l' Egypte",
1943;]{.style_} [Paper and Books in Ancient Egypt,]{.style_1} [London,
1952.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[M. David and B. A. van Groningen,]{.style_} [Papyrological
Primer,]{.style_1} [2nd ed., Leyden, 1946.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. and H. A. Frankfort, J. A. Wilson, and others,]{.style_} [The
Adventure of Ancient Man,]{.style_1} [etc., Chicago, 1946.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[B. Gunn, in B. Lewis,]{.style_} [The Land of Enchanters,]{.style_1}
[London, 1948.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. Lefebvre,]{.style_} [Romans et contes égyptiens,]{.style_1} [etc.,
Paris, 1949.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[P. Gilbert,]{.style_} [La Poésie égyptienne,]{.style_1} [2nd ed.,
Brussels, 1949.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[R. A. Parker,]{.style_} [The Calendars of Ancient Egypt,]{.style_1}
[Chicago, 1950.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. B. Pritchard, ed.,]{.style_} [Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to
the Old Testament,]{.style_1} [Princeton, N.J., 1950.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Scharff and A. Moortgat,]{.style_} [Aegypten und Vorderasien im
Altertum,]{.style_1} [Munich, 1950.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[See also BIBLIOGRAPHY to Chapters V and VI.]{.style_}
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: {#calibre_link-129 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-11}

::: calibre7
:::

### [CHAPTER V]{.style_2} {#chapter-v .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

### [FROM LEATHER TO PARCHMENT]{.style_2} {#from-leather-to-parchment .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

[SIDE by side with papyrus, another writing material for books was
extensively employed for several centuries. This was parchment, the
prepared skin of animals such as cattle, sheep, goats, and occasionally
deer, and preferably from the young of these animals. The finer quality
(derived from the calf) was called vellum (in Latin]{.style_}
[vitulinum]{.style_1}[); it is finer in grain, whiter and smoother than
ordinary parchment. The whitest and thinnest kind (made from the skin of
an aborted calf) was called uterine vellum, and was employed chiefly for
elaborate miniatures.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[PARCHMENT AND ITS TRADITIONAL ORIGIN]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Parchment was, of course, the most beautiful and suitable material for
writing or printing upon that has ever been used, its surface being
singularly even and offering little or no resistance to the pen, so that
every sort of handwriting can be made upon it with equal ease. Although
the exact meaning of the words "parchment" and "vellum" is as has just
been explained, and although some scholars employ the former for
sheepskin and the latter for calfskin, in common but incorrect usage,
the two words are synonymous.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The word "parchment" (French,]{.style_} [parchemin;]{.style_1}
[German,]{.style_} [Pergament;]{.style_1} [Italian,]{.style_}
[pergamena]{.style_1}[)---being a derivation of the Greek]{.style_}
[Pergam né]{.style_1} [and the Latin]{.style_} [Pergamena]{.style_1}
[(or]{.style_} [charta Pergamena]{.style_1}[),]{.style_}
[i.e.]{.style_1} [stuff prepared at Pergamum, which was an important
city and kingdom in Asia Minor---is strictly associated with a milestone
in the history of this writing material. According to Pliny the Elder
(]{.style_}[Natur. Hist.,]{.style_1} [xiii, 11), quoting the earlier
Roman writer Varro, King Ptolemy of Egypt---he probably refers to
Ptolemy V Epiphanes (]{.style_}[c.]{.style_1} [205 ---]{.style_}
[c.]{.style_1} [185 B.C.)---jealous of a rival book collector, feared
that the library of Eumenes, King of Pergamum---probably, Eumenes II
(]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 197 ---]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 159
B.C.)---might come to surpass the library of Alexandria, and he
therefore laid an embargo on the export of papyrus from Egypt, in order
to retard the literary progress of the rival city. Eumenes, thus
debarred from obtaining papyrus rolls, was driven to the invention of
parchment. This would imply that parchment was invented about the first
decade of the second century B.C. But this account is not considered as
historical.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000153.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-130}

[Fig. V---1]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Earliest extant book written on leather. Hieratic manuscript attributed
to the Sixth Dynasty (Cairo Museum).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Moreover, parchment cannot be considered a true invention. It was
rather the result of a slow development, or else an improvement upon an
old practice, this being the employment of hides or skins of animals as
writing material. Whereas leather is simply tanned, the fabrication of
parchment is much more complicated; the skin (of the sheep, lambs, kids,
goats, asses, pigs, or cattle, especially calves), washed and divested
of its hair or wool, is soaked in a lime-pit, stretched tight on a
frame, and scraped clear of the remaining hair on one side and the flesh
on the other; it is then wetted with a moist rag, covered with pounded
chalk, and rubbed with pumice stone; finally, it is allowed to dry in
the frame.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-388}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Leather used as Writing Material in the Ancient Near East]{.style_2} {#leather-used-as-writing-material-in-the-ancient-near-east .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is uncertain how and when the change came about from the use of
leather to that of parchment as writing material. The employment of
skins of animals for writing, however, was familiar in ancient times in
Egypt, Mesopotamia, Palestine, Persia, Asia Minor, and in other
countries.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-389}

::: calibre5
:::

## [EGYPT]{.style_2} {#egypt .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

["Ancient Egypt," wrote Erman, "was exceedingly rich in skins, the
result of the stockbreeding so extensively carried on in that country."
"\... while leather made into a kind of parchment and used . . . for
writing material." A. Lucas writes, "From raw hide to skin treated
sufficiently to render it pliable and thence to fully tanned leather are
steps that the Egyptians took at an early date, and leather-working
became an important industry and is depicted in a tomb painting of the
Eighteenth Dynasty at Thebes." "Articles of leather were often coloured,
red, yellow or green."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The first mention of Egyptian documents written on leather goes back to
the Fourth Dynasty (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 2550---2450 B.C.), but the
earliest of such documents extant are: a fragmentary roll of leather of
the Sixth Dynasty (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. twenty-fourth century
B.C.), unrolled by Dr. H. Ibscher, and preserved in the Cairo Museum
[]{#calibre_link-390}([Fig. V---1](#calibre_link-130){.calibre9}); a
roll of the Twelfth Dynasty (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 1990---1777 B.C.)
now in Berlin; the mathematical text now in the British Museum (MS.
[]{#calibre_link-132}10250), [Fig. V---2](#calibre_link-131){.calibre9};
and a document of the reign of Ramses II (early thirteenth century
B.C.).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The mathematical roll, which is written in hieratic character, is 17
feet by 10 inches; Prof. Glanville assigns it to "much the same date" as
the]{.style_} [Rhind Papyrus]{.style_1} [(see Chapter IV); it thus
belongs to the Hyksos period or, at latest, to the beginning of the
Eighteenth Dynasty (sixteenth century B.C.). The leather is of a pale
cream colour and extremely brittle, so that its unrolling and
restoration were only possible thanks to expert treatment by the British
Museum authorities. The material is an animal skin, many of the hairs
and their roots being easily seen. The process used originally to
preserve the skin is unknown, but the experiments made so far---by Dr.
Alexander Scott---seem to indicate that it was not by means of "tanning"
as we understand it.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000154.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-131}

[[Fig. V---2](#calibre_link-132){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Egyptian mathematical manuscript on leather roll (British Museum 10250,
Col. 1 and part of Col. 2).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The victory of Thutmose III at Megiddo was recorded upon a roll of
leather in the temple of Amun; and according to an Egyptian inscription
of the Eighteenth Dynasty (the sixteenth to the fourteenth century B.C.)
laws were written on rolls of leather.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is, however, very probable that---before the introduction of
parchment---skin, because of its expense, was used much less extensively
than papyrus, and was never in general use. Indeed, it was mainly
employed for important or official documents. This view seems to be
confirmed by archaeological finds. While, as already explained, papyrus
was the chief writing material, still cheaper materials, such as ostraca
(see]{.style_} [The Alphabet, passim]{.style_1}[) and small wooden
tablets (see p. 27) were used by poorer people or for merely ephemeral
purposes.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-391}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MESOPOTAMIA]{.style_2} {#mesopotamia .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is very probable that skin was employed in ancient Mesopotamia, but
in G. R. Driver's opinion the Babylonian expression "missive of leather"
is apparently not found before the early years of the Seleucid period
(311---95 B.C.).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[On the other hand, the representation of a scribe in an Assyrian
bas-relief of the seventh century B.C., holding a scroll, has been
considered as evidence of the use of leather, but the scroll may
represent either leather or papyrus. Part of the relief, preserved in
the British Museum, is reproduced on [Fig.
III---1](#calibre_link-75){.calibre9},]{.style_} [below.]{.style_1} [It
represents two scribes taking a memorandum of the spoils of war after an
Assyrian victory. The bearded man, probably an Assyrian, holds an
angular stilus in the right hand, and a tablet in the left. The other
man, who "is marked by his shaven face as a foreigner" (Burney), holds a
reed-pen in the right, and a piece of curling material in the left.
There can hardly be any doubt that the former is writing in cuneiform
character upon a clay tablet, and the latter is possibly writing in the
Aramaic alphabet and language on a roll of leather or papyrus. A similar
scene is represented on another bas-relief (also preserved in the
British Museum), which seems to be a continuation of the same series.
Thus, apparently the lists of booty---and possibly other official
documents---were usually taken down in a double entry, in Assyrian
cuneiform writing upon clay tablets, and the Aramaic alphabet on scrolls
of leather or papyrus (more probably on rolls of leather).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-392}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ANCIENT HEBREWS]{.style_2} {#ancient-hebrews .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Many facts suggest that the ancient Hebrews employed leather as a
writing material at an early time. When Jeremiah dictated his prophecies
to Baruch the son of Neriah (]{.style_}[Jer]{.style_1}[. xxxvi, 4), they
were "taken down" on a]{.style_} [megillath sepher]{.style_1} [("roll of
a book"), and later a]{.style_} [ta'ar ha-sopher]{.style_1} [("scribe's
knife" or "penknife") was used to cut the roll in pieces when the King
wished to burn it (]{.style_}[ibid]{.style_1}[., 23). Either leather or
payrus is implied in this and other references in the Bible
(]{.style_}[Jer]{.style_1}[., xxxvi, 2;]{.style_} [Ezek.,]{.style_1}
[ii, 9; Z]{.style_}[ech.]{.style_1}[, v, 1;]{.style_} [Psalm]{.style_1}
[xi, 8). The Hebrew word]{.style_} [megillah]{.style_1} [means "roll",
and only papyrus or leather (including parchment) could form book rolls.
The term]{.style_} [megillah]{.style_1} [is generally employed to
indicate the]{.style_} [Book of Esther,]{.style_1} [while the]{.style_}
[Five Megilloth]{.style_1} [indicate the books of]{.style_} [Esther,
Canticles, Ruth, Lamentations,]{.style_1} [and]{.style_}
[Ecclesiastes]{.style_1} [.]{.style_} [Megillah]{.style_1}[, however, is
never used for the Scrolls of the Law or for any other Biblical
book.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The exact meaning of the early Hebrew word]{.style_} [sepher]{.style_1}
[is uncertain; it is generally translated "book", but it often means
"letter" (as in]{.style_} [Esth.,]{.style_1} [ix, 25, or in the Lachish
ostraca, for which see]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [p. 240), and
sometimes it indicates a legal or a private document. In Phoenician and
Aramaic inscriptions it even means "inscription". At the same
time,]{.style_} [sepher]{.style_1} [in the Bible may denote historical
chronicles, legal codes, collections of poems, and even the Sacred
Scriptures.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Therefore, the old theory of Jewish scholars that]{.style_} [megillath
sepher]{.style_1} [means "leather roll" is not exact, although in
the]{.style_} [Mishnah]{.style_1} [(trad - tional commentary on the
Hebrew written law, completed in the early third century A.D.)]{.style_}
[sepher]{.style_1} [is used for leather or parchment, and in the
mishnaic tractate]{.style_} [Makkoth]{.style_1} [("Stripes") we are told
that the Law was written upon the hides of cattle: this statement
reflects an ancient tradition.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-393}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ANCIENT HEBREW TRADITIONS]{.style_2} {#ancient-hebrew-traditions .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[This tradition no doubt underlies the]{.style_} [Talmud]{.style_1}
[regulation that all copies of the]{.style_} [Torah]{.style_1} [(or
"Law") must be written on rolls (or scrolls) of skin; thanks to this
regulation, which is still in force, there exist many thousands of such
Law Scrolls in the Jewish synagogues all over the world.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Exodus,]{.style_1} [xxvi, 14 shows that the art of preparing and
colouring skins was known in very early times, and the passage
of]{.style_} [Ezekiel]{.style_1}[, in which the roll was referred to as
written]{.style_} [pan m ve-a r]{.style_1} [("within and without") would
suggest leather rather than papyrus. See, however, C. F.
Burney,]{.style_} [Book of Judges]{.style_1}[, London, 1918, pp. 253 and
259.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to Kenyon, the]{.style_} [ta'ar ha-sopher]{.style_1}
[of]{.style_} [fer.,]{.style_1} [xxxvi, 23---already referred to---was
the scribe's scraping-knife, part of the normal equipment of a scribe
writing on leather or parchment, and used for erasures, as shown in
medieval pictures; this would point to the probability that the roll was
of leather. According to other scholars, however, the "penknife" was
probably used for sharpening the reeds, which served for writing on
papyrus.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Further evidence of the use of leather or parchment for the Hebrew Law
Scrolls is provided by the "letter" of Pseudo-Aristeas (nowadays
assigned to the middle second century B.C.), which refers to a
magnificent copy of the Law written on]{.style_} [diphthérai,
i.e.]{.style_1} [leather, in letters of gold, which was supposed to have
been sent to King Ptolemy I (of Egypt) in 285 B.C., for the purpose of
making the]{.style_} [septuagint]{.style_1} [translation of the Hebrew
Bible into Greek.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, it is most probable that costly leather was the regular
material for important or official documents as well as for formal
copies, while the much cheaper papyrus (see Chapter IV) and ostraca---as
evidenced by finds at Samaria, Lachish, Jerusalem, and other
places---were employed for more or less private and merely ephemeral
matters: see]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [p. 238 ff.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the Jewish colony of Elephantine (see p. 148 ff.), beside the famous
papyri, there was found a fragment of leather, which contains a few
broken lines of Aramaic text: it is assigned to the fifth century B.C.
See also p. 190.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-394}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE DEAD SEA SCROLLS []{#calibre_link-136 .calibre14}([Fig. V---3](#calibre_link-133){.calibre13}---8)]{.style_2} {#the-dead-sea-scrolls-fig.-v38 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[There were probably many early Hebrew books; but in the damp soil of
Palestine no leather or papyrus could be expected to endure to our time,
unless preserved in conditions similar to those referred to in]{.style_}
[Jer]{.style_1}[., xxxii, 14: "Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of
Israel: Take these deeds . . . and put them in an earthen vessel; that
they may continue many days."]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-395}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE FIND]{.style_2} {#the-find .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the late spring months of 1947 an epoch-making discovery was made.
It is common knowledge that the earliest extant Hebrew Biblical books
hitherto known belong to the ninth century A.D., and no scholar was in a
position to challenge the authoritative statement made a few years ago
by Sir Frederic Kenyon: "There is, indeed, no probability that we shall
ever find manuscripts of the Hebrew text going back to a period before
the formation of the text which we know as Masoretic."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[So common has been this belief and so astonishing the discovery, that a
great deal of scepticism has been current regarding the authenticity of
the new finds; a distinguished member of the Catholic "École Biblique et
Archéologique Française" in Jerusalem, a great rabbinical scholar in
America, and other eminent scholars considered the newly found
manuscripts forgeries; while several other eminent scholars, leading
authorities on Biblical studies and Semitic philology, have expressed
the belief that the manuscripts are medieval.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[As generally happens with great discoveries, this one was quite casual.
Two Beduin goatherds of the Taamerah tribe, looking for a goat which had
strayed amongst the heights of the Dead Sea, near the northern end, came
upon what proved to be a natural cave high up the steep rock in a wady,
some twelve kilometres south of Jericho, four north of 'Ain Feshkha, and
two to the west of the shores of the sea: ([Fig.
V---3](#calibre_link-133){.calibre9}, a)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the first instance only three rolls were discovered, which propably
were the]{.style_} [Sectarian Document, Isaiah "A",]{.style_1} [and
the]{.style_} [Habakkuk Commentary.]{.style_1} [The remaining
books---and perhaps also some books which are still hidden away---were
brought to light in the clandestine excavation by Mr. George Isaiah of
the Syrian Orthodox Convent of St. Mark in Jerusalem. (Personal
information by Mr. Gerald Lankester Harding.)]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-396}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE NEW BOOKS]{.style_2} {#the-new-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[All told (apart from those which may still be hidden away) eleven rolls
of leather were discovered; among the numerous fragments of pottery
there were two entire jars (which were sold for two pounds). Apparently
the rolls, wrapped in linen, had been put into the jars for safety. Six
of the rolls (with the two entire jars) were bought by Prof. E. L.
Sukenik of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, and the remaining five by
Mar Athanasius Samuel, the Syrian Metropolitan and head of the Convent
of St. Mark in Jerusalem. For the two jars, []{#calibre_link-137}see
[Fig. V---4](#calibre_link-134){.calibre9},]{.style_} [a;]{.style_1}
[for the manuscripts, see [Fig.
V---3](#calibre_link-133){.calibre9},]{.style_} [b,]{.style_1}
[4,]{.style_} [b-c,]{.style_1} [5---8.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The five rolls in possession of the Syrians are reduced to four books;
two rolls being part of one single book, now called the "Sectarian
Document" or "Manual of Discipline" []{#calibre_link-140}([Fig.
V--6](#calibre_link-135){.calibre9},]{.style_} [right):]{.style_1}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000155.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-133}

[[Fig. V---3](#calibre_link-136){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(a) The Ain Feshkha cave. (Above) Interior; (below) entrance to the
cave: smaller hole at right is the original entrance; large hole was
made by clandestine excavators, in November 1948. (b) Portion of Isaiah
Scroll A (showing Isaiah, xxxviii, 20---xxxix, 4).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000156.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-134}

[[Fig. V--4](#calibre_link-137){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a, jars reputed to have been found in the 'Ain feshkha cave
(Archeological Museum, Hebrew University, Jerusalem). b, Lamech Scroll
(still unrolled) with fragments; c, end view of Lamech
Scroll.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[this book describes the initiation rites and oaths of allegiance of a
sect whose identity has not yet been established. Another book is a kind
of commentary on the first two chapters of the]{.style_} [Book of
Habakkuk]{.style_1} []{#calibre_link-139}[([Fig.
V---5](#calibre_link-138){.calibre9},]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[, and
7]{.style_} [right]{.style_1}[) : a short passage is taken from the
Biblical text, and then follows a comment on contemporary conditions.
Another scroll, which---being the most brittle of all the scrolls in
Syrian possession---has not yet been unrolled notwithstanding the most
careful treatment, appears to be the Aramaic apocryphal book
of]{.style_} [Lamech,]{.style_1} [mentioned once in a Greek list of
apocryphal books: [Fig. V---4](#calibre_link-134){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[b-c.]{.style_1}

[]{#calibre_link-397}

::: calibre5
:::

::: calibre15
:::

## [THE BOOK OF ISAIAH ([Fig. V---3](#calibre_link-133){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [b]{.style_2}[, and 5,]{.style_2} [a]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#the-book-of-isaiah-fig.-v3-b-and-5-a .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[While these three books were hitherto unknown, the fourth one, the
largest and most important, contains in its fifty-four columns the
complete text (with the exception of a few]{.style_}
[lacunae]{.style_1}[) of the]{.style_} [Book of Isaiah.]{.style_1} [It
appears that the whole scroll was originally prepared by sewing together
with thread seventeen sheets of somewhat coarse parchment (or carefully
prepared leather approaching the refinement of parchment). The sheets
vary a great deal in length, but all are inches high (containing about
twenty-nine lines of writing) making a scroll feet long in its present
state of preservation. The sheets were carefully lined (with a
semi-sharp instrument); the lines were used as a guide for the tops of
the letters, except that the]{.style_} [lamedh]{.style_1} [naturally
projected beyond. Notable features in the]{.style_} [Isaiah
Scroll]{.style_1} [(now known as]{.style_} [Isaiah A]{.style_1}[) are
particularly the strange orthography (which appears also in other
scrolls) and some textual divergences from the Massoretic text, but on
the whole the text is much closer to the Massoretic text than some
scholars would have expected, though the affinities with the]{.style_}
[Septuagint]{.style_1} [are very marked.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-398}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE HEBREW UNIVERSITY MANUSCRIPTS]{.style_2} {#the-hebrew-university-manuscripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Of the Hebrew University manuscripts, four are part of one extremely
interesting book ([Fig. V---5](#calibre_link-138){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[b]{.style_1}[, and 7,]{.style_}
[left]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[,]{.style_1} [which Prof. Sukenik calls the
"Scroll of Thanksgivings" (]{.style_}[Megillath ha-hoday
th]{.style_1}[): it consists of large sheets, each one folded up, and,
unlike the other manuscripts, not made up into rolls; all told, there
are twelve large columns, with an addition of a great number of
fragments. The text consists of beautiful hymns which have a strong
flavour of the]{.style_} [Psalms]{.style_1}[, although in style they are
quite distinct from them and from any psalm-like composition preserved
in the Apocrypha. Another of Sukenik's scrolls describes (in its elegant
Hebrew handwriting, the clearest in all the scrolls) a war between "The
Children of Light and the Children of Darkness"; it is uncertain whether
this "war" refers to some historical event or is purely allegorical, the
scroll---in nineteen columns---being a sectarian ritual.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000157.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-138}

[[Fig. V---5](#calibre_link-139){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a, Isaiah Scroll A (showing Cols. 32-33); b, portion of the Songs of
Thanksgiving; c, portion of Habakkuk Commentary; note the Divine Name
(1. 7, third word from the right) written in the Early Hebrew script.
while the scroll is written in the Square Hebrew character.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Finally, there is a second, but fragmentary, copy of the]{.style_}
[Book of Isaiah]{.style_1} [(now known as "Isaiah B"), containing the
chapters xli-xlvi (with small]{.style_} [lacunae]{.style_1}[) and small
fragments of the chapters xvi, xix, xxii-xxiii, xxviii-xxxix. With a few
minor exceptions, this text follows (unlike "Isaiah A") the spelling of
the Massoretic text. Owing to its brittle state, the]{.style_} [Isaiah
Scroll B]{.style_1} [([Fig.
V---6](#calibre_link-135){.calibre9},]{.style_} [above]{.style_1}[), was
unrolled in the summer months of 1949 only after careful
treatment.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Divine Name]{.style_1} [([Fig.
V---5](#calibre_link-138){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[c]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Not all the interesting features of the Dead Sea Scrolls can be here
discussed or even mentioned; one of the most noteworthy is the variety
of ways in which the Divine Name is represented. In a few places we have
the Tetragrammaton (the Hebrew Divine Name,]{.style_} [ΥHWH]{.style_1}[)
as in the Massoretic text, but with]{.style_} ['Ad nay]{.style_1} [("my
Lord") written above it; in other places we have]{.style_} ['Ad
nay]{.style_1} [with the Tetragrammaton written above it. In some places
the Divine Name is omitted, but five dots are written above the
succeeding words. In the "Sectarian Document", the word
']{.style_}[El]{.style_1} [("God") or ']{.style_}[El]{.style_1} [("My
God") or dots replace the Tetragrammaton, and in column 8, I.13 there is
an abbreviation (]{.style_}[hw'lh']{.style_1}[) for]{.style_} [h ' ha'el
h m,]{.style_1} ["He is God".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Still more striking is the "Habakkuk Commentary" where (in column 6,
l.14; 10, l.7 and 14; and 11, l.10) the Tetragrammaton is written, in
the quotations from the Biblical text, in Early Hebrew letters, although
in a stylized manner, whereas in the exposition following the text the
scribe always uses ']{.style_}[El]{.style_1} [in Square Hebrew letters.
In a few places (in the "Thanksgivings Scroll" or in other fragments)
the word ']{.style_}[El]{.style_1} [or ']{.style_}[El]{.style_1} [is
also written in Early Hebrew letters, in a beautiful
book-hand.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Uncertain Details of Discovery]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is quite natural that in the disturbed political conditions in
Palestine at the time of the discovery, and during the subsequent war
between Arabs and Jews, several details of the discovery could not be
adequately investigated, and they may never be fully ascertained. The
more so, as an unauthorized excavation was made after the first
discovery, and apparently during this illicit activity the contents of
the cave were "thoroughly turned over, and a new larger entrance opened
up at a lower level to give easier access" (Harding). "Many sherds and
much linen were lying about in the filling and the rubbish
outside."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-135}

[[Fig. V---6](#calibre_link-140){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Isaiah Scroll B before unrolling; (right) Manual of Discipline,
col. 1.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000158.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Harding-De Vaux Excavation]{.style_1} []{#calibre_link-141}[(Fig.
V--8)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Mr. Gerald Lankester Harding, Chief Curator of Antiquities of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, and Father R. de Vaux of the "École
Biblique" of Jerusalem, excavated the cave from the middle of February
to 5th March, 1949. No new scrolls were discovered, but "patient and
careful work---the whole cave being cleared with the use of only
penknives and fingers---resulted in the recovery of many hundreds of
small fragments of scrolls, varying in size from pieces bearing only one
letter to several lines of inscription" (Harding).]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000159.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. V--7]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Left) A sheet of the Songs of Thanksgiving before its restoration;
(right) Habakkuk Commentary]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[There was also found a larger fragment of a scroll, "terribly damaged
through careless and inexpert handling", which has been carefully
treated by Dr. Plenderleith of the British Museum. Apart from these
leather and parchment fragments, a few papyrus fragments were recovered,
written in some cases on both sides.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Many fragments of linen (later cleaned and treated by the British
expert, Mrs. Grace M. Crowfoot), a few pieces of string and thread, as
well as many broken fragments of pottery, were also recovered. Judging
from the preserved fragments, the excavators suggest that the original
deposit must have contained at least forty jars (c. 2 feet high and 10
inches in diameter), and as many bowls ("which were presumably inverted
over the necks of the jars to close them"). "Five or six scrolls could
easily have been stored in one jar, so about 200 scrolls may have been
hidden in the cave" (Harding). However, according to later information
collected by Mr. Harding, when the Beduins entered the cave all the jars
were empty with the exception of one which contained the scrolls that
have survived.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The excavators assigned the jars and the bowls to the late Hellenistic
period, towards the end of the second century B.C., whereas the
fragments of two lamps and a cooking pot of the Roman period, which were
also found in the cave, are generally considered as intrusive pieces,
introduced by the first intruders in the cave. For Father de Vaux's more
recent theory, see below.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-399}

::: calibre5
:::

## [EARLY HEBREW BOOK-HAND []{#calibre_link-400 .calibre14}([Fig. V---8](#calibre_link-141){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#early-hebrew-book-hand-fig.-v8 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In addition to the rolls and fragments written in the Square Hebrew
script, there are a few fragments on leather written in Early Hebrew
script (see]{.style_} [The Alphabet]{.style_1}[, pp. 236---242). These
are the only documents extant written in the Early Hebrew book-hand: a
similar hand must have been employed by the secretaries of the kings of
ancient Israel and of the prophets, as well as by ancient Israelite
professional scribes. These fragments, containing passages from the book
of]{.style_} [Leviticus]{.style_1} [(xix, 31---34, xx, 20---23, xxi,
24---xxii, 3, and xxii, 4---5), may perhaps be assigned to the late
fourth or early third century B.C., and thus be considered as the
earliest fragments of the Bible extant, apart from the fact that they
are written in the original language and script. Beside the]{.style_}
[Leviticus]{.style_1} [fragments, two other tiny ragments were also
found by Harding, written in Early Hebrew character; they contain only a
few words or letters, but apparently were part of different
manuscripts.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000160.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

[]{#calibre_link-401}

::: calibre5
:::

## [FRAGMENTS IN SQUARE HEBREW SCRIPT]{.style_2} {#fragments-in-square-hebrew-script .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The other fragments (discovered by Mr. Harding and so far identified),
those written in Square Hebrew script, contain passages from]{.style_}
[Genesis, Deuteronomy, Judges]{.style_1}[,]{.style_} [Daniel]{.style_1}
[(in Aramaic), and from the]{.style_} [Book of Jubilees.]{.style_1}

[]{#calibre_link-402}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE CONTROVERSIAL DATE]{.style_2} {#the-controversial-date .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Already, a quite extensive literature has been published on these
scrolls, but there is no agreement as to their date, some scholars
preferring the second or first century B.C.---Albright, Bea, Birnbaum,
Brownlee, Burrows, De Vaux, Diringer, Dupont-Sommer, Harding, Milik,
Rowley, Segal, Sukenik, Trever, and others---others a post-Christian
date (a few scholars suggest even the seventh or eighth century, or even
a later date)---Driver, Kahle, Lacheman, Teicher, Weiss, Zcitlin, and
others.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Up-to-date bibliography may be found in H. H. Rowley, "ANAL. LOVAN.
BIBLICA ET ORIENT.", Ser. II, Fasc. 30, 1952, and "BULL. OF THE JOHN RVL
LIBR.", September 1952.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is unwise at present to be dogmatic (as some scholars have been)
regarding the date of these scrolls and their importance for Biblical
study and philological, theological, or allied research, as well as
regarding the identification of the sect of the scrolls. However, the
palacographical and archaeological evidence seems to point to a
pre-Christian date (such as the second or first century B.C.); this is
also suggested by certain other features, such as the coarse writing
material used, the varying width of the columns of writing in the same
scroll---in "Isaiah A", the narrowest column, 52, is but 3.62 inches
wide, while the widest, 11, is a little more than inches wide. At
present, the controversy concerning the date continues with unabated
vigour, the most recent and ingenious theory---by Dr. J. L. Teicher of
the University of Cambridge---being that the scrolls belonged to the
Jewish-Christian sect of Ebionites, and were hidden in the cave during
Diocletian's persecution of the Christians in A.D. 303.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Prof. Dupont-Sommer and other scholars have identified the sect of the
Scrolls with the Essenes; others, with Pharisees, Sadducees, Zealots,
Dositheans, Therapeutae, the Karaites, and the followers of John the
Baptist.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Radioactivity-dating, the method based on carbon fourteen, has been
tried on the linen found in the cave. It is a new method for dating the
past which has only recently been developed. Although very great
accuracy has not been obtained, the result of the carbon fourteen method
shows that the scrolls should be placed between 167 B.C. and A.D.
230.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-403}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MORE RECENT DISCOVERIES]{.style_2} {#more-recent-discoveries .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the winter of 1951---2, both clandestine and legal excavations were
carried out at Khirbet-Qumran (less than a mile from the cave in which
the Dead Sea Scrolls were found) and in four grottoes of the Wadi
Maraba'at (about ten miles from Khirbet-Qumran, but only two hours' walk
from the Dead Sea). These excavations will be resumed, and when more
information will be available, some scholars may revise their opinion
with regard to the dating of the Dead Sea Scrolls.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Father de Vaux, who previously dated the jars found in the cave of the
Scrolls to the Hellenistic period, and thus considered the Scrolls as
pre-Christian, has already abandoned this theory. In his report to the
French Académie des Inscriptions and Belles-Lettres, de Vaux argues that
the jars of the same type were found in Khirbet-Qumran, where they were
in use for domestic purposes in the second half of the first century
A.D. De Vaux now accepts the theory held by Prof. Dupont-Sommer that the
Scrolls may have belonged to the Jewish sect of the Essenes, and may
have been part of the library of Khirbet-Qumran, which possibly was an
Essene monastery. The Essenes---before suffering martyrdom at the hands
of the Romans---may have hidden their library in the cave of the
vicinity, after the Jewish War of A.D. 66---70.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the grottoes of Wadi Maraba'at, apparently numerous fragments of
leather were found, some written in Aramaic or Greek, others in Hebrew;
there are included portions of]{.style_} [Genesis]{.style_1}[,]{.style_}
[Exodus]{.style_1}[, and]{.style_} [Deuteronomy]{.style_1}[, as well as
two letters, said to have been written by the famous---though partly
mythical---Jewish hero Bar Kokhba, the great leader in the Jewish War of
A.D. 132---5. Even more exciting---at least from the literary point of
view---is the discovery of a papyrus palimpsest, not yet deciphered, but
apparently written in the Early Hebrew script, employed in the period of
the Hebrew monarchy. The discoveries of Wadi Maraba'at are said to have
no connection with the Dead Sea Scrolls.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A further report from Jerusalem (of April 12th, 1952) mentions the
research carried out in forty caves in the neighbourhood of the Dead
Sea. In one cave, two tightly rolled strips of copper or bronze were
found. They are said to be about inches long and 12---14 inches wide,
and to be engraved with a long text in Square Hebrew characters, divided
into columns.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The "most sensational archaeological event of our time" has been
reported recently (April, 1953) from Amman, apparently consisting in the
discovery, in caves overlooking the Dead Sea, of seventy Biblical
scrolls, in Hebrew, Greek and Aramaic, believed to be about 2,000 years
old.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-404}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PERSIANS AND IONIAN GREEKS]{.style_2} {#persians-and-ionian-greeks .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to Diodorus Siculus (]{.style_}[Bibl. Hist.]{.style_1} [II,
xxxii, 4), Ctesias, the Greek historian of Persia, reported to have
derived his knowledge of early Persian history from the Persian royal
chronicles (]{.style_}[basilikaì diphthérai,]{.style_1} ["royal
leathers"), which were written on skins of sheep or goats; the date of
these chronicles is, however, not specified. It is probable, moreover,
that the Persian "book of records of the chronicles" (]{.style_}[sepher
ha-zikron th dibr ha-yam m]{.style_1}[) of]{.style_} [Esth]{.style_1}[.,
vi, 1, and the royal record written on a "roll" mentioned in]{.style_}
[Ezra,]{.style_1} [vi, 2, were also written on leather. The Avesta
(]{.style_}[i.e]{.style_1}[. the Persian or Zoroastrian sacred
literature is supposed to have been written on skins of oxen.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[An important collection of fourteen official letters (or fragments of
letters)---assigned to 411---408 B.C. or thereabouts---written in
Aramaic by Persian officers, in ink on leather, is being published by
Professor []{#calibre_link-144}Driver: [Fig.
V---9](#calibre_link-142){.calibre9},]{.style_} [above.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Finally, Iranian documents from the Avroman Dagh are extant; they are
written in the Pahlavi cursive script, in ink, on leather or parchment,
and are assigned by Sir Ellis Minns to the first century B.C. See also
p. 192 and [Fig. V---9](#calibre_link-142){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[below]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is not known in what period the Greeks began to employ leather as a
writing material, but---as already mentioned---Herodotus records
(in]{.style_} [Hist]{.style_1}[., v, 58) that the Ionian Greeks had,
from antiquity, called books]{.style_} [diphthérai]{.style_1}
[("leathers"), because in earlier times, when papyrus was scarce, they
employed in its place skins of sheep and goats; and in his own time,
many of the barbarian peoples still did so. Consequently, by the middle
of the fifth century B.C., the employment of leather as a writing
material must have been widespread. It is quite possible that the
Greeks, at least in very early times, employed leather as a vehicle for
writing literature, but we have no direct evidence of it.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-405}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Introduction of Parchment]{.style_2} {#introduction-of-parchment .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It has already been indicated that it is uncertain when and how
parchment was introduced. Parchment, it must be emphasized, is leather
manufactured more elaborately. It may, therefore, be assumed that the
steady development in the process of the manufacture of leather
continued for centuries. This may perhaps be the reason why, for some
centuries, the Greeks had no special term for "parchment"; they
continued to employ the word]{.style_} [diphthéra,]{.style_1} [meaning
"leather" (it was also the Ionian word for "book") ; or they used the
Latin term]{.style_} [membrána]{.style_1} [(see, for instance,
2]{.style_} [Tim]{.style_1}[., iv, 13,]{.style_} [tà biblía, málista tàs
membránas,]{.style_1} ["the books, especially the parchments"). Only
A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 301---in the Edict of Diocletian---there
appeared the Greek term]{.style_} [pergam né.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[EARLIEST USE OF PARCHMENT]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Until 1909 our knowledge of the earliest employment of parchment as
writing material was rather unsatisfactory; no example was known which
could be attributed to a pre-Christian date. A new chapter was begun
with the discovery about the year 1909, in a cave in the mountain
Kuh-i-S l n, near Avroman (Persian Kurdistan), of a hermetically sealed
stone jar containing millet seeds as well as three parchment documents,
one being in Pahlavi, and two in Greek. Of the latter two,
one---containing an endorsement in Pahlavi---is dated to the year 225 of
the Seleucid era, which is equivalent to 88 B.C., and the other belongs
to 22---21 B.C.: [Fig. V---9](#calibre_link-142){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[below]{.style_1}[. The earlier document is the British Museum]{.style_}
[Add]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [MS. 38895 A.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Furthermore, several documents on parchment were found in 1923 among
the ruins of Dura Europos on the Euphrates, one of which bears the years
117 and 123 of the Seleucid era, equivalent to 196---195 and 190---189
B.C., thus showing that this material was then already in use at a place
far distant from Pergamum. It follows, therefore, that in the time of
Eumenes II (see p. 170f.), parchment was already in use as writing
material. On the other hand, the earliest extant specimens of parchment
used for literary purposes appear to be two leaves probably belonging to
the late first or early second century A.D. One
[]{#calibre_link-145}([Fig.
V---10](#calibre_link-143){.calibre9},]{.style_} [A]{.style_1}[) is
preserved in the British Museum (]{.style_}[Add]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}
[MS]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [34473]{.style_1}[), and the other in the
Berlin Museum (No. 217), the former being a fragment of an oration by
Demosthenes, the latter a fragment from Euripides.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000161.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-142}

[[Fig. V---9](#calibre_link-144){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Aramaic letter written on leather, fifth century B.C. (Bodleian
Library, Oxford); (below) second earliest Greek document written on
parchment (British Museum, Add. MS. 38895 B). It is dated to the year
22---21 B.C. It was found with other two documents near Avrom
n.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Among the Romans parchment (]{.style_}[membrána]{.style_1}[) was
extensively used; animals' skin prepared for writing upon must have been
in use among pastoral people in early times, but the purposes
of]{.style_} [membrána]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [charta]{.style_1}
[("papyrus") were distinct until late in the Empire: see further
on.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[To sum up, from the fact that in the early second century B.C.
parchment was employed at an outpost such as Dura Europos, it may be
assumed as certain that in more central places it was employed at least
in the late third century B.C. The story concerning the invention of
parchment by Eumenes II, as told on p. 170 f., may contain the truth
that Pergamum was a particularly important emporium for trade in
parchment and a great centre for its manufacture, probably with the aid
of some new appliances by which the Pergamum product,]{.style_}
[i.e.]{.style_1} [the "parchment", became famous. It may also be that in
the period of Eumenes II parchment came temporarily to the front as a
material of book production.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[For the first four or more centuries of the employment of parchment,
its use was not very popular. It is referred to by Roman writers of the
first century B.C. and the first century A.D. (Cicero,]{.style_}
[Letters to Atticus]{.style_1}[, xiii, 24; Horace, ii, 3, 2;
Martial,]{.style_} [Epigrams]{.style_1}[, xiv, 7), but it was then used
chiefly for notebooks, "for which purpose it competed with the wax
tablet" (Kenyon). The Roman Quintilian (A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[.35
---]{.style_} [c.]{.style_1}[100) even preferred to write on wax tablets
rather than on parchment. However, some Greek literary fragments written
on parchment are extant, belonging to the first or second century A.D.
(see p. 192), the third century (a fragment of Tatian's]{.style_}
[Diatessaron---]{.style_1} [see p. 250), and A.D.]{.style_}
[c]{.style_1}[. 300 (fragments of the]{.style_} [Iliad]{.style_1} [and
the]{.style_} [Odyssey]{.style_1}[).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-406}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PARCHMENT WINS THE FIELD]{.style_2} {#parchment-wins-the-field .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[With the introduction of parchment, a fine smooth writing material was
produced, almost white in colour, capable of receiving writing on both
sides, and of great enduring power. The chief qualities of
parchment---when in later times its manufacture was greatly
improved---especially of vellum, are its semi-transparent fineness and
the striking beauty of its polish, particularly on the hair side. The
flesh side of the parchment is somewhat darker, but it retains the ink
better.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The advantages of parchment over papyrus were no doubt obvious (see
also p. 165 ff.) ; it was a much tougher and more lasting material than
the fragile papyrus; the leaves could receive writing on both sides;
ink, particularly if recently applied, could be easily removed for
corrections, and the surface could be readily made available for a
second writing (a second-hand manuscript of this sort is known as
"palimpsest"---see pp. 215---223).]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000162.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-143}

[[Fig. V---10](#calibre_link-145){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[A, The earliest extant Greek literary document on parchment : Oration
by Demosthenes ; late first century A.D. (British Museum, Add. MS.
34473). B, Books in the form of rolls: roll written in page form; roll
written longitudinally; and roll written across its width. c, Folding of
parchment codices: a, folio; b, quarto (quaternion); c, octavo; d, four
quaternions stitched together. Drawing by Ella Margules.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[With all these and other advantages, the natural conservatism of the
ancient world, as well as the traditions of the book trade, especially
among the non-Christians, were only gradually overcome. However, not
even parchment was without defects: for example, with the parchment
codices the edges of the leaves are apt to cockle. Also, it was much
heavier than papyrus, and more difficult to handle. The great physician
and philosopher Galen (Claudius Galenus, born in A.D. 130), who was a
very prolific writer, stated that parchment, which is shiny, strains the
eyes much more than papyrus, which does not reflect light.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Parchment competed rather with wax tablets than with papyrus,
and---usually bound in the codex form---it was used for account books,
for wills, and for notes. The]{.style_} [membrana]{.style_1} [mentioned
in Horace (]{.style_}[Sat]{.style_1}[., ii, 3, 2) was used for the rough
copy of poems to be altered and published later, and the same purpose
was served by the parchment in a diptych stained yellow referred to by
Juvenal (vii, 24).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Parchment was the heavier and more vulgar material; and clearly was
considered inferior to papyrus. Gifts of books written in]{.style_}
[pugillaribus membranis]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [in
membranis]{.style_1} [are presents of a cheaper sort (Martial, xiv,
183---96). Till long after the Augustine period,]{.style_}
[charta,]{.style_1} [meaning "papyrus", was used for literary
publications generally. Indeed, all the references in Roman literature
until the end of the first century of the Christian era are plainly to
papyrus, which is regarded by Pliny "as the principal and essential
organ of human civilization and history".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Curiously enough, even at the end of the fourth century A.D., and even
in the Christian world and "in a country far removed from Egypt, we find
Augustine apologizing for using vellum for a letter, in place of either
papyrus or his private tablets, which he has dispatched elsewhere"
(Kenyon).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, as already indicated, the growth of the Christian community
brought parchment into prominence, and it was in the first half of the
fourth century A.D. that vellum or parchment definitely superseded
papyrus as the material used for the best books. It happened that at
about the same time the Emperor Constantine the Great proclaimed
Christianity as the State religion of the Roman Empire.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The "Father" of Church history, Eusebius, known as Eusebius Pamphili of
Caesarea (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 264---]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[.
349), records (]{.style_}[Life of Constantine]{.style_1}[, iv, 36) that
in 332 the Emperor Constantine ordered "fifty copies of the Sacred
Scriptures \... to be written on prepared parchment in a legible manner,
and in a convenient, portable form \...", for the churches in Byzantium
(which became his new capital, Constantinople). This order was "followed
(wrote Eusebius) by the immediate execution of the work itself, which we
sent him in magnificent and elaborately bound volumes of a three-fold
and four-fold form" (]{.style_}[i.e]{.style_1}[. having three columns
and four columns to the page). Furthermore, according to Jerome (d.
420), in the mid-fourth century, when the Christian library of Origen
(186---]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 254) and of the martyr Pamphilus had
fallen into decay, its damaged papyrus rolls were replaced by copies
written on vellum. Finally, as early as the year A.D. 372 an edict of
Valentinian mentions the employment in libraries of scribes appointed to
produce codices.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-407}

::: calibre5
:::

## [EARLIEST VELLUM CODICES []{#calibre_link-148 .calibre14}([Fig. V---11](#calibre_link-146){.calibre13}---13)]{.style_2} {#earliest-vellum-codices-fig.-v1113 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is an interesting coincidence that the earliest preserved Greek
Bibles written on vellum codices belong precisely to this period: these
are the famous]{.style_} [Codex Sinaiticus]{.style_1} [([Fig.
V---11](#calibre_link-146){.calibre9}), which in 1933 was purchased by
the British Museum from the Soviet Government for £100,000, and
the]{.style_} [Codex Vaticanus]{.style_1} [of the Vatican Library, which
is considered by Sir Frederic Kenyon as the most valuable of all the
manuscripts of the Greek Bible. Also the earliest preserved Latin vellum
codices are attributed to the fourth century A.D., for example,
the]{.style_} [Vercelli Gospels]{.style_1} []{#calibre_link-178}[([Fig.
VII---1](#calibre_link-147){.calibre9}).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[About 5,000 Greek vellum codices of the Bible are extant. The following
are the earliest and by far the most important.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Sinaiticus]{.style_1} [([Fig
V---11](#calibre_link-146){.calibre9}) is known also as]{.style_} [Codex
S]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [Codex Aleph]{.style_1} [(the latter being
the more correct term). Originally it probably had at least 730 leaves;
now there are only 390 (the rest went to the Sinai "waste-paper
basket"!), of which 242 contain a great part of the O.T., and 148
contain the whole N.T. with some other Christian writings. The story of
its discovery in the monastery of St. Catherine at the foot of Mount
Sinai, and of its acquisition by the British Museum, reads like a
romance. (See F. G. Kenyon,]{.style_} [Our Bible and the Ancient
Manuscripts]{.style_1}[, London, 1939, pp. 128---35, where the
importance of this manuscript for Biblical studies is emphasized).
Forty-three leaves of this codex (all of the O.T.) are in Leipsic, three
fragments at Leningrad, and all the remaining leaves are in the British
Museum, beautifully bound by Mr. Douglas Cockerell (British
Museum,]{.style_} [Add]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [MS]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}
[43725]{.style_1}[); the Leipsic fragment is known as]{.style_}
[Cod]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [Gr. 1,]{.style_1} [Leipzig, or]{.style_}
[Codex Friderico-Augustanus.]{.style_1}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000164.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-146}

[[Fig. V---11](#calibre_link-148){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Sinaiticus, fourth century A.D. (British Museum, Add. MS.
43725).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The leaves, quite well preserved, are of vellum, made from fine skins;
originally they measured 15 inches by inches. The text is written in
four columns to the page (two in the poetical books), with forty-eight
lines to the column; the writing is of the fourth century A.D., perhaps
of the middle of that century; it is a large, clear and beautiful uncial
hand, without much attempt at ornamentation. The words are written
continuously without separation, but high and middle points as well as
the colon are used for punctuation. There are no accents or breathings.
Sacred names are abbreviated. It seems to have been written by three
scribes, and it has been corrected by at least three correctors, "who
seem to have worked on the manuscript at Caesarea at the end of the
sixth or beginning of the seventh century" (Kenyon). The place of origin
of this codex is uncertain; various places were suggested, even Rome;
however, Egypt (and especially Alexandria) is probable, and Palestine
(especially Caesarea) possible.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Vaticanus]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [Codex B]{.style_1} [has been
in the Vatican Library at least since 1481, but before the nineteenth
century no scholar was allowed to study or edit it, and only sixty years
ago, when a complete photographic facsimile of it was published, it
became commonly available. For some years it was in Paris, where
Napoleon brought it as a victory trophy, but in 1815 it was returned to
the Vatican Library. Originally it contained the whole Greek Bible, but
in the course of time many parts have disappeared (the]{.style_}
[Apocalypse]{.style_1}[, parts of]{.style_} [Genesis]{.style_1}[, of
the]{.style_} [Psalms]{.style_1}[, and so on). It is preserved in the
Vatican Library as]{.style_} [Codex Vat. Gr. 1209]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Out of about 820 original leaves, there are now 759. They are of very
fine vellum, and measure inches x 10 inches. The text is written in
three columns to the page. Unlike]{.style_} [Codex Aleph,]{.style_1}
[this manuscript is written in small and delicate uncials, although
(like the former) perfectly simple and without attempt at ornamentation.
"There are no enlarged initials, no stops or accents, no divisions into
chapters or sections \... but a different system of division peculiar to
this manuscript. Unfortunately, the beauty of the original writing has
been spoilt by a later corrector, who, thinking perhaps that the
original ink was becoming faint, traced over every letter afresh,
omitting only those letters and words which he believed to be incorrect.
Thus it is only in the case of such words that we see the original
writing untouched and uninjured" (Kenyon). There are corrections by
various hands.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Many scholars consider]{.style_} [Codex Vaticanus]{.style_1} [as the
best representative text of the]{.style_} [Septuagint.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The place of origin of]{.style_} [Codex B]{.style_1} [may be the same
as that of]{.style_} [Codex Aleph.]{.style_1} [As to its date, it also
belongs to the fourth century A.D., but the more complete absence of
ornamentation has generally caused it to be regarded as slightly the
older.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Alexandrinus:]{.style_1} [this---being the first of the earliest
greater manuscripts to be made accessible to scholars---is
called]{.style_} [Codex A.]{.style_1} [Cyril Lucar, Patriarch of
Constantinople and late Patriarch of Alexandria, brought it from the
latter city to the former, and, in 1627, it was presented to King
Charles I. George II presented it to the British Museum. Traditionally
it is assigned to the first half of the fourth century A.D., but it
probably belongs to the first half of the fifth century. "The leaves
measure x inches, having two columns to each page, written in large and
well-formed hands of round shape, apparently by two scribes in the Old
Testament and three in the New, with initial letters enlarged and
projected into the margin. The text has been corrected throughout by
several different hands" (Kenyon).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Alexandrinus]{.style_1} [is "one of the chief treasures of the
British Museum" (Kenyon): British Museum,]{.style_} [Royal MS. 1 D.
V.-viii.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Bezae or Codex D]{.style_1} []{#calibre_link-150}[(N.T.)---[Fig.
V---12](#calibre_link-149){.calibre9}; this is one of the chief
treasures of the Cambridge University Library. (It was presented, in
1581, by Théodore de Bèze, 1519---1605, Calvin's follower at Geneva.)
Its pages measure only 10 × 8 inches, each containing a single column of
writing. It is the first example of a bilingual Bible, for it contains
both Greek and Latin texts, the former written on the left-hand page,
the latter on the right. The writing (in uncials of somewhat large size)
is rather unusual, and the Latin and Greek characters arc so similar,
that both pages at first sight appear alike. As to its origin, Egypt,
Rome, S. Italy, Sicily, Sardinia, S. France, and N. Africa have been
suggested; in Sir Frederic Kenyon's opinion, the last one is the most
probable. Also according to Kenyon, this codex is the chief
representative of the Western text of the New Testament, and may belong
to the fifth century. "The MS. has a provincial look and can hardly be a
product of a great centre of calligraphy. The first fairly certain fact
is that it was used at Lyons in the ninth century by Ado and Florus. It
was from the loot of the Lyons church of St. Irenaeus in 1562 that
Theodore Beza \... acquired it" (E. A. Lowe).]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000165.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-149}

[[Fig. V--12](#calibre_link-150){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Bezne (University Library, cambridge, Nn. II, 41; fol. 304 verso
and 305 recto).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000166.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-152}

[Fig. V--13]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Left) the earliest Christian Chronicle. Jerome's Latin version of the
Chronicle of Eusebius (Bodleian Library, Oxford, MS. Auct. T.II, 26,
fol. 121). The oldest manuscript at present known, written in uncials,
in Italy, chiefly in three hands of the fifth and sixth centuries.
(right) Codex Laudianus; uncials, sixth century; written probably in
Sardinia. (See pp. 507 and 509).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Other very early Biblical codices are:]{.style_} [Cotton Genesis or
Codex D]{.style_1} [(O.T.), Brit. Mus.,]{.style_} [Cott. Otho B.,
VI;]{.style_1} [only charred remains of this once beautiful manuscript
are extant; it was written in a fine uncial hand of the fifth century,
and contained 250 illustrations in ancient style (see the book
on]{.style_} [Illumination and Binding]{.style_1}[) ;]{.style_} [Codex
Ephraemi]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [Codex C]{.style_1}[: palimpsest of
the fifth century, now in the National Library, Paris (]{.style_}[Cod.
Grec. 9]{.style_1}[);]{.style_} [Codex Ambrosianus]{.style_1}
[or]{.style_} [Codex F]{.style_1} [(O.T.), in the Ambrosian Library,
Milan: fifth century; there are three columns to the page; unlike the
other early manuscripts, it has punctuation, accents, and breathings
(written by the original scribe);]{.style_} [Codex
Sarravianus]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [Codex G]{.style_1}[, of which 130
leaves are at Leyden, twenty-two at Paris, and one at Leningrad, fourth
or, more probably, fifth century: two columns to the page;]{.style_}
[Codex Petropolitanus]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[H]{.style_1}[), palimpsest
at Leningrad, of the sixth century; the]{.style_} [Vienna Genesis or
Codex L,]{.style_1} [of the fifth or sixth century, written with silver
letters upon purple vellum, with beautiful illuminations, which will be
discussed in the volume on]{.style_} [Illumination and
Binding.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000167.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. V---14]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Primasius, in Apocalypsium (Bodleian Library, Oxford, MS. Douce 140);
half-uncial of the seventh or eighth century.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Marchalianus]{.style_1} [or Q, which comes from Egypt, and is
preserved in the Vatican library (]{.style_}[Vat. Gr. 2125]{.style_1}[),
belongs to the sixth century A.D. It contains the Prophets and was "a
principal authority for the Hexapla in the Prophetic books"
(Swete).]{.style_} [Codices Waslving-tonianus I]{.style_1}
[and]{.style_} [Wash. II,]{.style_1} [the former of the sixth and the
latter of the sixth or seventh century, are in the Freer Collection.
Finally,]{.style_} [Codex Tischendorfianus]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[Fragmenta Lipsensia]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [K]{.style_1}[, preserved
at the University of Leipsic (]{.style_}[Gr. 2, Tisch 11]{.style_1}[) is
a seventh-century palimpsest, re-used in the ninth century for an Arabic
book.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-408}

::: calibre5
:::

## [EARLIEST SECULAR VELLUM CODICES]{.style_2} {#earliest-secular-vellum-codices .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest extant secular works written on vellum codices are on the
whole contemporary with the earliest Bible vellum codices. It must,
however, be emphasized that the dating of early vellum uncial
manuscripts is a precarious task, since few fixed points are available.
The task is made still harder by the apparent practice of the scribes of
these codices to employ the elegant character of the second century A.D.
Thus, the earliest extant Greek uncial codex, the]{.style_}
[Iliad,]{.style_1} [preserved in the Ambrosian Library at Milan, is
written in a script which can be dated as early as the second century
A.D., but the codex cannot be earlier than the third, and is probably
later.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest preserved Latin vellum codices containing secular works
probably belong to the fourth century A.D. They are a group of Virgil
codices, such as the Vatican, Palatine, and Medicean (see Chapter VI),
and the palimpsest of]{.style_} [De Republica]{.style_1} [by Cicero
[]{#calibre_link-174}([Fig. VI---14](#calibre_link-151){.calibre9}).
This date, however, is not agreed upon, and some scholars suggest the
fifth century A.D. See also the book on]{.style_} [Illumination and
Binding]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-409}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE FINAL TRIUMPH OF THE PARCHMENT CODEX ([Fig. V---10](#calibre_link-143){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#the-final-triumph-of-the-parchment-codex-fig.-v10 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The final victory of parchment over papyrus in the sphere of book
production is due to the fact that the Christian Church, influenced no
doubt by Jewish practice, chose parchment to write their sacred books
upon. The Christians, however, soon diverged from the Jews in respect of
the form of the "book".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest parchment books, as already indicated, were in roll form.
Doubtless, gathered sheets of folded parchment were, though rarely, in
very early times applied to various literary purposes ---for instance,
among the Dead Sea Scrolls, a "folded-up" book has been discovered---but
the roll seems to have been the most general form for important
books.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Jews have continued until this very day to write ritual copies of
the Law on parchment scrolls, whereas Christians favoured the codex, and
the Bible in this form was quite common amongst them in the first half
of the fourth century.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In addition to its greater convenience for continuous reading, and
particularly for reference, the codex form had also the advantages that
(1) its size could be increased at will; (2) collections of poems or
short treatises, and especially of aphorisms, wisdom, or proverbs, could
be more easily transcribed.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Christians soon extended its use to their theological literature,
and then to literature in general. The parchment or vellum codex, having
thus achieved its triumph in the fourth century, remained the chief
writing material for books for over a millennium, i.e. until the
establishment of paper in general use in the fourteenth century, and
until the Renaissance. This period of the dominance of the vellum
book---"a book capable of the greatest magnificence and beauty that
books have ever reached"---corresponds almost exactly with the dominance
of Christian religion and Christian thought, "with the knowledge of
classical literature maintaining a fitful and difficult existence"
(Kenyon).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the Middle Ages manuscripts were generally on vellum, but sometimes
the material, though called vellum, was strictly speaking parchment.
Some of the early vellum codices extant, already referred to,
particularly those of the fifth and sixth centuries, are made of thin,
delicate material, with a smooth and glossy surface. At a later period,
as the demand increased, a great amount of inferior material came into
the market. In Italy, a highly polished surface seems at most periods to
have been in favour, and in the Renaissance period vellum was of extreme
whiteness and purity. In England, from the thirteenth to the fifteenth
centuries, soft vellum was sometimes used.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000168.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-177}

[Fig. V---15]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Sacramentary by Gelasius (Vatican Library, Reg. Lat. 316, fol. 46
recto); written at Corbie in the eighth century.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-410}

## [SERVICE-BOOKS]{.style_2} {#service-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[One of the many Christian innovations in book production was the great
service-books in the churches, such as the missal, the chorale, and the
antiphonary. (Many of such works were manufactured in Rome.) So, for
instance, an immense volume was laid upon the]{.style_}
[lutrin,]{.style_1} [or reading-desk, in the middle of the choir, and
the letters of the words and musical notes, which accompanied them were
of such a size, and so black, that they could be read by the canons as
they sat in their stalls with as much ease as an inscription on a stone
monument. These ponderous volumes, which were seldom removed from the
desk, or carried only to the adjoining sacristy, were a part of the
furniture, and almost of the fixtures, of the church, and were
frequently of great antiquity. Often they were garnished with corners of
brass, with bosses, and brass nails, to preserve the bindings from
injury in being rubbed on the desk or pulpit, and were protected from
dust by massive clasps. Some of the largest of these service-books, but
not always the most ancient, were laid upon rollers.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-411}

::: calibre5
:::

## ["The Book" of the Middle Ages]{.style_2} {#the-book-of-the-middle-ages .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-412}[([Fig. V---13](#calibre_link-152){.calibre9}---16;
see also Chapters VII and X).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The hand-written parchment or vellum codex is "the book"]{.style_} [par
excellence]{.style_1} [of the Middle Ages. Such codices are generally
termed "manuscripts" or MSS., from the Latin term]{.style_}
[codices]{.style_1} [(or]{.style_} [libri]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}
[manuscripti]{.style_1}[, "codices (or books) written by hand". From the
earliest codices extant belonging to the third or fourth century A.D.,
to the invention of the printing press in Europe, c. 1450, and the
spread of printing in the second half of that century, giving birth to
the "modern book", "the book" of the Middle Ages covers a period of well
over eleven hundred years.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Christian monasteries were the main book producers of the Middle
Ages. With the din of arms around him, it was the monk who, by
preserving and, especially, transcribing ancient manuscripts, both
Christian and---although in much lesser degree---pagan, as well as by
recording in writing his observations on contemporary events, was
handing down the torch of knowledge to future generations. In the most
important abbeys and monasteries a "writing room" or]{.style_}
[scriptorium]{.style_1} [was assigned to the scribes, who were
constantly employed in transcribing, not only service-books for the
choir and the church, but also books for the library and the monastery
school, and even lay books.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It must be allowed that we know very little for certain about the
conditions of book production in medieval times. W. Oakeshott asks: "If
a particular twelfth-century book was in a particular monastery in the
twelfth century, is that satisfactory evidence that it was produced
there, or were books often produced in one monastery for another?" "When
did the production of books by commercial scribes, even for monastic
use, become usual?" Only partial and tentative answers can be given to
these questions. Oakeshott has also pointed out that if an early
medieval book carries an inscription, which relates to its production,
we do not always know whether the]{.style_} [scriptor]{.style_1} [copied
the text, designed or completed the decorations, or was responsible for
all these things. "We seldom know anything of his status and seldom even
his name\.... There is nothing to suggest that in the Anglo-Saxon
period"---and, for that matter, generally speaking in early medieval
times---"the copying of books played anything like the part in monastic
life which it was to play later." And "there is nothing positively to
show that the decoration of the book, as opposed to the writing of the
text, was always done in the monastery", though we often find monks
described as painters, and we find artists holding some position in the
Church.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The devotion shown by some religious scribes to the task of copying and
illuminating is aptly indicated in the following passage.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["Let us consider then"---says a twelfth-century preacher---"how we may
become scribes of the Lord. The parchment on which we write for him is a
pure conscience, whereon all our good works are noted by the pen of
memory, and make us acceptable to God. The knife wherewith it is scraped
is the fear of God, which removes from our conscience by repentance all
the roughness and unevenness of sin and vice. The pumice wherewith it is
made smooth is the discipline of heavenly desires. . . . The chalk with
whose fine particles it is whitened indicates the unbroken meditation of
holy thoughts\.... The ruler by which the line is drawn that we may
write straight, is the will of God\.... The tool that is drawn along the
ruler to make the line, is our devotion to our holy task\.... The pen,
divided into two that it may be fit for writing, is the love of God and
our neighbour\.... The ink with which we write is humility itself\....
The diverse colours wherewith the book is illuminated, not unworthily
represent the multiple grace of heavenly Wisdom\.... The desk whereon we
write is tranquillity of heart\.... The copy by which we write is the
life of our Redeemer\.... The place where we write is contempt of
worldly things." (Extract from the Sermon on]{.style_} [Audivi vocem de
cœlo,]{.style_1} [added in a twelfth-century hand on f.37]{.style_}
[recto]{.style_1} [of MS. B. iv, 12 in Durham Cathedral, No. 59 in
Mynors,]{.style_} [Durham Cathedral Manuscripts;]{.style_1} [quoted from
Mynors.)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE SCRIPTORIUM]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In some great monasteries the]{.style_} [scriptorium]{.style_1} [was a
large room, usually over the chapter-house; it was in charge of
the]{.style_} [armarius,]{.style_1} [whose duty it was to provide desks,
parchment, pens, ink, penknives, awls (to give guiding marks for ruling
lines), rulers, metal]{.style_} [stili]{.style_1} [(to draw the lines),
pumice-stone (to smooth the surface of the parchment), reading frames
(to hold the book to be copied), and weights (to keep down the pages of
the codices); but even the]{.style_} [armarius]{.style_1} [was not
allowed to assign work without the abbot's permission. The scriptorium
was often built in the form of a series of separate little partitions or
studies. In some monasteries, especially in early times, the scribes
copied in the cloister.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[For the support of the scriptorium estates were often granted. That at
St. Edmondsbury was endowed with two mills. The tithes of a rectory were
appropriated to the Cathedral Convent of St. Swithin, at Winchester, in
the year 1171. Nigel, in the year 1160, gave the monks of Ely two
churches,]{.style_} [ad libros faciendos.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The scriptorium, besides being under the general discipline of the
monastery, had special rules of its own. To guard against irreparable
loss by fire and for fear of other damage to manuscripts, artificial
light was entirely forbidden, so all work had to be done during
daylight: the monastic scribe worked about six hours daily. To prevent
interruption and distraction, access to the scriptorium was denied to
all non-scribes who had no leading position in the monastery, and
absolute silence was required. Scribes were not allowed even to ask for
the books or other things they needed for their work. Thus, a whole
system of gesture-communication was introduced: if a scribe wanted to
consult a book, he extended his hands and made a movement as of turning
over pages; if the book required was a psalter, he made the general
sign, and then placed his hands on his head in shape of a crown
(alluding to King David); if a pagan book was needed, the general sign
was followed by scratching the ear in the manner of a dog.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It may, therefore, be assumed that, as a rule, the scribe copied his
book, and did not write from dictation. Indeed, as Madan points out, the
evidence of dictation is extremely scanty. "Alcuin, who describes the
copying work at York, seems to know nothing of it, and the word dictare,
used in connection with writing, means 'to compose', not dictate." See,
however, p. 214.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[When no scriptorium was available, separate little rooms were assigned
to book copying; they were situated in such a way that each scribe had
to himself a window open to the cloister walk. Only in special cases
were private rooms or cells assigned.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[SECULAR SCRIBES AND ILLUMINATORS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In addition to the monks who were regular scribes and illuminators,
there were special classes of secular scribes (such as]{.style_}
[illumin-atores]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [rubricatores]{.style_1}[),
who were brought to the monasteries when there were no competent men
there to do the required job. There were also men who, though
living---but not always---within the monastic precincts, and often
adopting the outward dress of monks, were, in fact, only lay brethren,
skilled in various handicrafts or trades. At Osney Abbey (Oxford), for
instance, a number of workmen, such as tailors, wax-chandlers,
bookbinders and book illuminators, who lived outside the water-gate, had
their workshops within the abbey precincts; similar arrangements
prevailed in other great monasteries.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is also known that important university towns had scribes and
illuminators who worked on a fixed tariff of charges. Particular mention
should be made of the guild of binders, scribes and illuminators of the
University of Paris.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It has also been suggested that there were numerous travelling groups
of artists and urban bookshops, and that between these various systems
of book production there was a considerable degree of overlapping. For
the famous Italian]{.style_} [botteghe]{.style_1} [(or "shops") see the
volume on]{.style_} [Illumination and Binding.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[[Fig. V---13](#calibre_link-152){.calibre9}---16 reproduce some
interesting medieval codices. See also Chapters VII and X.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-413}

::: calibre5
:::

## [COPYING A PARCHMENT CODEX]{.style_2} {#copying-a-parchment-codex .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Since parchment has two distinct sides, care was generally taken in
putting together the sheets for the quire (see pp. 163 and 215) to lay
them in such a way that hair side faced hair side, and flesh side faced
flesh side.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000169.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. V---16]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Chanson de Roland, a French epic of the Carolingian cycle, probably
of Norman origin (eleventh century A.D.), is the greatest heroic poem of
the Romance period. The specimen here reproduced is from the earliest
known manuscript of this celebrated poem (Bodleian Library, at Oxford,
MS. Digby 23, fol. 43, recto).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Thus, when the book was opened, the two pages before the reader had the
same appearance, either flesh side or hair side. It seems that in the
Greek codices, with little exception, the first page of the quire was
the flesh side; while in the Latin codices, it was the hair side. A
great number of books being left unbound, many scribes usually left
blank the first leaf, or at least the]{.style_} [recto]{.style_1} [of
the first leaf; the blank page or leaf was intended to give some
protection against tear and wear.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-414}

::: calibre5
:::

## [RULING]{.style_2} {#ruling .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[After the decision as to the style and size of the script to be
employed---the largest style being naturally reserved for books to be
used for public services---the margins of the pages were determined by
holes pricked with a compass or awl (]{.style_}[punctorium]{.style_1}[),
and by lines drawn from hole to hole with a hard-pointed instrument or
stilus of iron or wood (]{.style_}[ligniculum]{.style_1}[) and a ruler
(]{.style_}[regula]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [norma]{.style_1}[) ; space
was left for illuminations. Guide lines for the individual lines of
writing were also ruled (the term for "to rule" was]{.style_}
[sulcare]{.style_1}[) with the stilus, which made a little furrow in the
parchment (and, naturally, raised a ridge on the other side). In some
early codices ruling was not drawn for every line of writing, but was
occasionally spaced, so that some lines of the text lay in the spaces
and some stand on the ruled lines. (It may be mentioned that in the Dead
Sea Scrolls ---see pp. 176---189---the letters were not written on the
line, but were suspended from it, so that the effect produced was a very
regular top line, except for the letter]{.style_} [lamed,]{.style_1}
[and a less regular lower line, made even worse by an elongated form of
the final]{.style_} [mem]{.style_1}[.)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Ruling with the lead point or plummet came into use in the eleventh
century, and in the thirteenth century it became more or less general.
In fifteenth-century manuscripts we find also lines ruled with ink. In
earlier manuscripts the prickings are often within the width of the text
column, and the horizontal lines were not confined within the
longitudinal boundaries of the text. In later codices, however, it was
the custom to prick off the spaces close to the margin, and to keep the
ruled lines within the boundaries of the text, and often the prickings
disappeared when the edges were cut off by the binder.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The normal practice of ruling was as follows: Unfolded bifolia were
selected and laid "on top of the other, flesh facing flesh and hair
facing hair\.... Then followed the ruling guided by the prickings
previously made. Some scribes ruled each bifolium separately---this is
seen in some of our oldest manuscripts---others preferred to rule by
pairs; the majority, however, ruled all the bifolia at the same
time\.... Once ruled, the bifolia were folded in two to form a
gathering. In Insular manuscripts ruling generally preceded folding"
(Lowe). See also p. 215. There are some exceptions, however.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-415}

::: calibre5
:::

## [COLUMNS]{.style_2} {#columns .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Anciently the text might be written across the face of the page
(especially in poetical works), though generally speaking---continuing
the arrangements of the papyrus roll (see p. 135 ff.)---the page was
arranged in columns: there were ordinarily two columns, but
sometimes---especially in earlier codices or in exact copies of earlier
ones---there were three or four.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Indeed, the two great volumes which head the roll of vellum manuscripts
of the Greek Bible, the]{.style_} [Codex Vaticanus]{.style_1} [and
the]{.style_} [Codex Sinaiticus,]{.style_1} [having relatively narrow
columns, show that they were copied from rolls rather than from codices
(see p. 197). Further experience, however, showed the advantage of a
wider column. Hence, from the fifth century onwards the arrangement with
two columns to the page in the large vellum codices became normal;
though occasionally we find such manuscripts with single columns to the
page.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-416}

::: calibre5
:::

## [SEPARATION OF WORDS]{.style_2} {#separation-of-words .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In early codices (with some exceptions, however), as in papyrus rolls
(see p. 158 ff.), and down to about the ninth century, the text was
written continuously without separation of words. When the minuscule
writing came into use as the literary hand (see]{.style_} [The
Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp. 547 ff.), separation of words from one another
gradually followed, but even then the scribes used to attach short
words, for instance prepositions, to the words which immediately
followed them, and also to detach a final letter of a word, attaching it
to the next following word. In Latin manuscripts, a perfect system of
separately written words was established about the eleventh century,
whereas in the Greek manuscripts the system was at no time perfectly
followed.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The first lines of the main divisions of the text, such as the "books"
of the Bible or of the]{.style_} [Iliad,]{.style_1} [were often written
in red for distinction. The initial letters of sections or chapters, as
well as rubrics, titles and colophons, were at first written in the same
characters as the text, though the first letter of each page was often
made larger than the rest. At a later time different style was used; for
instance, in codices written in minuscule the rubrics, titles and
colophons might be in capitals or rustic capitals (for this terminology
see]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp. 541 ff.).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-417}

::: calibre5
:::

## [DIVISION OF WORDS BETWEEN ONE LINE AND ANOTHER]{.style_2} {#division-of-words-between-one-line-and-another .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the division of words at the end of the line, the latter generally
broke off with a syllable, but there were exceptions: in Greek codices,
in the case of compound words, the last consonant of the prefix or of
the preposition (and, in some other instances, single consonants,
especially the]{.style_} [sigma]{.style_1}[) was carried to the next
syllable if this began with, or was a vowel; in Latin codices, when two
consonants came together, they were generally assigned to their several
syllables (]{.style_}[par-tem, scrip-sit, misericor-dia]{.style_1}[),
but sometimes, under Greek influence, we may find]{.style_} [pa-rtem,
scri-psit, miserico-rdia]{.style_1}[. This division of words between one
line and another is indicated in earlier manuscripts by a dot; the
dividing stroke, or hyphen, appears in the eleventh century, and becomes
more systematic in the twelfth century, but then it is also repeated at
the beginning of the next line. In order to avoid division of a word,
and perhaps also to save space, towards the end of the line the letters
were often written in smaller characters.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-418}

::: calibre5
:::

## [DIVISION OF PARAGRAPHS]{.style_2} {#division-of-paragraphs .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[As in papyrus rolls, the paragraphs were at first not distinguished by
blank space, but by a horizontal dividing stroke (in Greek,]{.style_}
[parágraphos]{.style_1}[), or else a wedge
(]{.style_}[diplê]{.style_1}[), which was inserted at the beginning of
the new paragraph. At a later stage, the first letter of the new
paragraph was made prominent, by making it project slightly into the
margin, and by writing it in a larger character.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-419}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PUNCTUATION]{.style_2} {#punctuation .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[A regular system of punctuation---consisting of the high point
(corresponding to our full stop), the point on the line (corresponding
to our semicolon), and the point in a middle position (corresponding to
our comma)---is ascribed to Aristophanes of Byzantium (c. 260 B.C.): it
was developed in the school of the Alexandrian grammarians (see p. 155).
This system of points, or]{.style_} [positurae]{.style_1}[, was accepted
by the Latin grammarians---the terms being]{.style_} [distinctio
finalis, subdistinctio,]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [distinctio
media]{.style_1}[---but was never employed consistently. In early uncial
manuscripts we find the point used as a stop; and a colon, or colon and
dash, or a number of points used as a final stop of a paragraph or
chapter; in the seventh century we find the high point ( = comma), the
semicolon (with its modern value), and a combination of points and
dashes (=full stop).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the eighth century, there appears the inverted semicolon (a sort of
middle way between our semicolon and comma), the comma, and the
interrogation mark. Other marks are found in both Greek and Latin
manuscripts, such as the private marks of correctors or readers. There
are also critical symbols, such as that known as]{.style_}
[diplê]{.style_1} [and the asterisk used by Aristarchus in the texts of
Homer, or the asterisk and a sign called]{.style_} [obelus]{.style_1}
[employed by St. Jerome to distinguish certain passages in versions of
the Latin Psalter.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-420}

::: calibre5
:::

## [CORRECTORS, RUBRICATORS AND ILLUMINATORS]{.style_2} {#correctors-rubricators-and-illuminators .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[When the quire was completed, it was checked by a]{.style_}
[corrector,]{.style_1} [who compared the written copy with its original;
afterwards, it was sent to the rubricator, who added (in red or other
colours) the titles, headlines, the initials of chapters and sections,
the notes, and so on; and then---if the book was to be illustrated---it
was send to the illuminator. Finally, when all quires were written,
corrected, rubricated, and illuminated, the book was sent to the
binder.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-421}

::: calibre5
:::

## [COPYISTS: THEIR BLUNDERS]{.style_2} {#copyists-their-blunders .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[What we have of ancient literature, including the Bible and its
translations, and classical works, as already mentioned, are only such
as have come down to us through manuscripts copied by hand, often
several times removed from the original. It can be accepted, therefore,
that, generally speaking, a text---especially if it is the translation
of a copy, or a translation from such a translation---does not
correspond in some respects with the original, and the danger of faulty
judgments or beliefs based on inaccurate texts is now so well recognized
by scholars that texts are studied in the light of this
possibility.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The copyists did their best to be as accurate as possible, but the
human hand and brain have not been created which could copy the whole of
a long work without mistakes. Besides, in early times, the copies were
made hurriedly and without opportunity for accurate revision; the
copyists were often half educated, half illiterate. Thus, mistakes were
certain to creep in, and when once in existence, they were certain to
remain and to increase. The scribe was not allowed to make any
alteration in the text, even when the original was obviously
wrong.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The sources of error in transcription are so various that any attempt
to enumerate and classify them must be very incomplete. Sir Frederic
Kenyon distinguished three kinds of errors.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(1)]{.style_} [Errors of Hand and Eye]{.style_1}[: the copyist confuses
words of similar sound (as in English]{.style_} [there]{.style_1}
[and]{.style_} [their, here]{.style_1} [and]{.style_}
[hear]{.style_1}[). It is known that in later antiquity the]{.style_}
[librarii]{.style_1} [often employed dictation; a manuscript was read
aloud and copied by several scribes simultaneously, hence the frequent
errors due to confusion of sounds. More frequent, however, were errors
due to the influence of the immediate context. Sometimes two successive
lines of the manuscript, which was being copied, ended with the same or
similar words, and the copyist's eye slipped from the first to the
second, and omitted a line: such omission is called]{.style_}
[homoioteleutón]{.style_1} [("similarity of endings"). The main errors
of the eye are confusions of letters (such as E-F in
majuscules,]{.style_} [s-f]{.style_1} [in minuscules,]{.style_}
[c-e]{.style_1} [in the Carolingian minuscules,]{.style_}
[c-t]{.style_1} [in the black-letter) ; omissions or transpositions or
additions of letters; confusions of words or abbreviations; loss of
letters, syllables, words or lines through some similarity in lettering
(]{.style_}[homoiographón]{.style_1}[), especially where similar letters
stand next to each other in the line
(]{.style_}[haplógraphy]{.style_1}[);]{.style_} [dittógraphy,]{.style_1}
[or "repetition" of letters, a group of letters, or words, or even of
lines.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(2)]{.style_} [Errors of Mind]{.style_1}[: the copyist's mind wanders a
little from the book he is copying, just as we do nowadays when we are
distracted. So, for instance, when the same event is narrated in two or
more different versions, the copyist unconsciously alters the words of
the one version to make them the same as those of the other; also the
phonetic confusions; the transpositions of parts of words, or words, or
even of one or more lines; the grammatical assimilations to the context,
and similar instances.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(3)]{.style_} [Errors of Deliberate Alteration:]{.style_1} [intentional
alterations,]{.style_} [in bona fide]{.style_1}[, of a phrase to suit
the narrative of another, or the combination of two reports of some
utterance into one: hence, there is a conscious tampering with the text
by way of substitution, or, especially, of addition, which is known as
"interpolation". Quite often an editor attempted to fill the ancient
gaps; for instance, according to Strabo, Apellicon
(]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 100 B.C.) attempted to supply what was
missing in a damaged text of Aristotle.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-422}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PARCHMENT CODICES ([Fig. V---10](#calibre_link-143){.calibre13},c)]{.style_2} {#parchment-codices-fig.-v10c .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The arrangement of the leaves of ancient parchment or vellum books was
essentially the same as that of modern books. Originally, the bcoks
consisted of sheets, each forming two leaves---hence the term]{.style_}
[folio]{.style_1} [(from Latin, meaning "sheet") ; but normally the
parchment book was composed of a series of quires fastened together. A
"quarto" volume, called]{.style_} [tetrádion]{.style_1} [in
Greek,]{.style_} [quaternus]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[quaternio]{.style_1} [in Latin, now]{.style_} [cahier]{.style_1} [in
French and "quire" in English, was formed of four sheets of vellum or
parchment (about 10 inches high and 18 inches wide), folded down the
middle and placed one inside the other; thus giving eight leaves or
sixteen pages. They were fastened, or rather threaded together by the
means of a string, thread or fibre, passing down the middle of the
crease of the innermost sheet of the quire, and running from the
innermost fold right through to the outermost, thus holding the leaves
firmly together.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Many variations of form, both smaller and larger than]{.style_}
[quarto]{.style_1} [are found, and we find also quires of six, ten and
twelve leaves. A quire consisting of five sheets (i.e. ten leaves or
twenty pages) was called]{.style_} [quinternio]{.style_1}
[("quinternion").]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The quires fastened together to form a book were marked (so that their
order might not be lost), and sent to the scribe or copyist to write on,
and were eventually bound.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[On the whole, "It stands to reason that not all writing centres
followed the same method in the manufacture of a book. Since this was a
craft, it had a technique, and different schools had different
practices. Thus, for example, some centre or centres in North-East
France, easily recognizable by certain script peculiarities, had a
special way of ruling and arranging the leaves\.... The same practice .
. . may have a bearing on the question of the manuscript's home.
Furthermore, the general observation regarding Insular manuscripts . . .
is found to be valid for most of the Irish and Anglo-Saxon items, namely
that Insular scribes had a tendency to rule the membranes after the
bifolia were folded into a gathering, with the direct impression on the
recto side of folios, now on each recto, now on alternate rectos, and
occasionally, when the lines seemed too faint, even on the verso"
(Lowe). See also p. 205 ff.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-423}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PALIMPSESTS []{#calibre_link-154 .calibre14}([Figs. V---17](#calibre_link-153){.calibre13}---20, VI---14, and X---7,]{.style_2} [a]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#palimpsests-figs.-v1720-vi14-and-x7-a .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It has already been mentioned that one of the main advantages of
parchment was that writing could be washed or scraped off, so that the
parchment could be used again. This practice was due to the scarcity and
high cost of writing material. The term]{.style_} [palimpsest]{.style_1}
[(from Greek]{.style_} [palímpsestos,]{.style_1} ["scraped again") is
already used by classical writers, such as Catullus
(]{.style_}[Carm]{.style_1}[., xxii, 5), Cicero (]{.style_}[Ad
Fam]{.style_1}[., xii, 18), and Plutarch (]{.style_}[Cum
princip]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [Philosoph.,]{.style_1} [ad fin.), but
the passages in question refer mainly to papyrus (and once to waxen
tablets), from which the ink could be washed off, but not scraped or
rubbed, whereas the word must have been applied originally---as it was
applied in later times---to material strong enough to bear such
treatment as parchment or waxen tablets. However, it is also possible
that the term became so commonly used as to have passed beyond its
strict meaning.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000170.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-153}

[[Fig. V--17](#calibre_link-154){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Greek palimpsest (Trinity College, Dublin, MS. K.3.4.A.,
N]{.style_1}[0]{.style_5}[. 28); lower script, Codex Z (Gospel of St.
Matthew), written in Greek uncials of the sixth century A.D.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000171.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-157}

[Fig. V--18]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[One of the most interesting palimpsests (Vatican Library, Cod. Lat.
5750, and Ambrosian Library, Milan. E.147, sup). The primary text of the
page here shown, written in Gothic uncials of the sixth century,
contains a Mesogothic Commentary to the Gospel of St. John.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[A great destruction of vellum manuscripts of the early centuries of our
era must have followed the fall of the Roman empire; political and
social changes interfered with the market, and writing material would
thus become scarce, and might well have been supplied from manuscripts
which had become useless and were considered mere encumbrances of the
shelves. In the case of Greek manuscripts, so great was their clearance
that a synodal decree of the year 691 forbade the destruction of
manuscripts of the Scriptures or of the Fathers, imperfect or injured
volumes excepted. Indeed, no entire work has been found in the original
text of a palimpsest; we may, therefore, assume that only portions of
different manuscripts were taken to make up a volume for a second
text.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000172.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. V---19]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Latin-Hebrew palimpsest (University Library, Cambridge, Add. MS. 4320),
found in the Cairo Genizah.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Palimpsests (in Latin they were also called]{.style_} [codices
rescripti]{.style_1}[) were most common between the seventh and ninth
centuries---indeed, the most valuable Latin texts are found in the
volumes which were re-written in this period; the employment of
palimpsests, however, continued even down to the sixteenth century. In
the earlier centuries the works of classical writers were obliterated to
make room for patristic literature or grammatical works; in the later
centuries classical works were written over Biblical
manuscripts.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The practice was as follows: the old writing was scraped off with a
scraping knife or razor, or with pumice, and a mixture of cheese, milk,
and lime was used to soften the vellum. If the first writing were
thoroughly removed, none of it, of course, could ever be recovered. But,
in point of fact, it was often very imperfectly effaced; the ink of the
old writing had penetrated so deeply into the vellum that even severe
scraping could not remove all traces of the text. Even if, to all
appearances, the parchment was restored to the original condition of an
unwritten surface, yet when the manuscript is soaked in certain
chemicals, the blue or red outlines of the old writing appear again;
even the action of the atmosphere might intensify the old ink, and make
the former text legible.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Unfortunately, after chemical treatment---primarily with acid obtained
from oak gall---the manuscript became so dim that it was impossible to
read it. More recently, in place of tannic acid, substances such as
hydrosulphide of ammonia were used; these brought out the old writing
for a short time, and while the text was thus visible, photographs were
taken; then the chemicals were washed out. Nowadays, photographs of the
old writing can be taken without any chemical treatment, simply by
employing infra-red or ultra-violet photography, or fluorescence. Many
valuable manuscripts which had been lost, including codices written in
capital and uncial styles of writing have thus been recovered from
palimpsests.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-156}

[[Fig. V---20](#calibre_link-155){.calibre9} shows part of folio 193 of
the]{.style_} [Codex Sangallensis]{.style_1} [known as]{.style_}
[Codex]{.style_1} [Δ, containing the Gospels in Greek, written in small
half-uncials of western type, while the later text is written in Latin,
in Insular minuscules. The photograph was taken by using the method of
ultra-violet rays developed from the researches of Prof. G. R. Koegel of
Vienna.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Sometimes the palimpsests are bilingual, the old writing being Greek
and the new writing Latin; or the old, Syriac and the new, Arabic; or
Hebrew and Latin. There are even, though rare, instances of double
palimpsests,]{.style_} [i]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}[e]{.style_1}[. in which
there appear three successive writings. A manuscript of the British
Museum (Add. MS. 17212), which comes from the great collection of
manuscripts of the Nitrian Desert in Egypt (see p. 301) is of that
description: a Syriac translation of St. Chrysostom's]{.style_}
[Homilies,]{.style_1} [of the ninth or tenth century, covers a Latin
grammatical treatise, written in cursive minuscule of the sixth century,
which again displaced the]{.style_} [Annales]{.style_1} [of the Latin
historian C. Granius Licinianus (who lived in the first half of the
second century A.D.) written in uncials of the fifth century. Another
interesting palimpsest, from the Nitrian Desert collection, is a work of
Severus of Antioch of the early ninth century, written on leaves taken
from manuscripts of the]{.style_} [Iliad]{.style_1} [and the]{.style_}
[Gospel of St. Luke]{.style_1} [of the sixth century, and of
the]{.style_} [Elements]{.style_1} [of Euclid of the seventh or eighth
century.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000173.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-155}

[[Fig. V---20](#calibre_link-156){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Palimpsest photographed by ultra-violet light. On the left is seen part
of the Codex Sangallensis photographed under ordinary light, and on the
right the same portion under ultra-violet, the palimpsest being shown
transversely. (From Antiquity.)]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The idea of using palimpsest manuscripts for the recovery of earlier
works was first taken up at the end of the seventeenth century, when
attention was called to the Biblical text (portions of the Old and New
Testaments in Greek, of the fifth century), underlying the works of St.
Ephraem of Syria, written in a hand which may be assigned to the twelfth
century. The palimpsest in question is the]{.style_} [Codex
Ephraemi]{.style_1} [(see p. 202), now in the National Library in Paris,
having been brought from the East to Italy early in the sixteenth
century, and taken to Paris by Queen Catherine de'Medici]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[One of the most important palimpsests is a Vatican manuscript
(]{.style_}[Vat. Lat. 5757]{.style_1}[) containing portions of
Cicero's]{.style_} [De Republica,]{.style_1} [of the fourth century,
written under the work of St. Augustine on the Psalms, of the seventh
century ([Fig. VI--14](#calibre_link-151){.calibre9}). The earlier
manuscript, written "in a large and massive style . . . must have formed
a large volume which . . . was presumably an]{.style_} [edition de
luxe]{.style_1} [on a scale which could not often have been repeated"
(E. Maunde Thompson). Cardinal Angelo Mai published in 1814---15
the]{.style_} [Codex Ambrosianus]{.style_1} [(Ambrosian Library, at
Milan,]{.style_} [G.28 sup]{.style_1}[.) of Plautus, written in rustic
capitals of the fourth or fifth century under a Biblical text of the
ninth century. A famous Verona palimpsest---discovered in 1816 by
Niebuhr---contains the only extant fragment of the]{.style_}
[Institutions]{.style_1} [(being an Introduction to Roman Jurisprudence)
of the eminent jurist Gaius (A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 110 --- c.
184), and the]{.style_} [Fasti Consulares]{.style_1} [of the years A.D.
487---94; the former is written in an interesting literary hand of mixed
uncial and minuscule letters ascribed to the fifth century, while the
latter is written in the half-uncial literary hand.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Even more curious are a manuscript of the Ambrosian Library, at Milan
(]{.style_}[Cimelio MS. 3]{.style_1}[), and a Vatican codex
(]{.style_}[Palatinus]{.style_1}[,]{.style_} [Lat.]{.style_1} [24), the
former being a portion of Virgil (140 folios are extant), in semi-uncial
of the fifth or sixth century A.D., "all rewritten, some more than
once"; the upper script is Arabic of]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 1100 (it
is a copy of a Christian work); "the lower scripts include Hebrew,
Syriac, Greek, Coptic and Latin; the Latin apparently much the oldest"
(Lowe). The Vatican manuscript, a fragmentary copy of the Old Testament,
written (probably at Lorsch) mainly in eighth-century uncials, a small
portion being in ninth-century minuscule, consists partly of palimpsest
leaves and partly of non-palimpsest leaves, which in Prof. Lowe's
opinion are evidently a restoration of a portion of older palimpsest
leaves. The earlier scripts of the preserved palimpsest leaves show
portions of the following works or authors: Seneca (written in
fifth-century uncials), Lucan (Rustic capitals, fourth or fifth
century), Hyginus (uncials, fifth century), a Greek medical fragment
(Greek sloping uncial, fifth century), Fronto (Rustic capitals, fourth
or fifth century), an oratorical fragment (quarter uncial, fifth or
sixth century), Livy (Rustic capitals, fourth century), Aulus Gellius
(Rustic capitals, fourth century), Cicero,]{.style_} [Pro
Rabirio]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [pro Roscio Comoedo]{.style_1}
[(uncials, fifth century). Another curious palimpsest is reproduced
[]{#calibre_link-424}on [Fig. V---18](#calibre_link-157){.calibre9}.
Primary texts of this codex ---apart from the]{.style_} [Mesogothic
Commentary]{.style_1}[---are Cicero, Fronto, Symmachus, Pliny, Juvenal,
Persius, and]{.style_} [Tractatus Arianorum]{.style_1}[. They are
written in Latin rustic capitals, uncials and half-uncials of the fifth
or sixth century. The upper text (]{.style_}[Acta Synodi I
Chalcedonensis]{.style_1}[) was written in Bobbio in the seventh
century. (See also p. 461 []{#calibre_link-245}and [Fig.
X---7](#calibre_link-158){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[above]{.style_1}[.)]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-425}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE ULTRA-VIOLET METHOD]{.style_2} {#the-ultra-violet-method .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Mr. Leonard V. Dodds gives the following description of the
ultra-violet method: Ultra-violet rays "are generated by a lamp of the
familiar mercury vapour type. In this instrument a direct current of
electricity is passed through the vapour of molten mercury contained in
a quartz generator, and electrons in the form of ultra-violet energy are
driven off similarly to X-rays. The burner is housed in a box-like
structure with suitable arrangements for observation and insertion of
the camera lens, and all rays emitted by the lamp other than the
ultra-violet are screened from the subject examined by the provision of
a special filter which is permeable to this group only. Consequently the
manuscript is illuminated by a beam of invisible ultra-violet rays only.
In some lamps a solution of copper-sulphate and a deep orange-dye,
nitrosodimethylanaline, is used to make the filter, and this is
contained between sheets of uviol blue glass, but in the Hanovia
apparatus, one of the most widely used, this type of filter has been
superseded entirely by a new glass, almost black in colour, which
transmits the ultra-violet rays only\....]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[When an old manuscript is examined in this way, the tints and dyes left
in the parchment from the earlier writings fluoresce distinctly from
those of the visible text and from the parchment itself, and the
palimpsest can easily be distinguished. By using a special filter the
later writings may be eliminated and a photograph taken of the earlier
script only, but it is of probably greater interest to see the two texts
on one print. The visible writings appear as if in outline type, that is
white letters with a narrow black edge, and underneath, or often
transversally, may be seen the dark grey lettering of the original text.
Slight imperfections due to the varying action of the cleaning process
are to be expected, but it is seldom that any difficulties in
deciphering occur which are due to visibility". "It is an extraordinary
development of science which thus enables writing erased so long ago to
be read again, and while the ability to photograph the fluorescence
makes a permanent record ready for immediate reference, testing with
ultra-violet rays has the great advantage over other methods using
chemicals which might be employed, in that no damage is caused to the
existing writings." (Quoted with permission from]{.style_}
[Antiquity.]{.style_1}[) See [Fig.
V---20](#calibre_link-155){.calibre9}.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-426}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BIBLIOGRAPHY]{.style_2} {#bibliography-3 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Palaeographical Society and New Palaeographical Society,]{.style_}
[Facsimiles of Manuscripts,]{.style_1} [etc. (ed. by E. A. Bond, E. M.
Thompson, G. F. Warner, F. G. Kenyon, and G. P. Gilson), two series
each, London, 1873-83, 1884-94, 1903-12, 1913---30. Indices, 1901, 1914,
1932.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. T. Gilbert,]{.style_} [Facsimiles of National MSS. of
Ireland,]{.style_1} [Dublin, 1874---84.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. Wattenbach and C. Zangemeister,]{.style_} [Exempla codicum
Latinorum,]{.style_1} [etc., Heidelberg, 1876 ;------and A. von
Velsen,]{.style_} [Exempla codicum Graecorum,]{.style_1} [etc.,
Heidelberg, 1878.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[L. Delisle,]{.style_} [Mélanges de paléographie et de
bibliographie,]{.style_1} [Paris, 1880;]{.style_} [Notice de douze lives
royaux,]{.style_1} [etc., Paris 1902;]{.style_} [Recherches sur la
librairie de Charles V,]{.style_1} [Paris, 1907.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. M. Thompson and G. F. Warner,]{.style_} [Catal. of Ancient MSS. of
the British Museum,]{.style_1} [etc., 2 parts, (I, Greek; II, Latin),
London, 1881-4.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. Vitelli and C. Paoli,]{.style_} [Collezione fiorentina di faseimili
paleografici greci e latini,]{.style_1} [4 vols., Florence,
1884-97.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. Chatelain,]{.style_} [Paleographie des Classiques latins,]{.style_1}
[2 vols., Paris, 1884--- 1900;]{.style_} [Uncialis scriptura codicum
Latinorum,]{.style_1} [etc. Paris, 1901-2;]{.style_} [Les Palimpsests
latins,]{.style_1} [Paris, 1903.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. Wattenbach,]{.style_} [Anleitung zur lateinisch.
Palaeographie,]{.style_1} [4th ed., Leipsic, 1886;]{.style_} [Das
Schriftwesen im Mittelalter]{.style_1}[, 3rd ed., Leipsic,
1896;]{.style_} [Scripturae Graecae specimina in usum
scholarum,]{.style_1} [4th ed., Berlin, 1936.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. Battifol,]{.style_} [Librairies byzantines à Rome,]{.style_1} ["MÉL.
D'ARCHÉOL. ET D'HIST." 1888.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Palma di Cesnola,]{.style_} [Catalogo di MSS. ital. esistenti nel
Museo Britannico di Londra,]{.style_1} [Turin, 1890.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. Sackur,]{.style_} [Die Cluniacenser,]{.style_1} [etc., 2 vols.,
Halle, 1892.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[S. Berger,]{.style_} [Histoire de la Vulgate,]{.style_1} [etc., Paris,
1893.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[British Museum,]{.style_} [Catal. of the Stowe MSS.,]{.style_1} [2
vols., London, 1895---6;]{.style_} [Guide to the Exhibited
MSS.,]{.style_1} [London, 1911; Part II, new ed., London, 1923; repr.,
1927;]{.style_} [A Guide to Some Parts of the Egerton Collection of
MSS.,]{.style_1} [etc., London, 1929;]{.style_} [A Guide to a Select
Exhibition of Cottonian MSS.,]{.style_1} [London, 1931. See also the
Catalogues of the various collections and of the Additional
manuscripts.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. Woelfflin, ed.,]{.style_} [Benedicti Regula Monachorum,]{.style_1}
[Leipsic, 1895.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[M. R. James,]{.style_} [Descriptive Catalogues of MSS. (Eton College;
Fitzwilliam Museum; Jesus College, Trinity, King's, Peterhouse, Queens',
Gonville and Caius, Clare, Corpus Christi, Christ's, Emmanuel,
Pembroke,]{.style_1} [etc., of Cambridge;]{.style_} [Lambeth Palace,
Westminster Abbey;]{.style_1} [the]{.style_} [John Rylands
Library,]{.style_1} [and so on), Cambridge, 1895 onwards;------and A. H.
Thompson,]{.style_} [Abbeys,]{.style_1} [London, 1925.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[R. Priebsch,]{.style_} [Deutsche Handschriften in England,]{.style_1}
[Erlangen, 1896.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Cte. de Montalembert,]{.style_} [The Monks of the West,]{.style_1}
[etc., London, 1896.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. M. Lindsay,]{.style_} [An Introduction to Latin Textual
Emendation,]{.style_1} [etc., London, 1896;]{.style_} [Palaeographia
Latina,]{.style_1} [6 vols. Oxford, 1922-9;------and E.
Carusi,]{.style_} [Monumenti paleografici veronesi,]{.style_1} [Rome,
1929.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Ebner,]{.style_} [Quellen und Forschungen zur Geschichte des
"Missale Romanum",]{.style_1} [Fribourg, 1896.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. W. Johnston,]{.style_} [Latin Manuscripts,]{.style_1} [Chicago,
1897.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. Denifle,]{.style_} [La Desolation des eglises, monasteres \... en
France,]{.style_1} [etc., 2 vols., Paris, 1897-9.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[K. Wessely,]{.style_} [Schrifttafeln zur aelteren lateinischen
Palaeographie,]{.style_1} [Leipsic, 1898.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. Malagola,]{.style_} [Sunti dalle lezioni]{.style_1} [\...]{.style_}
[di paleografia,]{.style_1} [etc., Bologna, 1899.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. Carta, C. Cipolla, and L. Frati,]{.style_} [Monumenta Palaeographica
sacra,]{.style_1} [etc., Turin, 1899.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. G. Kenyon,]{.style_} [Facsimiles of Biblical MSS.,]{.style_1}
[London, 1900;]{.style_} [The Story of the Bible,]{.style_1} [London,
1936;]{.style_} [Text of the Greek Bible,]{.style_1} [2nd ed., London,
1949.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Biblioteca Vaticana,]{.style_} [Codices e Vaticanis selecti,]{.style_1}
[etc., Series major, Rome, 1902 onwards; Series minor, Rome, 1910
onwards;]{.style_} [Collezione paleografica vaticana,]{.style_1} [Milan,
1906;]{.style_} [Exempla scripturarum,]{.style_1} [etc., Rome, 1929
onwards.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Rohault de Fleury,]{.style_} [Gallia Dominicana,]{.style_1} [etc., 2
vols., Paris, 1903.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. O. Hannay,]{.style_} [The Spirit and Origin of Christian
Monasticism,]{.style_1} [London, 1903.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. A. Gasquet,]{.style_} [English Monastic Life,]{.style_1} [London,
1904.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. Arndt and M. Tangl,]{.style_} [Schrifttafeln zur Erlern. d. latein.
Palaeogr.,]{.style_1} [I---II, 4th ed., Berlin, 1904-6; III, 2nd ed.,
1907.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Muñoz,]{.style_} [I codici greci delle minori biblioteche di
Roma,]{.style_1} [Florence, 1906.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[L. David,]{.style_} [Les grandes Abbayes de l'Occident,]{.style_1}
[Lille, 1907.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. Chapman,]{.style_} [Notes on the Early History of the Vulgate
Gospels,]{.style_1} [Oxford, 1908.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[M. Vogel and V. Gardthausen,]{.style_} [Die griech. Schreiber d.
Mittelalters,]{.style_1} [etc., Leipsic, 1909.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[S. G. de Vries,]{.style_} [Album Palaeographicum,]{.style_1} [etc.,
Leiden, 1909.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[L. Traube,]{.style_} [Vorlesungen und Abhandlungen,]{.style_1} [ed. by
F. Boll, 3 vols., Munich, 1909-20.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Chroust,]{.style_} [Monumenta Palaeographica. Denkmaeler der
Schreibkunst des Mittelalters,]{.style_1} [new ed., Munich,
1909.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[L. von Sybel,]{.style_} [Christliche Antike,]{.style_1} [Marburg,
1909.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Monumenta Palaeographica Vindobonensia,]{.style_1} [Leipsic, 1910
onwards.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[K. Lake,]{.style_} [Codex Sinaiticus,]{.style_1} [2 vols., Oxford, 1911
and 1922.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[V. Gardthausen,]{.style_} [Griechische Palaeographie]{.style_1}[, 2nd
ed., Leipsic, 1911---13.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[L. Havet,]{.style_} [Manuel de Critique verbal appliquée au textes
latins,]{.style_1} [Paris, 1911.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. Steffens,]{.style_} [Proben aus griechischen Handschriften und
Urkunden,]{.style_1} [Tréves, 1912;]{.style_} [Lateinische
Palaeographie,]{.style_1} [2nd ed., Berlin, 1929.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. Ehrle and P. Liebaert,]{.style_} [Specimina cod. Latin.
Vatican.,]{.style_1} [Berlin, 1912; 2nd ed., 1927.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. H. Thompson,]{.style_} [English Monasteries,]{.style_1} [Cambridge,
1913 (2nd ed., 1923);]{.style_} [The Historic Monuments of
England,]{.style_1} [London, 1924;]{.style_} [Bede,]{.style_1} [etc.,
Oxford, 1935. (See also M. R. James.)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codices ex ecclesiasticis Italiae bybliothecis selecti,]{.style_1}
[etc., Rome, 1913- .]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. Bédier,]{.style_} [Les Légendes épiques,]{.style_1} [etc., 4 vols.,
2nd ed., Paris, 1914---21.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. Muñoz y Rivero,]{.style_} [Manual de Paleografia diplomatica
española]{.style_1}[, etc., 2nd ed., Madrid, 1917;]{.style_}
[Paleografia Visigoda,]{.style_1} [etc., new ed., Madrid,
1929.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. C. Clark,]{.style_} [The Descent of Manuscripts,]{.style_1} [Oxford,
1918.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. Bishop,]{.style_} [Liturgica historica: Papers on the Liturgy and
Religious Life of the Western Church,]{.style_1} [Oxford,
1918.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[P. Scheuten,]{.style_} [Das Moenchtum in d. altfranz.
Profandichtung,]{.style_1} [etc., Muenster i. Westf., 1919.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[L. M. Smith,]{.style_} [The Early History of the Monastery of
Cluny,]{.style_1} [Oxford, 1920.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[U. Berlière,]{.style_} [L'Ordre monastique,]{.style_1} [etc., Paris and
Maredsous, 1921.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. F. Warner and J. P. Gilson,]{.style_} [Catal. of Western MSS. in the
Old Royal and King's Collections (British Museum),]{.style_1} [4 vols.,
London, 1921.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. Quentin,]{.style_} [Memoire sur l'etablissement du text de la
Vulgate,]{.style_1} [Rome, 1922.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[N. Barone,]{.style_} [Paleografia latina,]{.style_1} [etc., 3rd cd.,
Naples, 1923.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. G. Coulton,]{.style_} [Five Centuries of Religion,]{.style_1} [3
vols., Cambridge, 1923-36.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. Huizinga,]{.style_} [The Waning of the Middle Ages,]{.style_1}
[London, 1924.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[O. Schissel,]{.style_} [Kataloge griechischer Handschriften,]{.style_1}
[Graz, 1924.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. C. Butler,]{.style_} [Benedictine Monachism,]{.style_1} [2nd ed.,
London, 1924;]{.style_} [Western Mysticism,]{.style_1} [2nd ed., London,
1927;]{.style_} [Sancti Benedicti Regula monasteriorum,]{.style_1}
[Stanbrook, 1930.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[M. Prou,]{.style_} [Manuel de paléogr. latine et française,]{.style_1}
[4th ed., Paris, 1924.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[S. H. O'Grady and F. Flower,]{.style_} [Catal. of Irish
MSS.,]{.style_1} [2 vols., London, 1926.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[D. H. S. Cranage,]{.style_} [The Home of the Monk,]{.style_1}
[Cambridge, 1926.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[B. Bretholz,]{.style_} [Latein. Palaeogr.,]{.style_1} ["Grundr. d.
Geschichtswissensch.", 3rd ed., Leipsic, 1926.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. G. Crump and E. F. Jacob,]{.style_} [The Legacy of the Middle
Ages,]{.style_1} [Oxford, 1926 (repr., 1948).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. J. E. Raby,]{.style_} [A History of Christian-Latin
Poetry,]{.style_1} [etc., Oxford, 1927.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[S. R. K. Glanville,]{.style_} [Leather Roll British Museum
10250]{.style_1}[,]{.style_} ["JOURN.]{.style_1} [OF EGYPT. ARCHAEOL.",
1927.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. H. Haskins,]{.style_} [The Renaissance of the Twelfth
Century]{.style_1}[, Cambridge (Mass.), 1927.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[R. Graham,]{.style_} [English Ecclesiastical Studies,]{.style_1}
[London, 1928.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. A. Vasiliev,]{.style_} [History of the Byzantine Empire,]{.style_1}
[2 vols., Madison (Wis., U.S.A.), 1928-29]{.style_} [(Histoire de
l'Empire byzantin,]{.style_1} [2 vols., Paris, 1932).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[P. F. de'Cavalieri and J. Lietzmann,]{.style_} [Specimina codicum
graecorum Vaticanorum,]{.style_1} [2nd ed., Bonn, 1929.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. Morin,]{.style_} [L'Idéal monastique,]{.style_1} [4th ed., Paris,
1929.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[T. A. Cook and W. H. Ward,]{.style_} [Twenty-five Great Houses of
France,]{.style_1} [London, n.d.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. Vittani,]{.style_} [Nozioni elementari di paleografia,]{.style_1}
[etc., Milan, 1930.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[M. Ihm,]{.style_} [Palaeographia Latina,]{.style_1} [2nd ed., Leipsic,
1931.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. Evans,]{.style_} [Monastic Life at Cluny 910---1157,]{.style_1}
[Oxford, 1931;]{.style_} [Cluniac Art,]{.style_1} [etc., Cambridge,
1950.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. Doelger,]{.style_} [Facsimiles byzantinischer
Kaiserurkunden,]{.style_1} [Munich, 1931.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Milares Carlo,]{.style_} [Tratado de paleografia
española,]{.style_1} [2nd ed., Madrid, 1932.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[R. E. Swartwout,]{.style_} [The Monastic Craftsman,]{.style_1}
[Cambridge, 1932.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Z. Garcia Villada,]{.style_} [Paleografia española,]{.style_1} [etc.,
Madrid. 1932.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Wilmart,]{.style_} [Auteurs spirituels et textes dévots du moyen âge
latin,]{.style_1} [Paris, 1932.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[K. Young,]{.style_} [The Drama of the Medieval Church,]{.style_1}
[Oxford, 1933.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[M. Heimbucher,]{.style_} [Die Orden und Kongregationen der kathol.
Kirche,]{.style_1} [2 vols., 3rd ed., Paderborn, 1933---34.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. A. Lowe,]{.style_} [Codices Latini Antiquiores,]{.style_1} [Oxford,
5 vols., 1934---50.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Bruel,]{.style_} [Romans français du moyen âge,]{.style_1} [Paris,
1934.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[K. and S. Lake,]{.style_} [Monumenta palaeographica vetera. Dated Greek
Minuscule MSS.]{.style_1} [etc., Boston (Mass.), 1934-40.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. H. Crossley,]{.style_} [The English Abbey,]{.style_1} [etc., London,
1935 (3rd ed., 1949).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. Battelli,]{.style_} [Lezioni di Paleografia,]{.style_1} [Vatican
City, 1936 (3rd ed., 1946).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. Baskerville,]{.style_} [English Monks and the Suppression of the
Monasteries,]{.style_1} [London, 1937;------and H. E. Roberts,]{.style_}
[Notes on the Medieval Monasteries,]{.style_1} [etc. 1949.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Bruckner,]{.style_} [Scriptoria Medii Aevi Helvetica,]{.style_1}
[Geneva, 1938.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[L. Brehier and R. Aigrain,]{.style_} [Grégoire le Grand,]{.style_1}
[etc., Paris, 1938.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. J. M. Milne, T. C. Skeat, and D. Cockerell,]{.style_} [The Codex
Sinaiticus and the Codex Alexandrinus,]{.style_1} [London,
1938.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. H. P. Hatch,]{.style_} [The Principal Uncial Manuscripts of the New
Testament,]{.style_1} [Chicago, 1939.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. Westfall Thompson,]{.style_} [The Medieval Library,]{.style_1}
[Chicago, 1939.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Mallon-Marichel-Perrat,]{.style_} [L'écriture latine,]{.style_1}
[Paris, 1939.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[D. Knowles,]{.style_} [The Religious Houses of Medieval
England,]{.style_1} [London, 1940;]{.style_} [The Religious Orders in
England,]{.style_1} [Cambridge, 1948.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. W. Beard and A. R. Billington,]{.style_} [English
Abbeys]{.style_1}[, Worcester, 1949.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[See also BIBLIOGRAPHY to Chapters IV, VI, VII and VIII.]{.style_}
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: {#calibre_link-159 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-12}

::: calibre7
:::

### [CHAPTER VI]{.style_2} {#chapter-vi .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

### [GREEK AND LATIN BOOK PRODUCTION]{.style_2} {#greek-and-latin-book-production .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

[No original manuscript of any ancient Greek or Roman author (and for
that matter of any ancient Hebrew, Indian or Chinese author) has yet
come to light, and it generally comes as rather a shock when one first
learns that the oldest manuscripts extant are sometimes separated by
many centuries from the date at which the writings in question were
originally composed. Perhaps a millennium separates the earliest Homeric
manuscript extant---which has come down to us in fragments only---from
the period in which these famous poems were composed, poems with which
the matured literature of Greece and of Rome begins. And little, if
anything, is known of the earlier and ruder stages of Greek
literature.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-427}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Greece]{.style_2} {#greece .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The question of Greek book writing and book production in the first
half of the first millennium B.C. presents various problems.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE HOMERIC POEMS ([Fig. VI---1](#calibre_link-118){.calibre9},
2,]{.style_} [above]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The traditional dates for the composition of the Homeric poems vary
between the eleventh and the ninth century B.C. Some modern scholars
prefer the ninth, some the eighth, and others the seventh century B.C.,
some suggest even a later date. Sir Frederic Kenyon is probably right in
suggesting the ninth century as the latest date for Homer.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Were the Homeric poems composed in writing? The majority of scholars
deny it, but Sir Frederic Kenyon's opinion cannot easily be dismissed.
He admits that the feat of memorizing poems of such length is not
incredible: the poems, once composed, could have been recited; but it is
difficult to believe that they could have been carried in the memory of
the poet during the process of composition, and that the poet, after
completing them, assembled a corps of rhapsodists around him; and
recited his work over and over until they had committed it to
memory.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000175.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-118}

[[Fig. VI---1](#calibre_link-160){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Homer manuscripts written on papyrus. a, Berlin Pap. 6869 (first
century B.C.); b, Fayyûm, No. VI (period of Augustus); c, British Museum
Pap. 126 (fourth century A.D.).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[There is an even stronger case for Hesiod's]{.style_} [Works and
Days.]{.style_1} [It seems incredible that such a poem should have
survived unless it had been written down. "The same might perhaps be
said of the poems of the Epic Cycle\.... And if the works of Hesiod and
the Cyclics were written down, it is surely straining at a gnat to
refuse to allow the same to Homer." Sir Frederic Kenyon, therefore,
concludes that "sober criticism must allow that the]{.style_}
[Iliad]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [Odyssey]{.style_1} [were composed in
writing, and that written copies of them existed to assist the
rhapsodists who recited them and to control their variations". On the
other hand, such written copies were rare, and were only used by
professional reciters; there was no reading public, and the normal
method of publication was by recital.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[SEVENTH AND SIXTH CENTURIES B.C. []{#calibre_link-162}([Fig.
VI---2](#calibre_link-161){.calibre9},]{.style_} [below]{.style_1}[, and
3,]{.style_} [above]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the seventh and the sixth centuries B.C. Greek literary writing was
widely spread, though the recitations of the rhapsodies continued. It
was the great period of martial elegy (Callinus of Ephesus, 660 B.C.;
Tyrtaeus, c. 640 B.C.), erotic elegy (Solon, sixth century B.C., and
Phocylides of Miletus) and commemorative elegy (Archilochus, seventh
century; Sappho,]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 610---565 B.C.), of iambic
poetry, such as satire (Archilochus; Semonides of Amorgos,]{.style_}
[c]{.style_1}[. 640 B.C.; Hipponax of Ephesus,]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[.
540 B.C.), of melic or lyric poetry (Terpander of Lesbos,]{.style_}
[c]{.style_1}[. 710---670 B.C.; Sappho and the slightly older
contemporary Alcaeus---[Fig. VI---3](#calibre_link-107){.calibre9},
Anacreon of Teos,]{.style_} [c.]{.style_1} [550---500 B.C.), of choral
lyric (Thalctas of Crete,]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 670---640 B.C.;
Alcman,]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 640---600 B.C.---[Fig.
VI---2](#calibre_link-161){.calibre9} (see p. 245); Stesichorus of
Himera, Sicily,]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 640---555 B.C.;
Ibycus,]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 550 B.C.; Simonides of Ceos, born in
556 B.C.; Greek lyric reaches its zenith with Pindar
(]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 518--]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 445
B.C.).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[While there is no doubt that written copies of the poems circulated in
fairly high numbers, it is uncertain whether their authors gathered them
together into collections such as those which existed in Hellenistic
times (Sappho's odes, for instance, were arranged in nine volumes; the
odes of Alcaeus in six volumes). The existence of an organized book
trade at the time is also improbable.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[FIFTH CENTURY B.C. ([Fig.
IV---15](#calibre_link-117){.calibre9},]{.style_} [a]{.style_1}[, VI---7
and 8)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[With Aeschylus (born in 525 B.C.), Sophocles (born c. 496), Euripides
(born in 480), and Aristophanes (born]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 448),
Herodotus (born]{.style_} [c.]{.style_1} [484), Thucydides
(born]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 470---460), and Xenophon (born]{.style_}
[c.]{.style_1} [431), Greek literature reaches its zenith; book
production and book trade are already organized.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000176.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-161}

[[Fig. VI--2](#calibre_link-162){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) The Ambrosian Iliad (Ambrosian Library, Milan, Codex F.205,
inf.), variously attributed to the third to fifth centuries A.D.;
(below) Alcman (Louvre Museum, Paris, Pap. E. 3320).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000177.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-107}

[[Fig. VI---3](#calibre_link-163){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Alcaeus. earliest Aeolian lyric poet; late seventh and early
sixth centuries B.C. (Bodleian Library. MS. Gr. Class. b.18 (P.)). Parts
of four poems written on papyrus in the second century A.D.; (below)
Timotheus, Persae (col. 5, v. 187---247). The earliest preserved Greek
literary papyrus (fourth century B.C.). It was unearthed in 1902 at
Abûsîr, and is (or was until the last war) preserved in
Berlin.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Indeed, although no original ancient Greek manuscripts have been handed
down to our days, we know from several sources that from the fifth
century B.C. onwards the Greeks made much use of producing, selling and
reading books. In the time of Eupolis (flourished 429---41 B.C.), who
was a famous Athenian poet of the "Old" Comedy, there was a book market
(]{.style_}[tà biblía]{.style_1}[) in Athens; and Aristophanes implies
that books were easily procured in his time. Xenophon relates that a
rich youth, Euthydemus, surnamed the Handsome, had collected many books
of the most celebrated poets and sophists, and imagined that by that
means he was outstripping his contemporaries in accomplishments
(]{.style_}[Apomn moneúmata]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[Memorabilia]{.style_1}[, iv, 11). Xenophon also relates that the Greeks
who accompanied him on an expedition against the Thracians found at
Salmydessus, on the western shore of the Black Sea, boxes, written
books, and many other things, such as seamen carry in their wooden store
chests (]{.style_}[Anabasis]{.style_1}[, vii, 5.14). Plutarch tells us
(]{.style_}[Alexander]{.style_1}[, 8) that Alexander the Great ordered
the purchase in Athens of books written by Aeschylus, Sophocles,
Euripides, and of other works, including histories and poetry.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[HELLENISTIC AND GRAECO-ROMAN PERIODS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to Aristotle (384---322 B.C.)---as quoted by a great literary
critic of antiquity, Dionysius of Halicarnassus in]{.style_}
[Isocrates]{.style_1}[, 18 (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 25 B.C.)---the
speeches of famous orators were sold in Athens by the hundred. Even more
interesting is verse 1114 of Aristophanes']{.style_} [Frogs]{.style_1}
[(produced in 405 B.C.), which tells us that each man of the audience
holds in his hand a copy of the play.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[For the Hellenistic, Graeco-Roman, and Byzantine periods, preceding the
Moslem conquest, we can draw our information from the numerous literary
manuscripts, written on papyri, which were discovered in Egypt (see
Chapter IV). Frederic Kenyon has reached the following general
conclusions. During the last three centuries B.C. Greek book production
was spreading over the wide regions of the Hellenistic world; there was
a large output of literature, and there was also a general habit of
reading the great works of previous ages. After the Roman conquest, the
Graeco-Roman population, which was mainly Greek-reading, greatly
increased; and the first three centuries of the Roman Empire mark in
Egypt the climax of Greek culture, including book production and the
practice of reading. With the spread and the adoption of Christianity as
the State religion of the Roman Empire, while Christian book production
increased, pagan or secular book production declined, "until the Arab
conquest in the seventh century extinguished Christian and pagan
literature at once".]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-428}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Rome]{.style_2} {#rome .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is a somewhat curious fact that Roman literature and, consequently,
book production had a very late and poor beginning. Livius Andronicus,
the "Father" of Latin literature, was a Greek taken prisoner at the
capture of Tarentum (272 B.C.) and afterwards emancipated. He gave
literary instruction in Rome, for which purpose he translated
the]{.style_} [Odyssey]{.style_1} [into Latin verse. He created the
Latin drama, having produced in 240 B.C.---]{.style_}[i.e.]{.style_1}
[in the first year of peace after the First Punic War---the first Latin
plays, a tragedy and a comedy, based upon Greek originals. Even the
first Roman historian, the old annalist Fabius Pictor, the]{.style_}
[scriptorum antiquissimus]{.style_1} [of Livy, wrote in Greek. The
introduction of Greek into Rome, of Greek books and Greek literature
automatically caused the introduction of the Greek main writing material
for books, i.e. the papyrus roll, which henceforth became the standard
form of the Latin book.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[EARLY PERIOD]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[There can be hardly any doubt, however, that books were produced in
Rome in still earlier times. Cn. Terentius, a scribe under the
consulship of P. Cornelius Cethegus and M. Baebius Pamphilus (181 B.C.),
was said to have found the coffin of the mythical Numa Pompilius (the
second traditional king of Rome and reputed founder of the Roman
religion) together with a stone box, containing books written on papyrus
anointed with cedar oil (for their better preservation); this story,
told by the annalist Cassius Hemina (early second century B.C.) is
recorded by Pliny,]{.style_} [Nat. Hist.,]{.style_1} [xiii,
13.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The existence of earlier Roman books may also be argued from various
references by Livy (such as i, 20, 31 f., 42, and iv, 7, 13). For
instance, according to traditions, quoted by Livy, i, 31---32, Numa's
regulations were inscribed in an]{.style_} [album]{.style_1}[, or
"book", on the order of Ancus Martius, and Numa's]{.style_}
[commentarii]{.style_1} [or "memoirs" contained instructions concerning
certain sacrifices, which at a later period were found by Tullus
Hostilius. Fabius Pictor quoted the]{.style_} [annales
maximi,]{.style_1} [which were recorded by the Pontifex Maximus, and
preserved in the temple of Juno Moneta. Aelius Tubero and Licinius
Macer, who wrote in the second century B.C., cited the]{.style_} [libri
lintei]{.style_1} [(see Chapter I), or books written on linen, for two
accounts of the consuls of 434 B.C.; Livy mentions both
accounts.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THIRD AND SECOND CENTURIES B.C. []{#calibre_link-175}([Fig.
VI---19](#calibre_link-164){.calibre9})]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, in the second half of the third and in the second century B.C.
a great national literature has been created in Rome, as the following
list of authors and works will testify: Gnaeus Naevius, a tragic poet of
the late third century, who also wrote the]{.style_}
[Annals]{.style_1}[, a poetic historical narrative in Saturnian hymn; Q.
Ennius (239---169 B.C.), the "Father" of Roman poetry, whose great
epic]{.style_} [Annales]{.style_1} [(of which only some 600 verses are
preserved) occupied his last twenty years; T. Maccius Plautus
(]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 254---184 B.C.), whose plays were so popular,
that out of twenty-one reckoned genuine, twenty have come down to us;
the prose writings of Appius Claudius (280 B.C.) and, especially, of M.
Porcius Cato (234---149 B.C.), who compiled the earliest Roman
encyclopaedia, whose work]{.style_} [De agricultura]{.style_1} [is the
earliest extant monument of Latin literature (though the preserved text
has suffered from later revisions), and another work,]{.style_}
[Rhetoricorum ad C. Herennium libri quattuor,]{.style_1} [which is the
earliest Latin prose work preserved in its original text; in the Middle
Ages it was one of the most popular manuals; his historical
work]{.style_} [Origines]{.style_1}[, written]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[.
160 B.C. has been lost.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Caecilius Statius, an Insubrian Gaul playwriter, was brought to Rome in
222 B.C.; Terence or P. Terentius Afer (185---159 B.C.), who was of
Numidian or Phoenician birth, was brought to Rome as a slave: he wrote
six comedies, which were very popular; M. Pacuvius and L. Accius are
with Ennius the three great names in the history of Roman tragedy; Gaius
Lucilius (180---102 B.C.), the creator of Roman satire, is considered by
some modern scholars as the most original mind of early literary Rome.
Omitting casual fragments and quotations, very little has come down to
us of all this literary production. Only the works of Plautus ([Fig.
VI---19](#calibre_link-164){.calibre9},]{.style_} [below]{.style_1}[)
and Terence ([Fig. VI---19](#calibre_link-164){.calibre9}]{.style_}
[above)]{.style_1} [are more or less well preserved.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[We can take it for granted that the dramas, the tragedies, and other
plays, the lyric poems and epics, the historical works, produced in
considerable quantities, must have been accessible to those who desired
them; in other words, they imply the existence of a reading public and
the circulation of books in manuscript. Greek influence continued to be
paramount; Latin literature was based on Greek models; education was
based upon teaching of Greek and of Greek literature, and numerous Greek
slaves were brought to Rome, where they taught these subjects.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, there must have already existed a more or less organized book
production and book trade, though with regard to this period we have no
evidence whatever concerning the methods of publication, the appearance
of manuscripts, or their circulation. In later times the circumstances
were quite different. The earliest description of Latin books appears in
Catullus (Gaius Valerius Catullus, 87 ---]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[.54
B.C.), i, 1---6, xxii, 3---8, 1, 1---5, lxviii, 33, etc. See also
Tibullus, iii, 1, 9---14, iv, 7, 7---8; Propertius, iii, 23, 1---8,
19---24; Martial, ii, 6, 1---12, 77, 5---6, iii, 2, iv, 10, 86, 89, v,
6, vi, 61, vii, 17, viii, 62 and 72, x, 1, 2, 59 and 93, xi, 1 and 107,
xiv, 38.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[GOLDEN AGE AND DECLINE []{#calibre_link-172}([Fig.
VI---11](#calibre_link-165){.calibre9}---16, 18)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the first century B.C. with Cicero, Caesar, Livy, Lucretius,
Catullus, Virgil, Horace, Propertius, Tibullus, Ovid, and others, Latin
prose and poetry reached their excellence. With the death of Augustus
(A.D. 14) began the decline of Roman literature, notwithstanding the
prominence of many writers, philosophers and poets, such as Seneca,
Lucan, Persius, Quintilian, Valerius, Silius, and especially Martial,
Statius, Juvenal, Tacitus, and both Plinys; and in later times,
Suetonius, Fronto, and Aulus Gellius.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[BOOK PRODUCTION AND BOOK TRADE]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In that period, like the Greeks, the Romans made much use of producing,
selling and reading books. Atticus (see p. 244) had amongst his slaves
highly educated men and numerous copyists. He published the works of
Cicero and other authors, and sold them not only in Rome but also in
Athens and in other Greek cities, and probably in other places connected
with Rome. (See, for instance, Cornelius Nepos,]{.style_}
[Atticus]{.style_1}[, xiii, 3, xviii, etc.; Cicero,]{.style_} [Ep. ad
Atticum,]{.style_1} [xii, 40, 1 ; xiii, 44, 3, etc.). According to the
second-century A.D. writer Lucian, the works published by Atticus and by
Callinus were in demand "in the whole world". Tryphon was a famous
publisher of the latter half of the first century A.D.; he published
"best-sellers" such as the works of Martial (M. Valerius Martialis;
A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 40---104) and the]{.style_} [Institutio
Oratoria]{.style_1} [by Quintilian (Fabius Quintilianus, A.D. c.
35---95): see Martial, iv, 72, 2, xiii, 3; and Quintilian's "Prefatory
Letter" to the]{.style_} [Institutio]{.style_1}[. Atrectus was Martial's
publisher; the new books were advertised by him on large advertising
bills. The brothers Sosii were Horace's publishers: see
Horace,]{.style_} [Ars Poetica,]{.style_1} [345.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The appearance of the Roman books of that period has already been
described in Chapters IV and V, and various references from Latin poets
have been mentioned.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Varro's works (see p. 243) are said to have been sold in "the furthest
corners of the world". Horace's]{.style_} [Ars Poetica]{.style_1} ["will
cross the seas" (]{.style_}[Ars Poet]{.style_1}[., 345) ; his poems were
read in Gaul, Spain, Africa, on the Bosphorus, and in other parts of the
Roman Empire. Propertius (Sextus Propertius, elegiac poet of the latter
half of the first century B.C.) says (ii, 7, 17) that his name is known
in the northern cold countries. Ovid's works went "from East to West
throughout the world" (]{.style_}[Tristia]{.style_1}[, iv, 9, 21), and
Martial's works were read even in Vienna (Gaul).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Rome was the main centre of the ancient book trade in Latin books---we
are told, for instance, of the famous bookshops in the Argiletum; but
even provincial cities like Brindisi, Lyons, Rheims, and many others,
had great bookshops, where new and second-hand books were sold. The
poems of Martial (i, 3, 66, 117, iv, 72, xiii, 3) give us some
information about the trade in Latin books.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[BOOK READING]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Concerning reading, we get some information from Martial (iv, 8, vi, 60
and 64, x, 19, xi, 3, xiv, 183---95), Propertius (iii, 3 and 9), and
other Latin literary sources. It must be pointed out, however, that the
fashionable public recitations, of which we are informed by Tacitus
(]{.style_}[Dialogues]{.style_1}[, ch. 9), Juvenal
(]{.style_}[Satire]{.style_1}[, vii, 40---47), Petronius, and others,
did no good service to reading.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[REPRODUCTION OF BOOKS---ANCIENT AND MODERN]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[What happened to the text of these ancient books during the long
periods of oral transmission, or later, when hand copying was the rule?
Nowadays, when an author writes a book, he sends his typescript to the
printer, from whom he receives proof sheets; he corrects these until he
is satisfied that his text is printed accurately. Then, hundreds or
thousands of copies are printed from the same types---each one of them,
therefore, being exactly like all the rest---and are sent for sale all
over the world. The means of accurate reproduction, it must be
remembered, are only of comparatively recent date. It is disquieting to
reflect on the extent to which, before that date, a text was liable to
be corrupted or mutilated in the course of a long period of
time.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The ancients were already complaining about the mistakes of the
copyists. Cicero (]{.style_}[Ad Quintum,]{.style_1} [iii, 5) grumbles,
"I no longer know where to turn for Latin books, the copies on the
market are so inaccurate". He calls these copies "books full of
lies".]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-429}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PRESERVATION OF IMPORTANT WORKS]{.style_2} {#preservation-of-important-works .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In ancient times, as in our own, certain works were considered of high
importance. The fragments of Homer which have come down to us (see [Fig.
VI---1](#calibre_link-118){.calibre9}, 2) are the most numerous of any
old Greek manuscripts, but they are mainly of the]{.style_}
[Iliad]{.style_1} [and not of the]{.style_} [Odyssey]{.style_1}[. By
1945, the number of]{.style_} [Iliad]{.style_1} [fragments found in
Egypt was 364, whereas those from the]{.style_} [Odyssey]{.style_1}
[numbered only 119. "Homer," says Plato, "was described by his admirers
as the educator of Hellas". "And there was a great deal of literal truth
in the claim" (R. C. Jebb). Homer occupied a place in Greek education
comparable with that of the Bible in English schools. The extreme care
with which copies of such works were written was a guarantee against
serious corruption in those that have come down to us, even though in
many instances a fairly long chain of copies intervened between the
original manuscript and the copy which has reached us.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[We may assume that libraries all over the Greek World and the Roman
Empire contained copies of books of major importance so that in one way
or another at least one of the numerous copies has come down to us, even
if it is only a copy from a copy of a copy. Of the works of lesser poets
or writers, however, remarkably little has survived. Hundreds of poets
and writers are known either by their names only or by the titles of
their works.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Athenaeus, of Naucratis in Egypt, of the late second and early third
century A.D. wrote a work,]{.style_} [Deipnosophistae]{.style_1}
[("Connoisseurs in Dining", or rather "Learned Men at Dinner"), in
fifteen books; containing a conversation lasting several days among
twenty-nine erudite diners, on literature, art, science, grammar, social
and public life, and pleasures of the table. Over five hundred authors,
who would otherwise be unknown, are mentioned in this interesting work.
Amongst the lost works is quoted]{.style_} [Linos]{.style_1}[, a book
written by Alexis, one of the main representatives of the Greek "Middle"
Comedy (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 400--- 336 B.C.). Linos asks the young
Hercules to chose a book. "Look at the titles and see if they interest
you; here are Orpheus, Hesiod, Khoerilus, Homer, Epicharmus. Here are
plays and all else you could wish for. Your choice shall show your
interests and your taste." Hercules chooses . . . a cookery
book.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It has already been mentioned that all civilized nations of the ancient
world, and especially the highly cultured Greek and Latin peoples, had
rich libraries, containing numerous books on a large variety of
subjects, which were used for scientific as well as for educative
purposes. Yet, no ancient Greek manuscripts have been found either in
Greece or Italy, except for the charred papyrus rolls found in a private
library of Herculaneum; see pp. 251---58.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Apart from the papyrus literary manuscripts, mainly recovered in Egypt
(see Chapter IV) almost all preserved copies of Greek works belong to
the Byzantine period, and---with few exceptions, such as the]{.style_}
[Iliad]{.style_1} [of the Ambrosian Library, Milan---[Fig.
VI---2](#calibre_link-161){.calibre9}, or Dio Cassius, a fifth or
sixth-century manuscript in the Vatican Library---are rather late. Their
preservation is mainly due to the fact that after the fall of
Constantinople, in 1453, they were brought to Italy. In Sir John
Sandys's opinion, the best manuscripts of Homer are preserved in Venice;
of Hesiod and Herodotus, in Florence; of Pindar, in Rome, Florence,
Milan and Paris; of Aeschylus, Sophocles and Apollonius Rhodius, in
Florence; of Euripides, in Venice, Florence and Rome; of Aristophanes,
in Venice and Ravenna; of Thucydides, in Florence, Rome, Munich and
London; of Demosthenes and Plato, in Paris; and of Aristotle, in Venice,
Rome and Paris. Homer has been preserved in 110 codices, Sophocles in
nearly 100, Aeschylus in nearly fifty, Plato in eleven.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Latin manuscripts are on the whole---Virgil is the main exception
(for other exceptions, see for instance [Fig.
VI---14](#calibre_link-151){.calibre9}---16)---medieval copies and their
preservation is mainly due to Christian monasteries. "In the peaceful
seclusion of the monasteries a small part of the literature of the
ancients has survived the wreck of the classical world"
(Pinner).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-430}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Destruction of Ancient Manuscripts]{.style_2} {#destruction-of-ancient-manuscripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

["For every sheet of parchment or papyrus which has been preserved to
the present day, it is safe to say that thousands of such sheets have
been destroyed for ever. The ravages of time, the excesses of military
conquest, the bigotry of religious zealots, the fury of fire and flood,
and the carelessness of the ignorant and unthinking have all taken their
toll, and what is left is but a fragment of the records once written in
ages past" (D. C. McMurtrie).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Many peoples and events have conspired to deprive us of the greater
part of the literary treasures of antiquity.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Whether it be the Persians, who delivered a fatal blow to Phoenician
and Egyptian literatures, when in the sixth to fourth centuries B.C.
they destroyed the Phoenician temples and schools, and the Egyptian
temple-colleges;]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[whether it be political persecution, not unknown even in ancient times,
as exemplified by the public burning in 411 B.C., at Athens, of the
books of the Sophist and grammarian Protagoras; or by the public
burnings of books in Rome, even by enlightened emperors, such as
Augustus, who according to Suetonius (]{.style_}[De vita Caesarum:
Augustus]{.style_1}[, 31), confiscated and burned 2,000 books; also
Tiberius, Domitian, and others ordered public burnings of
books;]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[whether it be the Barbarians of the North, who invaded Italy in the
fourth and fifth centuries A.D., and destroyed the famous Roman
libraries;]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[whether it be the zeal of the Christians, who at different periods made
great havoc of non-Christian or "heretic" works;]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[whether it be the Mongols who ravaged the books of the Moslems, or the
Arabs who ravaged the books of the Christians;]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[whether it be---to limit ourselves now to England---the destruction by
the Anglo-Saxon invaders, the civil commotions caused by the barons, the
bloody contests between the houses of York and Lancaster, the general
plunder and devastation of monasteries and religious houses in the reign
of Henry the Eighth, or the occasional ravages of civil war in the time
of Charles the First;]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[whether it be the ravages of time and climate, of damp or the bookworm,
or of fire such as those which burned the famous Palatine Library, in
Rome, about A.D. 200 and in A.D. 363, or destroyed so much in the Cotton
Library of the British Museum, 23rd October, 1731;]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---we must accept Mrs. G. Burford Rawlings's statement that we "will
wonder, not that we have so few ancient writings in our present
possession, but that we have any".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[To enumerate only those Greek and Roman works of a literary and
scientific nature, which are known to have been destroyed or lost, would
form a catalogue of considerable bulk, but it may be interesting to
quote at least some amongst the most deplorable losses which mankind has
sustained. Many of the works extant are so mutilated that the fragments
which remain serve only to increase our regret for what has been lost or
destroyed.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-431}

::: calibre5
:::

## [LOSS OF GREEK WORKS]{.style_2} {#loss-of-greek-works .calibre12}

[]{#calibre_link-432}

::: calibre5
:::

## [HISTORY]{.style_2} {#history .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Our knowledge of the earliest Greek historians (sixth and first half of
the fifth century B.C.) is scanty, but even the works of the later
historians have reached us only in a fragmentary state. The]{.style_}
[History]{.style_1} [of Polybius of Megalopolis (end of the third
century B.C. to 183 B.C.) originally contained forty books: the first
five only with some extracts (made by various Byzantine compilers) and
some fragments of the later books are available to us. The]{.style_}
[Historical Library]{.style_1} [(a sort of general history of the world)
of Diodorus Siculus (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 40 B.C.) consisted
likewise of forty books: but only fifteen are extant (the first five,
and books xi-xx) with some extracts (collected out of Photius and
others).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Dionysius of Halicarnassus wrote twenty books of]{.style_} [Roman
Antiquities]{.style_1} [(a sort of early history of Rome extending to
the First Punic war, 264 B.C.) ; but only eleven now remain (i-x,
complete, and xi imperfect) and some excerpts. Appian or Appianus of
Alexandria (A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 140) is said to have written
a]{.style_} [Roman History]{.style_1} [from the earliest times to the
accession of Vespasian (A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 70), in
twenty-four books: only books vi-viii, xi, xiii-xvii, and xxiii, and
some excerpts and fragments from a few others have come down to us. Dion
Cassius (third century A.D.) wrote a]{.style_} [Roman History]{.style_1}
[in eighty books, from the earliest times to A.D. 229: only twenty-five
(xxxvi-lx) remain, with some fragments and excerpts, and an]{.style_}
[epitome]{.style_1}[, by Xiphilinus, of the last twenty.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-433}

::: calibre5
:::

## [POETRY AND DRAMA]{.style_2} {#poetry-and-drama .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Very little has come down to us of Greek lyric poetry and drama apart
from occasional quotations and the papyrus discoveries. Aeschylus wrote
over seventy plays: only seven remain; and the same number of plays have
survived of the 113 which were written by Sophocles. Euripides wrote
ninety-two plays, and Aristophanes at least forty-three: only eighteen
have survived of the former, and eleven of the latter. Quite a good
number of Pindar's odes have been preserved, and a small fraction of
Bacchylides' poems. All the other Greek lyrics (see, for instance, p.
230) and dramas have been lost.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-434}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ANTHOLOGIES]{.style_2} {#anthologies .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[John of Stobi, in Macedonia, known as Stobaeus, who lived in the latter
part of the fifth century A.D. and the early sixth, wrote two
compilations---naturally drawing from the best works and the best
authors---]{.style_}[Eklogai physikai dialektikai kai thikai]{.style_1}
[(a collection]{.style_} [of]{.style_1} [extracts from prose treatises
in philosophical branches) and]{.style_} [Anthológion]{.style_1} [(a
great anthology of prose and poetry, arranged under topics). Out of
about 1,430 quotations of the first thirty sections of the]{.style_}
[Anthology]{.style_1}[, 1,115 are from works that are lost.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Photius (A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 820---91) also wrote two
important compilations, the]{.style_} [Myriobiblon]{.style_1}
[or]{.style_} [Bibliotheca]{.style_1}[, and]{.style_}
[Lexicon]{.style_1}[. The former contains an account of 280 volumes,
including extracts from Hecataeus, Ctesias, Theopompus, Diodorus, and
Arrian; it also contains a summary of two of the earliest specimens of
Greek prose romance. The]{.style_} [Lexicon]{.style_1} [is preserved in
only one manuscript, the]{.style_} [Codex Galeanus]{.style_1}[, now in
the library of Trinity College, Cambridge. Photius mentions 470 names of
authors quoted by Stobaeus: the works of only forty of these authors
have been preserved in any substantial form.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Very illuminating is Sir Frederic Kenyon's statement that out of 366
quotations (mainly from the comic dramatists) in Athenaeus,]{.style_}
[Deipnosophistae]{.style_1} [(see p. 238), only twenty-three are from
works that we now have.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-435}

::: calibre5
:::

## [SCIENTIFIC WORKS AND MISCELLANEA]{.style_2} {#scientific-works-and-miscellanea .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[As to scientific works, early Greek astronomy from its beginnings about
200 B.C. to Ptolemy (A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 150) is almost
completely destroyed, except for papyrus fragments of a few elementary
works used for teaching purposes. Even Ptolemy's work is only in part
available, in Byzantine copies. Besides, as O. Neugebauer has pointed
out, the computations in the late copies of the Hellenistic mathematical
astronomical books are often hopelessly distorted: many centuries of
tradition through hand-written copies have badly affected numbers which
were of little interest, if not unintelligible, to the copyists. Of
Hipparchus (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 120 B.C.), the greatest astronomer
before the Christian era---the scientist who, amongst other things,
invented trigonometry, the precession of the equinoxes, and the method
of determining the position of places by reference to latitude and
longitude---nothing has come down to us except his commentary on
the]{.style_} [Pha nom na]{.style_1} [by Aratus, a poet of about 270
B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Greek mathematics "now consists of the fragments of writings of about
ten or twenty persons scattered over a period of six hundred years"
(Neugebauer).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[We know from Athenaeus of Naucratis that the Greeks had a great number
of books on cookery, horsebreeding, angling, and similar subjects, but
nothing of these has come down to us.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-436}

::: calibre5
:::

## [LOSS OF LATIN WORKS]{.style_2} {#loss-of-latin-works .calibre12}

[]{#calibre_link-437}

::: calibre5
:::

## [HISTORY]{.style_2} {#history-1 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Many of the works of the most ancient Latin historians have either
perished, or come down to us mutilated and imperfect. Sallust (C.
Sallustius Crispus, 86---35 B.C.), the earliest scientific historian in
Latin literature, the]{.style_} [rerum Romanarum florentissimus
auctor,]{.style_1} [as he was described by Tacitus, wrote a]{.style_}
[Roman History]{.style_1} [in five books, which was his maturest work,
but only four Speeches and two Letters, with some fragments, are
preserved. Livy's]{.style_} [Roman History]{.style_1} [consisted of 142
books, ending with the death of Drusus (9 B.C.) ; of this excellent work
107 books have perished; only numbers i-x, and xxi---xlv remain. A great
part of the elegant compendium of the]{.style_} [Roman
History]{.style_1}[, by C. Velleius Paterculus (]{.style_}[c.]{.style_1}
[19 B.C.---A.D. 31) has perished. A history of Alexander the Great in
ten books was written by the rhetorical historian Q. Curtius Rufus
(first century A.D.), but the first two books are missing, and there are
several large omissions in the copies which are preserved.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Tacitus (Cornelius Tacitus, A.D. c.55 --- c.117) wrote his]{.style_}
[History]{.style_1} [in some twelve or fourteen books, and his]{.style_}
[Annals]{.style_1} [in some sixteen to eighteen books; there remain only
books i-iv, and part of v of the former, and books i-iv, vi, xii-xv, and
parts of v, xi, and xvi of the latter. The first universal history in
Latin was written by Pompeius Trogus, from Gaul (first century B.C.?),
in forty-four books; only a synopsis and an abridgement have
survived---a mere shadow of Trogus. Ammianus Marcellinus (A.D.]{.style_}
[c]{.style_1}[.332 ---]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[.400) wrote a
continuation of Tacitus']{.style_} [History]{.style_1}[, in thirty-one
books, but the first thirteen are wanting.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-438}

::: calibre5
:::

## [SCIENTIFIC WORKS AND MISCELLANEA]{.style_2} {#scientific-works-and-miscellanea-1 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[To these losses may be added a great number of works in different
branches of science, law, and literature. Varro (M. Terentius Varro,
116---27 B.C.), who was styled the most learned of all the Romans, and
who excelled in grammar, history, philosophy, agricultural science, and
other fields of learning, wrote nearly 100 books (the number, indeed,
has been put at about 500!). Of the twenty-five books of his]{.style_}
[De Lingua Latina,]{.style_1} [the earliest extant scientific Latin
grammar, only the first six have survived. Nearly nothing has remained
of his forty-one books of]{.style_} [Antiquitates]{.style_1}[, of the
nine books of his]{.style_} [Disciplinae]{.style_1} [(the earliest
encyclopaedia of the liberal arts), of his]{.style_}
[Imagines]{.style_1} [(brief biographies of 700 Greek and Roman
celebrities), of his writings on literary criticism, or on
libraries.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Atticus, already mentioned, the great friend of Cicero, who was one of
the most honourable, hospitable and friendly men of his times, is said
to have written many works in Latin and Greek, but nothing has survived.
The inestimable loss of his work, containing biographies of great
Romans, which, like Varro, he ornamented with their portraits, is much
to be lamented, the more so as we know so little of the illustrations of
Roman books.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-439}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MANUSCRIPTS RECOVERED IN EGYPT]{.style_2} {#manuscripts-recovered-in-egypt .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[From the days when classical learning began to revive in Europe,
scholars have never ceased to hope for the discovery of the lost books
of Greek and Roman history, philosophy and literature. At one time the
buried cities of Greece and Italy were eagerly searched for precious
manuscripts, at another the monasteries of the Near East were diligently
explored, all with more or less negative results; but at last the sands
of Egypt have yielded to the excavator's spade.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Until within the lifetime of persons still living, our information with
regard to the physical form and the habitual use of books in ancient
Greece and Rome was singularly scanty. But thanks to the marvellous
protective covering of the Egyptian sands, we are fortunate in having
some remains of Greek papyrus books, ranging from the fourth century
B.C. to the seventh century A.D., found mainly in Egyptian refuse heaps,
or in tombs or temples. Under other climatic conditions, papyrus could
not have lasted to the present times. We often complain that modern
books are short-lived; the ancients similarly complained about their
books: for instance, Juvenal in his First Satire.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Mrs. G. Burford Rawlings illustrates the strange adventures of some of
these books -the cartonnage cases, in which Egyptian mummies of the
later period were enclosed, were made of papyrus rolls, used as waste
paper. But what appeared to be destruction, was really the condition of
safety; indeed, fragments (assigned to the third century B.C.) of
Plato's]{.style_} [Phaedo]{.style_1} [and of the lost]{.style_}
[Antiope]{.style_1} [by Euripides were recovered in some such way.
Numerous precious literary works have thus been brought to light. The
majority were recovered in rubbish baskets, in the refuse heaps
(]{.style_}[kôm]{.style_1}[) outside the towns and villages of
Graeco-Roman Egypt, and especially those of Oxyrhynchus; those found in
tombs were buried either near the dead or as mummy wrappers.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest Greek literary work extant (see p. 135), that is
Timotheus,]{.style_} [Persae]{.style_1}[, written on a papyrus, a
manuscript attributed to the second half of the fourth century B.C.
([Fig. VI---3](#calibre_link-107){.calibre9},]{.style_} [b]{.style_1}[),
was also found in Egypt; it is now in Berlin (at least, it was there
before the last war). Other important Greek literary texts, written on
papyrus and preserved by Egyptian sands, are Aristotle's]{.style_}
[Constitution of Athens]{.style_1} [---[Fig.
VI---4](#calibre_link-109){.calibre9} (see p. 157) ; Herodas,]{.style_}
[Mimes]{.style_1} []{#calibre_link-168}[([Fig.
VI---5](#calibre_link-166){.calibre9}) ; Bacchylides,]{.style_}
[Odes]{.style_1} [([Fig. VI--6](#calibre_link-106){.calibre9}); a
new]{.style_} [Ode]{.style_1} [of Sappho, and Greek fragments from the
Old and New Testaments (such as]{.style_} [St]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}
[John]{.style_1}[, xviii, 31---33,]{.style_} [recto]{.style_1}[, and
37---38,]{.style_} [verso]{.style_1}[): [Fig.
VI---9](#calibre_link-125){.calibre9}. The New Testament fragment is
assigned to the first half of the second century A.D., thus being
undoubtedly the earliest fragment extant of the N.T.: it is in the John
Rylands Library, Manchester (]{.style_}[P. Ryl. Gk]{.style_1}[. 457). At
the same place in Egypt where it came to light, possibly Behnesa, the
site of the ancient city of Oxyrhynchus, were also found the]{.style_}
[Sayings of Jesus]{.style_1}[---[Fig.
IV---18](#calibre_link-127){.calibre9} (attributed to the second or,
more probably, third century), a fragment of]{.style_}
[St]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [Matthew's Gospel]{.style_1} [(third
century), and other important documents. See also Chapter IV.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Finally, though the classical Greek works on astronomy---such as
the]{.style_} [M gále Sýntaxis tês astronomías]{.style_1} [(afterwards
called]{.style_} [Almagest]{.style_1} [by the Arabs) written by Ptolemy
(Claudius Ptolemaeus, first half of the second century A.D.), the
exposition of that famous astronomical theory which remained
unchallenged for fourteen hundred years ---have come down to us only in
manuscripts of the Byzantine period, we have now important Greek papyri
which are fragments of astronomical works, containing hundreds of
extensive numerical tables, partly belonging to the Ptolemaic period
(323---30 B.C.). In some of these papyri we find a special sign for ,
and, what is more important, a special sign for zero. Neugebauer
suggests that the Greek sign for zero is not, as it is usually
explained, the first letter of the Greek word]{.style_}
[oudén]{.style_1}[=("nothing"), but an arbitrarily invented symbol
intended to indicate an empty space.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-440}

::: calibre5
:::

## [IMPORTANCE OF THE RECOVERED LITERARY MANUSCRIPTS]{.style_2} {#importance-of-the-recovered-literary-manuscripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Fragments of many classical authors have thus been recovered. Works
hitherto completely lost have been found, and these are amongst the
greatest treasures of papyrus literature.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[They include a mutilated fragment ([Fig.
VI---2](#calibre_link-161){.calibre9},]{.style_} [below]{.style_1}[) of
Alcman (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 640---600 B.C.), the first recorded
poet of the Greek choral lyric, and fragmentary speeches by Hyperides
(born]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 389 B.C.), a pupil of Isocrates; these
fragments are partly at Paris, and partly at the British Museum ([Fig.
VI--6](#calibre_link-106){.calibre9}); seven nearly complete "mimes" and
fragments of others of Herodas (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 300---250.
B.C)---[Fig. VI---5](#calibre_link-166){.calibre9}--- and other valuable
works. One of the most important and interesting is undoubtedly
Aristotle's]{.style_} [Ath naí n Politeia]{.style_1} [([Fig.
VI---4](#calibre_link-109){.calibre9}), which has been described on p.
157. An historical work, dealing with the events of 396---5, has been
discovered at Oxyrhynchus; it has been variously assigned to Cratippus,
a continuator of Thucydides, or to Theopompus, a pupil of Isocrates, who
wrote]{.style_} [Hellenica]{.style_1} [(in twelve books), and]{.style_}
[Philippica]{.style_1} [(in fifty-eight books), or else to Ephorus,
another pupil of Isocrates, who wrote an important history of Greece
from the "Return of the Heracleidae" to 340 B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000178.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-109}

[[Fig. VI---4](#calibre_link-167){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Aristotle, Constitution of Athens (British Museum, Pap.
131).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000179.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-166}

[[Fig. VI--5](#calibre_link-168){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Herodas, Mimes (British Museum, Pap. 135-3).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The literary manuscripts which have been discovered are not only of
paramount importance for the recovery of works wholly lost or known to
us only by quotations or references, but also for our knowledge of the
literary tastes and educational practice of Graeco-Roman Egypt, as well
as of book production at the time. Since the discoveries were made
mainly near provincial towns or villages, our information does not apply
in the same measure to great cultural centres, such as
Alexandria.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The American C. H. Oldfather, in 1922, and the Italian Laura Giabbani,
in 1945, have compiled lists of the literary manuscripts, including
fragments, recovered in Egypt. Biblical and Christian books are omitted.
Of the 1,167 works listed by Oldfather, and the 1,124 (including 83
already listed by Oldfather) of Giabbani, 537 are Homeric manuscripts
(including commentaries), 397 are from works preserved otherwise, 1,357
are from works completely lost or known only by quotations, or
unidentified. Demosthenes is represented by seventy-six manuscripts,
Euripides by sixty-five, Plato and Hesiod by thirty-six each, Isocrates
by thirty-two, Menander by twenty-six, Sophocles by twenty-five,
Thucydides by twenty-one, Herodotus by nineteen, Aristophanes and
Xenophon by seventeen each, and Pindar by eleven.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The distribution in time of these literary manuscripts is approximately
as given in the table (G stands for Giabbani's list; O for Oldfather's
list):]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000180.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-441}

## [THE DIATESSARON AND A HITHERTO UNKNOWN TRAGEDY]{.style_2} {#the-diatessaron-and-a-hitherto-unknown-tragedy .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The importance of the literary papyri found in relatively recent times
has already been emphasized. Here two other examples may be noticed. The
first is Tatian's]{.style_} [Diatessaron]{.style_1} [or "The Harmony of
the Four Gospels", which is known to have been in existence
A.D.]{.style_}[c.]{.style_1} [160. Although composed by a Syrian (who
had been converted at Rome by Justin Martyr), it has been preserved only
in the Arabic and Latin translations; whether the original was in Greek
or in Syriac has for long been a matter of disagreement amongst
scholars. The discovery at Dura Europos (see p. 192) in 1933 of a
third-century fragment of the]{.style_} [Diatessaron]{.style_1}
[containing part of the Greek text will probably facilitate a solution
of the problem.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000181.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-106}

[[Fig. VI---6](#calibre_link-169){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Portion of a poem by Bacchylides (British Museum, Pap. 733),
variously attributed to the first century B.C., or A.D.; (below) portion
of the great papyrus containing the three speeches by Hyperides against
Demosthenes and for Lycophron and Euxenippus (British Museum, Pap. 108
and 115; first century A.D.).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The second is a fragmentary papyrus roll found at Oxyrhynchus; this
contains part of a tragedy written in three columns, the middle one
comprising sixteen successive lines, being in a relatively good state of
preservation. The fragment has been described by E. Lobel as surprising
as any recovered from the soil of Egypt. The cursive script with a free
use of ligatures induced that scholar to date this fragment to the late
second or early third century A.D. Each side bears evidences of having
been used for accounts.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The literary text formed the subject of his inaugural lecture by D. L.
Page, Regius Professor of Greek in Cambridge University, delivered at
Cambridge on 18th January, 1951. The title of the lecture---]{.style_}[A
New Chapter in the History of Greek Tragedy]{.style_1}[---may suffice to
draw the reader's attention to the importance of this fragment. The text
is, indeed, unusual; it is part of a hitherto unknown Greek tragedy
based on a theme neither mythical nor of local interest, but dealing
with the usurpation by Gyges of the throne of Lydia in the seventh
century B.C.,]{.style_} [i.e.]{.style_1} [a historical event far off
geographically and chronologically. The story is familiar from various
literary sources (Herodotus,]{.style_} [History]{.style_1}[, i, 7 seqq.;
Plato,]{.style_} [Republic]{.style_1}[, ii, 359; Nicolas Damascenus, fr.
47J., and others), but we have no record that it formed the
subject-matter of a drama.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Both, Lobel and Page, agree that the play may be of very early
date---probably of the first quarter of the fifth century B.C. Page
considers the poetry as being of high quality, closer in style to
Aeschylus than to any other writer of tragedy known to us. Lobel has
suggested that the author might be the older contemporary of Aeschylus,
Phrynichus. However, "In force and lucidity of language, in power of
narrative, and in portrayal of character", the author of our drama "was
among the masters, and in particular among the old masters" (Page). The
silence of antiquity regarding this important play is the more
remarkable as this pre-Sophoclean tragedy was still known in the late
second or the early third century A.D.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-442}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MANUSCRIPTS RECOVERED AT HERCULANEUM]{.style_2} {#manuscripts-recovered-at-herculaneum .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Outside Egypt, Herculaneum occupies a unique position in the history of
excavated ancient cities. Situated on the western slope of Mt. Vesuvius,
it was destroyed by the terrible eruption of this volcano in A.D. 79.
The city was then entirely buried under the stream of liquid mud and
ashes mixed with water from the torrential rains or from the rivulets,
advancing with relentless slowness, and penetrating
everywhere.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It was not hot lava, as is commonly thought; glass was not melted,
marble was not calcined, and even wood and the rolls of papyrus were not
burned up. However, damp, absence of air, and the lapse of nearly
seventeen centuries are enough to account for the carbonization,
discolouring, or decay of wood or papyrus. This mass of mud solidified
and became a kind of matrix, which---covering and preserving the forms
it enveloped---acted as a prop to the buildings, which would otherwise
have collapsed from age, earthquakes, or pressure overhead. In the
course of time, this volcanic mass of mud and ashes consolidated into a
compact mass of rock, in places exceedingly hard, popularly known as
"volcanic tuff", or, in Italian,]{.style_} [tufo, tufa,
peperino,]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [trass.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Thus, the eruption of A.D. 79 arrested the life of a little Roman
provincial town as it existed, in its full vigour and completeness. In
many subsequent eruptions of Vesuvius, especially those of A.D. 471,
513, 1306---8, 1631 and 1698, cinders and lava covered the site to a
depth of 70 to 100 feet. The city lay undisturbed for sixteen hundred
and fifty years. A small town, Resina, and, in part, the town of Portici
have grown up above it.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In 1709, the Austrian general Prince d'Elbouf purchased a site for a
seaside villa at Granatello, near Portici. In 1713, in sinking a well,
his workmen came upon the back of the stage of the Roman theatre. In
complete ignorance of the nature of the building, d'Elbouf made a
network of tunnels; slabs of precious marbles and many beautiful statues
were found, which were dispatched to Vienna, or sold to private dealers.
Regular excavations were promoted in the years 1738---65 by Charles
(Bourbon), King of Spain and Naples, and were conducted by the Spanish
chief military engineer Roco Joaquin de Alcubierre, assisted by the
Swiss engineer Charles Weber.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In June, 1750, a magnificent country villa was discovered---now known
as the Villa of the Papyri; it is considered to be the most luxurious
Roman villa that has been preserved. The villa was splendidly decorated
by frescoes and mosaics, and precious marbles and statues were there
found, which are now preserved in the Naples Museum of Antiquities.
There, too, in the years 1752---4, numerous papyrus rolls were
recovered. In, or near, the]{.style_} [tablinum]{.style_1}[, or open
hall, some twenty-one volumes were found in 1752; they were contained in
two wooden cases; in 1753, eleven rolls were found in a room just south
to the]{.style_} [tablinum]{.style_1}[, and 250 in a room to its
north.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000182.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. VI---7]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a, Aristophanes (Vatican Library, Pal. Gr. 67); b, Aeschylus
(Laurentian Library, Florence, Cod. 31.8). c, Demosthenes (Laurentian
Library, Plut. lix. 9; early eleventh century A.D.).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The main find, however, occurred in 1754, when 337 Greek volumes were
found, arranged in bookcases, which were inlaid with different kinds of
wood, disposed in rows, and provided with cornices. The main bookcases
were situated round the sides of a room, which was probably a private
library; a sort of rectangular bookcase stood in the centre of the room.
Some of the bookcases crumbled to dust on the first touch, or on
exposure. Many papyrus rolls were found lying about; others, however,
were still on the shelves. The great majority of the books were Greek,
but in the same room twenty-four Latin fragmentary manuscripts were
found, of which eighteen were in a]{.style_} [capsa]{.style_1} [of
bark.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Many of the rolls were destroyed or thrown away by the workmen, who,
from the colour of some of them took them to be sticks of charcoal;
others were destroyed when extracted from the volcanic tuff, in which
they were embedded. After one roll fell upon the ground and broke in the
middle, and many letters were seen, it was realized that the rolls were
ancient manuscripts. Then, naturally, the attention of the learned world
was directed towards these unique documents and their
preservation.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is uncertain how many rolls and fragments were originally found. The
complete list of those now preserved, including every tiny fragment,
amounts to 1,814, of which 1,756 were discovered up to 1855. Of the
total number, over 340 are almost entire, about 970 are partly decayed
(full of holes, or cut, crushed, or crumpled) and partly decipherable,
and over 500 are merely charred fragments. Only 585 rolls or fragments
have hitherto been completely unrolled, and 209 unrolled in part. Of the
unrolled manuscripts, about 200 have been deciphered and published, and
about 150 deciphered only; of the remainder, only 90 appear to be
decipherable.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the eighteenth century, the unrolling and deciphering of papyrus
rolls was an unenviable task. The Italian monk Piaggi invented a simple
machine for unrolling by means of silk threads attached to the edge of
the papyrus. The method was not very successful and was very slow,
but---as all the other attempts failed---it was carried on, in
the]{.style_} [Officina]{.style_1} [of the Papyri at Portici, from 1754
to 1876.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Attempts at unrolling were made by Sir H. Davy in England and at
Naples, in 1818, and by F. C. Sickler at Oxford, in 1817---19. George
IV, then Prince of Wales, took much interest in the matter, and at his
private expense the Rev. John Hayter was sent to Portici. Hayter
supervised the]{.style_} [Officina dei Papyri]{.style_1} [from 1802 to
1806, and unrolled and partly deciphered some two hundred papyri. The
bulk of the preserved manuscripts is in the National Museum of Naples;
in 1806, the Neapolitan Government presented six rolls to Napoleon
Bonaparte ; in 1810, eighteen unopened rolls were given to George IV,
four of which he presented to the Bodleian Library; the others are now
mainly in the British Museum.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000183.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. VI---8]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Dialogues by Plato written for Arethas of Patras in A.D. 896
(Bodleian Library, Oxford, Clarke MS. 39); (below) Thucydides,
tenth-century copy (Laurentian Library, Florence, Plut. lix.
2).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000184.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-125}

[[Fig. VI---9](#calibre_link-170){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Earliest preserved Greek manuscripts of the Bible. (Above) Fragments of
Deuteronomy, second century B.C. (Rylands Papyrus No. 458); (below) St.
John's Gospel. Ch. xviii, first half of the second century A.D. (Rylands
Papyrus No. 457).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The library apparently contained about 800 volumes, but the actual
number of works was probably less than 200, because some of them consist
of many volumes, and of several works there are two or three copies:
there are fragments of as many as three copies of the thirty-seven
volumes of the work]{.style_} [On Nature]{.style_1} [by
Epicurus.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[On the whole, the literary value of the Greek manuscripts is relatively
small. Apparently the owner of the library was a philosopher who
specialized in Epicurean philosophy, and was not a man of "all-round"
culture. The bulk of the works were written by an unimportant Epicurean
philosopher of Cicero's time, Philodemus ; the remaining Greek works are
written by six different authors, including Epicurus, and his able
disciple Metrodorus of Lampsacus; there is a single fragment by the
known Stoic Chrysippus of Soli in Cilicia. The most complete manuscripts
are those]{.style_} [On Music]{.style_1} [(some 1,710 lines)
and]{.style_} [On Rhetoric]{.style_1} [(112 columns), both by
Philodemus. There are titles to sixty-nine works written by the latter,
and no Greek manuscript of this library belongs to a later period than
Philodemus. In consequence, Mrs. Barker concludes that this philosopher
was the owner of the library. According to other scholars---such as the
Italians D. Comparetti and G. De Petra---the villa belonged to Lucius
Calpurnius Piso, the father-in-law of Julius Caesar; hence, the villa is
also known as the]{.style_} [Villa Ercolanese dei Pisoni.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Latin manuscripts belong to a later period than the Greek rolls,
and are of a quite different nature. Apparently they deal with history,
poetry and rhetoric. Unfortunately they are so damaged by the damp that
they are almost undecipherable, except for the main roll (of which eight
columns have been preserved), which is a fragmentary Latin poem in
hexameters, on the Battle of Actium, 31 B.C. This]{.style_} [Carmen de
bello Actiaco]{.style_1}[, or]{.style_} [Carmen de Augusti bello
aegyptico,]{.style_1} [is the earliest extant Latin manuscript. The
total number of the preserved columns in the Latin rolls is forty, while
the Greek manuscripts contain as many as 2,326 preserved columns. The
title-labels, which were attached, have all been destroyed. In recent
times, Latin polyptychs (see p. 29) were found at Herculaneum.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-443}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BIBLIOGRAPHY (on the Herculaneum papyri)]{.style_2} {#bibliography-on-the-herculaneum-papyri .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Reale Accademia Ercolanese,]{.style_} [Herculanensium Voluminum que
supersunt.]{.style_1} [Collectio Prior, 9 vols., Naples, 1793---1850;
Collectio Altera, 11 vols., Naples, 1862---76.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. Ventriglia,]{.style_} [Cenni storici sulla scoperta, svolgimento ed
interpretazione dei papiri ercolanesi]{.style_1}[, Naples,
1877.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. Scott,]{.style_} [Fragmenta Herculanensia]{.style_1}[, Oxford,
1885.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Herculaneum Fragments]{.style_1}[, 9 vols., Oxford Philological
Society, 1889; Facsimiles, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1891.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000186.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. VI---10]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Gospels written in 1429 by a monk Gabriel; the text is in Cyrillic
character, but it is accompanied by a Greek translation in cursive
script (Bodleian Library, MS. Can. Gr. 122).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. Groenert,]{.style_} [Memoria Graeca Herculanensis]{.style_1}[,
Leipsic, 1903.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. R. Barker,]{.style_} [Buried Herculaneum]{.style_1}[, London,
1908.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. Waldstein and L. Shoobridge,]{.style_} [Herculaneum Past Present &
Future]{.style_1}[, London, 1908.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. P. Zottoli,]{.style_} [Bibliografia ercolanese]{.style_1}[, "BOLLET.
D. R. ISTITUTO DI ARCHEOLOGIA E STORIA DELL'ARTE", II, 1928.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-444}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Earliest Roman Manuscripts]{.style_2} {#earliest-roman-manuscripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The early Roman manuscript remains are even more scarce than the Greek
ones. The earliest documents extant are assigned to the first century
A.D. (or perhaps to the late first century B.C.): they are written in
cursive or semi-cursive styles of writing, and are either on papyrus or
on wax tablets. The following are noteworthy: the aforementioned papyrus
of the]{.style_} [Carmen de bello Actiaco,]{.style_1} [written in
semi-cursive capitals, between 31 B.C. and A.D. 79; the]{.style_}
[Papyrus Claudius]{.style_1}[, found in Egypt, which contains
an]{.style_} [Oratio in senatu habita]{.style_1} [of A.D. 41--- 54; it
is written in cursive majuscules; and a wax tablet from Pompei, of A.D.
53, written in cursive capitals. Interesting documents of the next
century are a wax tablet from Alburnus Major (see Chapter I), written in
A.D. 139 in cursive capitals, and containing an]{.style_} [emptio
puellae,]{.style_1} [and a papyrus of A.D. 163, written in semi-cursive
majuscules, containing an]{.style_} [emptio pueri,]{.style_1} [now
preserved in the British Museum.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-445}

::: calibre5
:::

## [END OF AN AGE]{.style_2} {#end-of-an-age .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The significance of the fourth century A.D. in the history of writing,
of the book, of culture in general, and of other aspects of
civilization, has been repeatedly emphasized in the present work. The
table on p. 248 clearly shows that in that century there was not only a
sudden decline in production and reading of papyrus books, but also of
secular and pagan books in general. It is also known from literary and
other sources that, with very few exceptions, the original
productiveness of that period was not great.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, in the fourth century A.D. "literary culture was the mark of
the higher classes of Roman society" (Kenyon), and the books of pagan
literature were then extensively read, and presumably also copied, in
the dwindling society of the Roman aristocracy. "That society, however,
was not a large one\.... We have no reason to suppose that books were
extensively produced or read outside the narrow society of cultured
Romans, except so far as a new literature was growing up around the
Christian Church."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Church as a whole was hostile to pagan and secular literature,
though some of her leading writers were deeply steeped in such
literature, and were among the foremost masters of Greek or Latin style
and eloquence of the third to the fifth centuries.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It will suffice to mention Tertullian (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[.
150---230), Cyprian (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 200---65), Africanus
(third century), Eusebius (bishop of Caesarea in Palestine, 314---40),
Lactantius (early fourth century), Hieronymus or St. Jerome, the most
scholarly of the Latin fathers (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 340---420),
St. Ambrose (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 340---97), and St. Augustine
(354-430). The estrangement of Christianity from secular literature was
progressive, and the latter "ceased to perpetuate itself and to put out
fresh growth".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Thus, the life of Greek and Latin literature and book production was
rapidly waning, till it ceased completely. "It was \... a dying society,
and when it disappeared beneath the barbarian invasions, there was no
reading public in the old sense left. A new reading public had to be
created, by a long and laborious process, through the medium of the
Church and the monasteries \..." (Kenyon).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-446}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE FOURTH CENTURY A.D.]{.style_2} {#the-fourth-century-a.d. .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The fourth century A.D. may thus be considered a turning-point in the
history of the Latin book. The earliest Roman codices extant---like the
earliest preserved Greek vellum codices, already referred to---are
attributed to the fourth century A.D. []{#calibre_link-173}(see [Figs.
VI---12](#calibre_link-171){.calibre9}, 14, 15,
[VII---1](#calibre_link-147){.calibre9}).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Virgil was, in a certain way, to the Romans what Homer was to the
Greeks. Both Homer and Virgil formed the basis of school education.
Other popular Roman authors were Horace, Cicero, Livy, Ovid, Propertius,
Sallust, Tibullus, Catullus, and Martial.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Curiously enough, however, while Virgil has been preserved in about 100
medieval codices, there are as many as 250 codices of Horace; on the
other hand, of the]{.style_} [Annals]{.style_1} [by Tacitus, there is
only one complete codex. The earliest copies of Virgil are about 400
years older than those of Horace, about 500 years older than those of
Caesar, and nearly 800 years older than those of Cornelius
Nepos.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[We need not, therefore, be surprised to find that amongst the earliest
Latin codices extant, and a great part of the codices attributed to the
next centuries, there are Virgilian codices: [Fig.
VI--11](#calibre_link-165){.calibre9}---13. Some of them are written
either in the elegant book capitals (]{.style_}[Codex Vergil. Augusteus,
Vat. Lat.]{.style_1} [3256, the]{.style_} [Virgilian Cod]{.style_1}[.
1394 of St. Gall, and the British Museum papyrus manuscript from
Oxyrhynchus), or in rustic capitals (]{.style_}[Codex Vergil. Vaticanus,
Vat. Lat.]{.style_1} [3225;]{.style_} [Codex Medic.,
Cod]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [Laur.]{.style_1} [39.1 (Florence)
;]{.style_} [Codex Vergil. Romanus]{.style_1}[,]{.style_}
[Vat]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [Lat.]{.style_1} [3867;]{.style_} [Codex
Palatinus, Vat]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [Pal. Lat]{.style_1}[.
1631).]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000187.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-165}

[[Fig. VI---11](#calibre_link-172){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Virgil, Aeneid; fragment from a papyrus codex, written in
half-uncial of the fifth century A.D. (University Library, Cambridge,
Add. MS. 4031); (insert) Latin-Greek lexicon for Aeneid (University
Library, Cambridge, Add. MS. 5869). Incomplete folio from a parchment
codex written in uncials of the sixth century A.D. Both from
Oxyrhynchus.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000188.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-171}

[[Fig. VI---12](#calibre_link-173){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Virgil. (Above) Vatican Virgil (Vatican Library, Cod. Lat. 3225);
(below) St. Gall Virgil (St. Gall, Cod. No. 1394), in an elegant capital
book hand or the fourth century A.D.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000189.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. VI---13]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Virgil. (Above) Roman Virgil (Vatican Library, Cod. Lat. 3867, fol. 3
verso). (below) Virgil, Opera, copy of the fifteenth century (Riccardian
Library, Florence, MS. 492, fol. 85 verso).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-447}

::: calibre15
:::

## [THE LATIN UNCIAL AND SEMI-UNCIAL BOOK HANDS]{.style_2} {#the-latin-uncial-and-semi-uncial-book-hands .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The exact origin of the Latin uncial script---see]{.style_} [The
Alphabet]{.style_1}[, pp. 542 f.---is uncertain; it seems to have
appeared already in Roman documents of the third century A.D. In the
fourth century it appeared as a perfect book hand beside the square and
rustic capital scripts, and from the fifth century onwards, for over
five hundred years it was the main book hand of the Christian world,
especially for codices]{.style_} [de luxe.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000190.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-151}

[[Fig. VI---14](#calibre_link-174){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Cicero, De Republica, palimpsest (Vatican Library, Cod. Lat. 5757).
Primary script: uncials of the fourth or fifth century A.D.; written in
Italy. Re-written in the seventh century, in Bobbio, to copy Augustine,
In Psalmos.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Greek uncial character which was the script of the earliest Greek
Bible codices exercised a great influence in the rapid diffusion of the
Roman uncial writing. On the other hand, not all scholars accept the
theory that the Roman uncial character was]{.style_} [the]{.style_1}
[Christian book hand and derived directly and exclusively from the Greek
uncial script of the Sacred Scriptures.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Numerous Roman codices written in this beautiful book hand are extant,
and there are also manuscripts written in the book hand known as
semi-uncial or half-uncial. One of the earliest forms of the latter
script may be seen in the papyrus fragment of the third century A.D.,
containing an independent epitome of Livy's history of 150---137 B.C. It
was found in 1903 in Oxyrhynchus, is now in the British Museum, and has
been published in Vol. IV of the]{.style_} [Oxyrhynchus
Papyri]{.style_1}[. The semi-uncial hand is the book hand of many
codices of the fifth to ninth centuries.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000191.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. VI---15]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Livius Lateranensis (Livy, xxxiv), portion of a fragment consisting of
seven pieces of parchment, forming a leaf and a half (Vatican Library,
Cod. Lat. 10696). Assigned to the fourth or fifth century A.D. From the
seventh or eighth century onwards, it was used in the Lateran Church in
Rome to preserve relics which came from the Holy Land. In 1906 it was
found in a cypress box made by Pope Leo III (795---816).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-448}

## [SPREAD OF THE LATIN LANGUAGE AND SCRIPT]{.style_2} {#spread-of-the-latin-language-and-script .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the history of the Roman or Latin book, it is important not to
overlook the fact that, in ancient times, the Roman or Latin language
and script had been carried by Roman legionaries and imperial officials
to all parts of the vast empire, and particularly to the regions which
were not Hellenized. In a few countries (Italy, Gaul, Spain, and
Roumania), Latin replaced the languages of the natives, and it became
the ancestor of the modern Romance languages: Italian, French, Spanish,
Portuguese, Roumanian, and a few minor languages.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[At a later stage, churchmen and missionaries carried Latin still
farther afield, and for many more centuries Papal Rome was the light of
the western world; the centre whence religion, culture and learning were
disseminated to all parts of western, central and northern Europe. The
emissaries of the Pope, either legates or missionaries, travelled all
over Europe and carried with them the learning of their age, and their
language was Latin.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The abbeys were in the nature of large seminaries or colleges, where
learning was carried on, and the monastic system spread Christianity and
learning to an even wider extent. It was in the monasteries that the
lamp of learning was kept alight. Education was in certain periods
almost entirely monastic (obviously, only for the Christian population),
or at least conducted by teachers trained in monastic institutions.
There were also important centres of learning in the cathedral
schools.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Some of the great monastic Orders (such as the Benedictine Order, and
its daughter, the Cistercian) encouraged the study of literature, even
other than theological, and although important centres of writing were
not numerous, and only a small proportion of monks were allowed to take
up writing, copying or illustrating, still more than half the literary
work of Europe was done within the walls of the religious houses. Each
important monastery had its]{.style_} [scriptorium]{.style_1} [or
writing-room or separate writing-cells (see p. 206 ff.). Because of this
activity, the Church supplies the link between the ancient and the
modern "book". Indeed, thanks to the Christian Church, for centuries
after the fall of the Roman Empire---though Latin existed among the
common people only in the form of broken and breaking dialects---the
Latin of the grammarians continued to be the language of thought and of
education throughout the western half of Europe, and remained for the
educated a truly living language.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In consequence, Latin, the language of the Roman Church, became and
remained for many centuries, the]{.style_} [lingua franca]{.style_1} [of
the European higher intellectual world: ". . . and wherever the Latin
language went, thither, after the conversion of the Empire to
Christianity, went the Latin Bible" and other books. "Throughout the
period which we know as the Middle Ages, which may roughly be defined as
from A.D. 500---1500, almost all books were written in Latin" (Kenyon).
Latin is still used extensively for learned works---especially
theological treatises---in the Roman Catholic Church, and in certain
other fields, such as medical prescriptions and technical terminology,
although in consequence of the varied development of the last three or
four centuries, it has entirely lost its dominant position.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000192.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. VI---16]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Juvenal (vii, 173---98). Fragment from Antinopolis (verso). Fifth
century A.D. (?).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-449}

## [THE GREEK LANGUAGE AND CULTURE]{.style_2} {#the-greek-language-and-culture .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The importance of the Greek language and culture in the history of
civilization need not be emphasized. It will suffice to quote one
sentence by R. W. Livingstone: "Epic, lyric, dramatic, elegiac, didactic
poetry, history, biography, rhetoric and oratory, the epigram, the
essay, the sermon, the novel, letter writing, and literary criticism are
all Greek by origin, and in nearly every case their name betrays their
source." We may add philosophy, natural sciences, medicine, and many
other fields in which the ancient Greeks were outstanding. Even after
the Roman conquest of Greece (towards the end of the second century
B.C.), Greek culture remained supreme, and no young Roman would have
considered himself well educated without an acquaintance with Greek
literature.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The leading historian of ancient exact sciences has pointed out that
the centre of ancient science lies in the Hellenistic period, i.e. in
the period following Alexander's conquest of the ancient sites of
oriental civilizations. "In this melting pot of 'Hellenism'---writes
Neugebauer---a form of science was developed which later spread over an
area reaching from India to western Europe and which was dominant until
the creation of modern science in the time of Newton. On the other hand
the Hellenistic civilization had its roots in the oriental civilizations
which flourished about equally long before Hellenism as its direct
influence was felt afterwards."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["And Greek, not Latin, was still the language in which most of the
greatest literature of the Imperial period was written\.... Even
statistically the Empire was more Greek than anything else\.... The
Greek core of the Roman Empire played the part of western Europe in the
modern world\.... The pulse of the Empire was driven by a Greek heart,
and it beat comparatively feebly in the non-Greek extremities" (A.
Toynbee).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Greek was not only the language of learning and culture, but also the
common language of intercourse between people of different nationalities
in the East. In contrast with the Roman culture, of which Rome was
nearly always the main centre, Athens cannot be considered the main and
exclusive centre of Hellenistic culture, though Publius Aelius
Aristeides (A.D. c. 117---80), who "represents the rhetoric of display
at the zenith of its glory" (R. C. Jebb), writes (in the late second
century A.D.!) that the libraries of Athens were the finest in the
world. Actually, there were various important centres of Greek culture
on the Greek continent, in Magna Graecia, in Asia Minor (Corinth,
Delphi, Patras, Rhodes, Lesbos, Delos, Syracuse, Soli, Smyrna, Mylasa,
and many other places).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-450}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ALEXANDRIA]{.style_2} {#alexandria .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[After the submission of Egypt to Alexander the Great, who in 331 B.C.
founded Alexandria, this city became the headquarters alike of the
commerce and the literature of the East. For over a millennium it was
the capital of the country.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000193.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. VI--17]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Priscian---Manuscript written in England, presumably at Canterbury, "in
a very fine hand" of the eighth century (Corpus Christi College,
Cambridge, MS. 144).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000194.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. VI--18]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Caesar, Commentaria, eleventh-century manuscript (Riccardian Library,
Florence, MS. 541, fol. 2 recto).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[There is no certainty about the founding of its famous establishment,
known as the Alexandrian Museum and Library or, briefly, the
Alexandrina. While the majority of scholars attribute it to Ptolemy II
Philadelphus (283---247 B.C.), and a few to his predecessor, Ptolemy I
Sot r (323 B.C. onwards), there is an almost unanimous tradition that
Demetrius Phalereus (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 354---283-2) played an
important part in its beginnings, and thus may be regarded as the real
founder. For the first 150 years of the existence of the Alexandrina, a
chronological table of its director-librarians can be reconstructed, and
two names are known for the first century A.D. and the early second, but
there is a blank for the succeeding centuries. The Alexandrina continued
to exist for nearly a thousand years, i.e., until after 641, when the
city fell to the Arabs.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[As the greatest centre of Hellenism, Alexandria was for many centuries
the fountain of culture and intellect. The Alexandrina drew many
students from all parts of the Greek world to Alexandria, which thus
became the main centre of Greek learning and culture. It is stated that
"almost every scientific man of any note in the intervening centuries
either was a professor or had been a student in Alexandria" (J. Gow).
Examples are Euclid, Eratosthenes, Archimedes, and Theocritus. Many
books were written and published; they dealt both with scientific
subjects (medicine, natural science, engineering, astronomy) as well as
with humanistic branches (such as poetry, grammar, lexicography). As one
of the results of this literary and scientific activity, the Alexandrian
Library was probably the largest which ever existed before the invention
of printing, and the city of Alexandria became a main centre of the
Greek book production and book trade. See also p. 155. For book
illumination see]{.style_} [Illumination and Binding.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to E. A. Parsons (]{.style_}[The Alexandrian
Library,]{.style_1} [Amsterdam and London, 1952), starting with the
acquisition of about 200,000 volumes by Demetrius, the Alexandrina
possessed no fewer than 700,000 in the first century B.C., and with
later acquisitions, including the "present" of 200,000 rolls of the
Pergamum Library given by Anthony to Cleopatra, the vast collection
possibly comprised nearly one million volumes. The famous daughter
collection or outer library, which, starting as a carefully selected
library of 42,800 volumes, may have numbered up to 300,000---if it
included the Pergamum loot---was housed in the Halls of Books situated
within the temple area of the Serapcum. It is known that in addition to
being the great warehouse for the literature of Greece, from Homer to
Demosthenes and Aristotle, the Alexandrina possessed copies of the vast
literature produced during the Hellenistic period, probably also
including translations of foreign works, such as the Hebrew
Scriptures.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000195.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-164}

[[Fig. VI---19](#calibre_link-175){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) A twelfth-century codex of Terence, from south-west France
(Vatican Library, Vat. Lat. 3305) ; (below) Plautus (British Museum,
Royal MS. 15, C.xi, fol. 56).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Finally, it is known that the Alexandrina had a paramount importance in
the editing of classical Greek texts and the fixing of the canons of
Greek literature. The]{.style_} [Canon Alexandrinus]{.style_1} [may have
comprised works of about 180 poets, fifty philosophers, fifty
historians, and thirty-five orators.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[There were, of course, other centres of less importance than Alexandria
but nevertheless of much significance in the early development of the
book. We know from literary and other sources that considerable
libraries existed in cities like Rome, Athens, Ephesus, Antioch,
Damascus, Jerusalem, and other important capital cities.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-451}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BIBLIOGRAPHY]{.style_2} {#bibliography-4 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[T. Birt,]{.style_} [Das antike Buchwesen]{.style_1}[, Berlin,
1882;]{.style_} [Die Buchrolle in der Kunst,]{.style_1} [Leipsic,
1907.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. G. Kenyon,]{.style_} [Classical Texts from Papyri in the British
Museum,]{.style_1} [etc., London, 1891;]{.style_} [Aristotle on the
Constitution of Athens]{.style_1}[, London, 1891-2;]{.style_} [Ancient
Books and Modern Discoveries]{.style_1}[, Chicago, 1927;]{.style_}
[Books and Readers in Ancient Greece and Rome]{.style_1}[, 2nd ed.,
Oxford, 1951. See also Bibliography to Chapters IV and V.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Catalogus codicum astrologorum Graecorum]{.style_1}[, 12 vols.,
Brussels, 1898---1940.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff,]{.style_} [Timotheus'
Persae]{.style_1}[, Berlin, 1903;]{.style_} [Die griechische Litteratur
des Altertums]{.style_1}[, Leipsic and Berlin, 1912.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Berliner Klassikertexte]{.style_1}[, Berlin, 1904 onwards.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. R. Hall,]{.style_} [Coptic and Greek Texts of the Christian
Period]{.style_1}[, London, 1905.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. M. Thompson,]{.style_} [Handbook of Greek and Latin
Palaeograply]{.style_1}[, 3rd ed., London, 1906;]{.style_} [Introduction
to Greek and Latin Palaeography,]{.style_1} [Oxford, 1912.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. Mayser,]{.style_} [Grammatik d. griech. Papyri aus d.
Ptolomaeerzeit,]{.style_1} [Berlin and Leipsic, 1906---34.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. Diehl, ed.,]{.style_} [Supplementum lyricum,]{.style_1} [Bonn, 1908
(new ed., 1917).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. Robert, ed.,]{.style_} [Menander's Six Plays,]{.style_1} [Halle,
1908.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. J. Godspeed,]{.style_} [Chicago Literary Papyri,]{.style_1}
[Chicago, 1908.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. S. Hunt,]{.style_} [Fragmenta Tragica Papyracea]{.style_1}
[(]{.style_}[Tragicorum Graecorum Fragmenta nuper reperta]{.style_1}[),
Oxford, 1912.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. Baumgarten, F. Poland, and R. Wagner,]{.style_} [Die
hellenistisch-roemische Kultur,]{.style_1} [Leipsic, 1913.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. Leaf,]{.style_} [Homer and History,]{.style_1} [London,
1915.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[L. Whibley, ed.,]{.style_} [A Companion to Greek Studies]{.style_1}
[(R. C. Jebb,]{.style_} [Literature;]{.style_1} [H. Jackson,]{.style_}
[Philosophy;]{.style_1} [J. Gow,]{.style_} [Science;]{.style_1} [A. S.
Wilkins,]{.style_} [Education;]{.style_1} [M. R. James,]{.style_} [Books
and Writing;]{.style_1} [E. H. Minns,]{.style_} [Paleography;]{.style_1}
[R. C. Jebb,]{.style_} [Textual Criticism;]{.style_1} [J.
Sandys,]{.style_} [History of Scholarship]{.style_1}[), 3rd ed.,
Cambridge, 1916.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. Schubart,]{.style_} [Das Buch bei den Griechen und
Roemern,]{.style_1} [2nd ed., Berlin and Leipsic, 1921;]{.style_}
[Griechische Palaeographie,]{.style_1} [in Mueller,]{.style_} [Handb. d.
Altertumszviss]{.style_1}[., Munich, 1925;]{.style_} [Das antike
Buch]{.style_1}[, "Die Antike", 1938.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[K. Schottenloher,]{.style_} [Das alte Buch,]{.style_1} [2nd ed.,
Berlin, 1921.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. Breccia,]{.style_} [Alexandrea ad Aegyptum]{.style_1}[, Bergamo,
1922.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. H. Oldfather,]{.style_} [The Greek Literary Texts from Graeco-Roman
Egypt]{.style_1}[, Madison (U.S.A.), 1923.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[T. W. Allen,]{.style_} [Homer, the Origins and the
Transmission]{.style_1}[, Oxford, 1924.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. E. Sandys, ed.,]{.style_} [A Companion to Latin Studies]{.style_1}
[(W. Murison,]{.style_} [Education;]{.style_1} [M. R. James,]{.style_}
[Books and Writing]{.style_1}[; A. W. Verrall, W. C, Summers, and J.
Sandys,]{.style_} [Literature;]{.style_1} [R. D. Hicks,]{.style_}
[Philosophy;]{.style_1} [J. F. Payne,]{.style_} [Natural History and
Science]{.style_1}[; E. M. Thompson,]{.style_} [Paleography;]{.style_1}
[J. P. Postgate,]{.style_} [Textual Criticism]{.style_1}[; J.
Sandys,]{.style_} [History of Latin Scholarship]{.style_1}[), 3rd ed.,
Cambridge, 1925.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. J. H. Milne,]{.style_} [Catal. of Literary Greek Papyri in the
British Museum,]{.style_1} [London, 1927.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[P. Collomp,]{.style_} [La Critique des textes]{.style_1}[, Paris,
1931.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[National Library, Vienna,]{.style_} [Griechische literarische
Papyri]{.style_1}[, Vienna 1932 onwards.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[S. Runciman,]{.style_} [Byzantine Civilization]{.style_1}[, London,
1933.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[M. Rostovtzeff,]{.style_} [A Social and Economic History of the
Hellenistic World,]{.style_1} [3 vols., Oxford, 1941.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[M. Norsa,]{.style_} [La scrittura letteraria greca,]{.style_1} [etc.,
Florence, 1941.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[O. Neugebauer,]{.style_} [On some Astronomical Papyri,]{.style_1}
[etc., "TRANSACT OF THE AMER. PHILOS. SOC.", 1942;]{.style_} [The Exact
Sciences in Antiquity,]{.style_1} [Copenhagen, 1951.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[D. L. Page,]{.style_} [Greek Literary Papyri,]{.style_1} [London,
1942.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. Reggers,]{.style_} [Catalogue van de Grieksche Letterkundige
Papyrustexten]{.style_1} [(1922---8), Louvain, 1942.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[R. M. Cook,]{.style_} [Ionia and Greece, 800--600 B.C.,]{.style_1}
["JOURNAL OF HELLENIC STUDIES", 1946.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[L. Giabbani,]{.style_} [Testi letterari greci di provenienza
egiziana]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[1920--45]{.style_1}[), Florence,
1947.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. L. Pinner,]{.style_} [The World of Books in Classical
Antiquity]{.style_1}[, Leyden, 1948.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. 1. Bell,]{.style_} [Egypt from Alexander the Great to the Arab
Conquest,]{.style_1} [Oxford, 1948.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. Wendel,]{.style_} [Die griechisch-roemische
Buchbeschreibung]{.style_1}[, etc., 1949.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. J. Clère,]{.style_} [Un Text astronomique de Tanis]{.style_1}[,
"KÊMI", 1949.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[See also Bibliography to Chapters IV and V, and the General
Bibliography.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-452}

::: calibre5
:::

## [POST SCRIPTUM]{.style_2} {#post-scriptum .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It has not been possible to make use in this volume of the excellent
work---quoted in the BIBLIOGRAPHY to this chapter---by Carl
Wendel,]{.style_} [Die griechisch-roemische Buchbesehreibung verglichen
mit der des vorderen Orients]{.style_1}[, "HALLISCHE MONOGRAPHIEN", No.
3, Halle (Saale), 1949.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Although the book deals mainly with problems connected with the history
of libraries, Wendel treats extensively of various general problems
discussed in the present volume---namely, the clay-tablet book, the
papyrus-roll book, and the libraries and the books of ancient Greece and
Rome. He emphasizes the importance of Mesopotamian book-production in
the history of the book, particularly its indirect influence on Greek
book-production. He suggests that the Asiatic peoples, and particularly
the Lydians, as well as the Phoenicians, may have been the mediators
between Mesopotamia, Syro-Hittites and Hurrians, on the one hand, and
the Greek world on the other. Furthermore, he suggests that the leather
roll was the main writing material for books of the Ionian Greeks, the
Aramaeans, and perhaps also the Phoenicians.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The subjects are discussed in great detail and with profound learning,
but the evidence adduced---though vast and elaborate---is not
conclusive.]{.style_}
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: {#calibre_link-176 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-13}

::: calibre7
:::

### [CHAPTER VII]{.style_2} {#chapter-vii .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

### [THE BOOK FOLLOWS RELIGION]{.style_2} {#the-book-follows-religion .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-453}

::: calibre15
:::

## [The Book in Western Christianity]{.style_2} {#the-book-in-western-christianity .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[IT has already been mentioned that nearly all the writing of medieval
Europe was done in religious houses. Monasteries, in particular, assumed
the otherwise neglected task of making copies of sacred and---though
rarely---secular books.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[St. Benedict himself (480---543)---who founded fourteen monasteries,
including the famous monastery at Monte Cassino (founded in 528), which
became the main centre of the Order---composed the]{.style_} [Regula
Monachorum]{.style_1}[, or "Rule for Monks", which laid down not only
that the steady reading of books by the brethren should form part of the
daily round, but also that some of the elder monks should see that this
rule was duly observed. However, W. Oakeshott rightly argues that St.
Benedict reckoned on the likelihood that many of the monastery's inmates
would be illiterate, and that Benedict's injunction on the importance of
reading books is connected especially with Lent, "and the implication
clearly is that they might find thereby a suitable penance for the good
of their souls".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[CULTURAL ACTIVITIES OF THE MONASTERIES]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the second half of the sixth century, especially after the
foundation of the monastery at St. Maur-sur-Loire, in Gaul, various
Benedictine monasteries were engaged in the study of religious
literature as well as of Roman and Greek classics. The monks were to
learn Latin and Greek "as well as they learned their own tongue", and
were thus to obtain the key to the literature and science that were then
known. Their influence on western European art, literature and education
was very great. The Benedictine monk was the pioneer of medieval
civilization and Christianity in England, Germany, Poland, Bohemia,
Sweden and Denmark.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[St. Augustine introduced the Order into England, and the most important
English cathedral priories and abbeys were the foundations of the Order.
Some European universities, directly or indirectly, developed from
Benedictine schools, and so have some colleges of Oxford and Cambridge.
The abbey of St. Gall, in Switzerland, not far from the Lake of
Constance, is also a Benedictine foundation: for a period it was a focus
of Irish missionary effort. The famous St. Gall Chapter Library still
possesses a number of manuscripts written by Irish monks, who brought
with them their own peculiar style of writing. This style was taken up
and imitated by the native monks, but in the ninth century St. Gall
established its own centre for copying manuscripts, and towards the end
of the century it developed a distinct style of writing, which in time
was generally adopted in the districts bordering on the Rhine.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Other forms of monasticism arose---the most notable and distinguished,
dating from an early period, being the Order of St. Augustine (or Austin
canons); but their learned work was not on the level of the Benedictine
Order, with its daughters, the Cistercian Order and the Maurist
Congregation in France. However, numerous monasteries, which engaged in
small-scale manufacturing and agriculture, also became centres of
literary and artistic activity (see Chapters V and X). If monks boiled
down the salt of the brine pits, they also copied and illuminated
manuscripts in their]{.style_} [scriptorium]{.style_1} [; if they ran
rhines through the marshy moorland, and tilled the soil with vigour and
success, they also painted pictures with some rude merit of their own.
Although it is true that "the important centres of writing and
illumination were not numerous, such as, in England, Canterbury,
Winchester, St. Albans, Durham and Glastonbury," yet "at certain times
and places the scribe was held in quite conspicuous honour. In Ireland,
for instance, in the seventh and eighth centuries, the penalty for
shedding his blood was as great as that for killing a bishop or abbot;
and in Scotland, 'scriba' was regarded as an honourable addition to a
bishop's name" (F. Madan).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[All the main monasteries seem to have produced books, or at least to
have caused the production of books.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Space does not allow to deal here with the book production of the
single countries, but a few words may be said regarding
France.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The main]{.style_} [scriptoria]{.style_1} [in pre-Carolingian France
were at Lyons, the most important centre of Roman civilization; Luxeuil,
an early Irish foundation; Corbie, an offshoot of Luxeuil; St. Martin at
Tours, which was a large and wealthy abbey even before it was associated
with Alcuin; and St. Denis, near Paris, even before it became
"the]{.style_} [foyer]{.style_1} [of a rekindled art which was to shine
on France and Europe" (Male) []{#calibre_link-454}(see [Fig.
V--15](#calibre_link-177){.calibre9}; VII-7,]{.style_} [b]{.style_1}[;
8, 1--2).]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000002.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-147}

[[Fig. VII--1](#calibre_link-178){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Vercellensis or Eusebianus (Capitulary Archives, Vercelli, North
Italy); assigned to St. Eusebius, bishop of Vercelli, who died in 371
A.D. It is apparently the earliest preserved Vetus Latina
codex.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000003.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. VII--2]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Palatinus: 228 folios are preserved in Castel del Buonconsiglio,
Trent, North Italy; one is in the British Museum, Add. MS. 40107 ; and
one---here shown---in Trinity College, Dublin, N.iv.18. The manuscript
is written in two columns of 20 lines, in silver on well prepared and
deeply dyed parchment, the opening lines of St. John and St. Luke being
in gold. Attributed to the fifth century A.D., and apparently the
earliest preserved purple Gospel of the Vetus Latina.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000004.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. VII--3]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Sarzanensis (Chiesa Parrocchiale, Sarezzano, near Tortona,
Province of Alexandria. North Italy). The manuscript was found in 1585
under the main altar in a twelfth-century wooden box. It is a very fine
and early codex aureus of the Vetus Latina, though in very bad condition
of preservation. It consists of 72 folios, containing St. John and part
of St. Luke, written in gold in uncials of the early sixth century on
very fine and deeply dyed parchment. The golden ink has irreparably
damaged the fine vellum.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000005.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. VII--4]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Brixianus (Queriniana Library, Brescia, North Italy). 418 folios
of 20 lines. Uncials of the first half of the sixth century. Written in
silver on purple stained vellum, the opening lines of the chapters being
in gold. Contains Eusebius, Caesariensis, Canones evangeliorum and the
Four Gospels in the order of the Vetus Latina. From the monastery of St.
Salvatore and St. Giulia, at Brescia.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000006.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-181}

[Fig. VII--5]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Amiatinus (early eighth century) : see p. 504 f.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-455}

## [THE LATIN BIBLE MANUSCRIPTS]{.style_2} {#the-latin-bible-manuscripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The main characteristics of the books produced during the Middle Ages
are their illumination and binding. While, however, these form a
necessary part of the history of the book, they are so distinct in their
nature as to deserve a fairly full treatment, and accordingly a special
volume is being devoted to the subject.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000007.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-179}

[Fig. VII--6]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Claromontanus, written in uncials of the seventh century,
contains the Vulgate version (Vatican Library, Cod. Lat. 7223, fol. 230
recto).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Here it will suffice to mention one class---though undoubtedly the
principal one---of medieval book production, the Latin Bible
manuscripts, of which about 8,000 are preserved. It is well known that
of Latin versions the two most important are the so-called]{.style_}
[Vetus Latina]{.style_1}[, or Old Latin version, and the]{.style_}
[Vulgate]{.style_1}[. The former, based upon the Greek text, and
attributed to the second century A.D., seems to be contained in
relatively few manuscripts extant, partly belonging to the fifth or
sixth century. An excellent list of Old Latin Bible manuscripts is to be
found in B. Fischer,]{.style_} [Vetus Latina]{.style_1}[, etc.,
Freiburg, 1949 onwards. See also [Figs.
VII--1](#calibre_link-147){.calibre9}--4.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Vulgate is the Latin version of the Bible prepared by St. Jerome in
the last two decades of the fourth century (A.D.) and the following five
years. In the course of time, St. Jerome's translation became corrupted
and various recensions became necessary, of which the following may be
mentioned: those of Cassiodorus (sixth century), Alcuin (late eighth
century)---see p. 480 ff., the revision prepared for England and North
France by Lanfranc, Archbishop of Canterbury (late ninth century), the
revision of Stephen Harding (early twelfth century), and the]{.style_}
[Correctorium Parisiense]{.style_1} [(early thirteenth century).
Although the Vulgate was declared authentic by the Council of Trent
(1545---63), the earliest standard editions were those published by Pope
Sixtus V (1585---90) and Pope Clement VIII (1592---1605). In 1907, Pope
Pius X appointed a commission of Benedictine abbots to prepare a new
official version for the Catholic Church, but its work is still far from
complete, nor "is it likely to achieve finality as a textual recension"
(B. J. Roberts).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The following are the principal manuscripts containing the Vulgate
version: codices]{.style_} [Turonensis]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[G]{.style_1} [(sixth or seventh century),]{.style_}
[]{#calibre_link-456}[Claromontanus]{.style_1}[---[Fig.
VII--6](#calibre_link-179){.calibre9}---]{.style_}[Ottobonianus]{.style_1}
[or]{.style_} []{#calibre_link-182}[O]{.style_1}[---[Fig.
VII--7](#calibre_link-180){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[a]{.style_1}[---]{.style_}[Amiatinus]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[A]{.style_1} [(early eighth century; see p. 473 f.
[]{#calibre_link-457}and [Fig.
VII--5](#calibre_link-181){.calibre9}),]{.style_} [Cavensis]{.style_1}
[(ninth century),]{.style_} [Theodulfianus]{.style_1} [(ninth
century),]{.style_} [Vallicellianus]{.style_1} [(ninth century). They
all contain portions of the old Testament; the]{.style_} [Amiatinus,
Cavensis]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [Vallicellianus]{.style_1} [also
portions of the New Testament, and three other
manuscripts---]{.style_}[Fuldensis, Sangermanensis,]{.style_1}
[and]{.style_} [Lindisfarnensis]{.style_1} [(see p. 470 ff.)---contain
only portions of the New Testament. Other important groups of Latin
Bible manuscripts are a Spanish "family" of the eighth century and an
Italian "family" of the twelfth. Of all these manuscripts, the]{.style_}
[Amiatinus]{.style_1} [---[Fig.
VII--5](#calibre_link-181){.calibre9}---seems to be the leading
manuscript of the Vulgate (see p. 504). Concerning the "Irish" text see
Chapter X.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The total number of New Testament codices, which have come down to us
is 4,086, of which 169 are in uncials (two belonging to A.D. c. 400, and
fourteen to c. 500; all the others, to between A.D. 600 and 1000), 2,352
are written in minuscules (and date to A.D. 900--- 1500), 1,565 are
fragmentary. There are about fifty fragments of papyri. The number of
copies of translations of the New Testament, including fragments, is
said to be about 30,000.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000008.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-180}

[[Fig. VII--7(a)](#calibre_link-182){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Ottobonianus, written in North Italy in the seventh or eighth
century A.D., contains the Pentateuch in Vulgate version with some
portions in Vetus Latina (Vatican Library, Ott. Lat. 66, fol. 52
recto).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-458}

## [BOOKS WRITTEN IN "NATIONAL" SCRIPTS]{.style_2} {#books-written-in-national-scripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[As soon as the various European countries had shaken off the political
authority of the Roman empire, and the educated communities had been
scattered and dissolved, a marked change took place in the development
of the Latin cursive or running script. Several "national" hands, or
rather "national" styles of the Latin cursive minuscule, assumed
distinctive features, and there thus developed on the European continent
and in the British Isles, the five principal national hands, known as
South Italian or Beneventan, Merovingian (in France), Visigothic (in
Spain), Germanic pre-Carolingian, and Insular (in Ireland and
[]{#calibre_link-184}England): [Figs.
VII--7](#calibre_link-183){.calibre9},]{.style_} [b]{.style_1} [8 and
9.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000009.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-183}

[[Fig. VII---7](#calibre_link-184){.calibre9} (b)]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The oldest complete copy of the Hexameron by Ambrose; written at Corbie
in eighth-century minuscules (Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, MS.
193).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Each of them gave rise to several varieties.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[At the end of the eighth century, the Caroline or Carolingian minuscule
was formed in the Frankish empire, probably under the influence of the
Anglo-Irish hand. The Carolingian script became the literary hand of the
Frankish empire, and during the next two centuries it became the main
book hand of western Europe. The blending of the majuscules and the
minuscules into combined service is due mainly to this script. It was
employed until the twelfth century, and had some varieties, such as the
English, Frankish, Italian, and German. From the late twelfth century
onwards, in north-western Europe, including England, the letters
gradually assumed angular shapes. The new hand, termed "black letter" or
Gothic, or German, was employed in England until the sixteenth century,
and is still used in Germany as a kind of "national" hand.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000010.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. VII---8]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Specimens of manuscripts written in "national" hands. (1) Merovingian
(in France), seventh century A.D,; (2) Merovingian, eighth century; (3)
Visigothic minuscule (in Spain), 945; (4) Visigothic cursive script,
before 779; (5) Visigothic, eleventh century; (6) Roman minuscule, ninth
century (Vitae Sanctorum: Farfa codex); (7) North Italian pre-Caroliuc
minuscule (Codex 490. Capitulary Library, Lucca) ; (8) Idem, late eighth
century; (9) Idem, eighth- ninth (Tnturv (upper part, uncial script);
(10) Beneventan script, from Cassino. eighth century; (11) Idem,
eleventh century.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[During the fifteenth century, a beautiful Italian cursive minuscule,
the round, neat humanistic or renaissance hand, based on the earlier
round minuscule---this being considered at the time as the script of the
classical Roman period, the new script was called]{.style_}
[antiqua]{.style_1}[---was introduced in Florence, and employed for
literary productions. This style developed mainly into two varieties:
(1) the Venetian minuscule, nowadays known as]{.style_}
[italics,]{.style_1} [traditionally an imitation of the handwriting of
Petrarch, and probably the most clearly legible form of characters which
has yet been invented; and (2) the "Roman" type of letters, perfected in
North Italy, chiefly at Venice, where it was used in the printing
presses in the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries, and spread
thence to Holland, England (about 1518), Germany, France, Spain, and
other countries. The monumental Latin alphabet was taken over for the
majuscules. This majuscule and both forms of the minuscule, the "Roman"
and the]{.style_} [italics,]{.style_1} [spread all over the world. In
England they were adopted, from Italy, in the sixteenth
century.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[For further details see]{.style_} [The Alphabet]{.style_1}[, pp.
545--52.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The "national" scripts of the modern European peoples are, strictly
speaking, though with a few exceptions, adaptations of the Latin
alphabet to Germanic, Romance, Slavonic and Finno-Ugrian languages; for
the alphabets of the Graeco-orthodox Slavonic peoples, see p. 290 ff.;
the modern Greek alphabet is a development of the ancient Greek cursive
writing with some influences of the Latin alphabet.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Not only has the Latin alphabet, in all its varieties, been adapted to,
and adopted by the great majority of the European languages and peoples;
also the Graeco-Roman and Latin Christian book making has been inherited
by modern Europe. Until the invention of printing ---and even for some
time afterwards---the form of "the book" did not undergo great change,
except in two main fields: illumination and binding. These will be dealt
with---as repeatedly mentioned---in the forthcoming book on]{.style_}
[Illumination and Binding.]{.style_1}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000011.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. VII---9]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Origines, Homiliae in Lucam, eighth or ninth-century minuscule
(Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, MS. 334). (bellow) Varia Medica,
including Hippocrates and Galenus (University Library, Glasgow,
Hunterian MS. T.4.13, fol. 99 recto; it is written in "a curious and
awkward mixed minuscule (Visigothic, Beneventan, Caroline\....") (Lowe)
).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000013.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. VII---10]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[St. Cyril of Alexandria (d. 444). Thesaurus adversus haereticos,
transl. by Alphonsus Jorge of Trebizonda. The illuminated border shows
in the upper part the Catalan royal arms, and in the lower part those of
Naples. The codex, written in Italy, belonged to Alfonso V the
Magnanimous (1416--58), king of Aragon, Sicily and Naples (Central
Library, Barcelona, MS. 561, fol. 1).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-459}

## [The Eastern Church []{#calibre_link-186 .calibre14}([Figs. VII--11](#calibre_link-185){.calibre13}-16)]{.style_2} {#the-eastern-church-figs.-vii11-16 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The historical importance of the Eastern Church in early Christianity
is too well known to be discussed here in great detail; it is signalized
in the fact that of the Patriarchates four were in the east (Jerusalem,
Alexandria, Antioch, and Constantinople) and only one (Rome) in the
west.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The main weakness of eastern Christendom lay in its being riddled with
sects, "heresies", and schisms. The two great "heresies" of the fifth
century, Nestorianism (condemned by the Council of Ephesus, in 431), and
its extreme opposite, Monophysitism (condemned by the Council of
Chalcedon, in 451), caused the splitting up of the Eastern Church into
various independent Churches; this made for the rapid and easy victory
of Islam in Palestine, Syria and Egypt, and ultimately caused the
decline of Christianity in the east. Indeed, the predominant feeling of
the Syrian and Egyptian Christians (who were either Nestorians or
Monophysites) at the time of the Arab invasion appears to have been a
sense of relief that they were now able to practise their religion
unhindered by the persecution of the Imperial Orthodox Church.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[On the other hand, this separation of the various Churches produced
divergences between the liturgies and traditions of the various
religious schools. As a result, various native literatures were produced
(Syria: Nestorian, Jacobite, and Melkite; Coptic and Ethiopic; Armenian,
Georgian, and others); the Nestorians even carried their teachings,
their language, their script and their books far into the Kurdistan
highlands, into South India, into Turkestan, amongst the Turki and
Mongol tribes of Central Asia, and into China.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Thanks to the diffusion of Christianity, and to the consequent
necessity of translating the Bible into the native tongues, various
languages (]{.style_}[e.g]{.style_1}[. Armenian, Georgian, Alban and
others, in the east; Gothic in the west) were reduced to writing, and
native literatures, especially in the religious fields, were produced.
Some early manuscripts in these languages are, indeed, extant, for
example, the Gothic]{.style_} [Codex Argenteus]{.style_1} [([Fig.
VII--11](#calibre_link-185){.calibre9},]{.style_} [a]{.style_1}[),
preserved at Uppsala (Sweden), and consisting of 187 pages written in
silver and gold on purple-red parchment.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[CONSTANTINOPLE AS CAPITAL OF EASTERN CHRISTIANITY]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[After the Moslem invasion of Palestine, Syria, and Egypt, the Patriarch
of Constantinople assumed the title of Oecumenical Patriarch ("Universal
Father Ruler") and Constantinople became the most important centre of
Eastern Christianity. With the gradual separation of West from East, and
particularly after the definite severance, in 1054, of the Western
Church from the Eastern---the former retaining Latin as its official\|
language, the latter Greek---the peoples who took their religion from
Byzantium came within the influence of Greek culture, their languages
being reduced to scripts which descended directly from the Greek
alphabet.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000014.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-185}

[[Fig. VII--11](#calibre_link-186){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a, Page from the Codex Argenteus; b-f, specimens from Russian
manusripts: b, manuscript, A.D. 1073; c, manuscript, A.D. 1284; d,
prayer-book, A.D. 1400; e, manuscript of the fifteenth century A.D.; f,
manuscript dated 1561.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE BOOK IN EASTERN CHRISTIANITY]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The division between the peoples who took their religion from Rome and
those who took their religion from Byzantium, is particularly evident
among the Slavonic peoples: it coincides with the line of demarcation
between the peoples having Latin as their early cultural language and
still retaining it for their liturgy, besides using the Roman
characters, and the peoples influenced by the Greek-Byzantine culture
and employing the Cyrillic alphabet, derived from the Greek. See
also]{.style_} [The Alphabet, passim.]{.style_1} [[Fig.
VII--11](#calibre_link-185){.calibre9},]{.style_} [b---f,]{.style_1}
[reproduce specimens of early Russian manuscripts.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[As in the west, so in the east, the monks, and other religious people
kept the lamp of ancient science and culture burning during the Middle
Ages. In the east, indeed, monasticism arose earlier than in the west
and continually gained new ground: men of religious propensity gradually
sought solitude, or communion with kindred spirits, so that they might
develop in peace the higher life. The conventual life was in part a
revolt against contemporary society, with its wars and lusts and
manifold corruptions, and it was ever a bulwark of the Church.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Thanks to these conditions, in the east, as in the west, numerous
Christian scriptoria came into being; in the west the Latin characters
were employed; in the east the Greek and the Syriac (in all its
varieties, Estrangela, Nestorian, Jacobite, Melkite, and so on), as well
as the Coptic, the Arabic, or else, still farther east, the Armenian,
the Georgian, and other scripts. It is not surprising, therefore, that
numerous manuscripts have been brought to light from monasteries and
other religious houses of Greece, Egypt, Sinai, Palestine, Syria, Asia
Minor, Armenia, and other eastern countries.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["Several travellers who have managed to overcome the suspicion of the
monks and their unwillingness to open their literary hoards to
strangers, or to part with any of the volumes, have found immense
numbers of books hidden under dust and rubbish in vaults and cellars or
stowed away in chests, where they were probably thrust at some time when
danger threatened them. Books written in these monasteries themselves in
earlier days, or brought hither from other monasteries further East have
thus lain forgotten or neglected for centuries, or, if they were noticed
at all, it was only that they might be put to some ignoble use. Thus
some were found acting as covers to two large jars which had formerly
held preserves\.... Some large volumes were found in use as footstools
to protect the bare feet of the monks from the cold stone floor of their
chapel" (G. Burford Rawlings).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Relatively few monasteries are still in existence, and these are in
decadent condition. Mention may be made of the Greek orthodox convent of
St. Catherine, situated about 5,000 feet above sea level at the foot of
Mt. Sinai. Here the famous]{.style_} [Codex Sinaiticus]{.style_1} [(p.
195 ff.) was discovered. St. Catherine's Monastery is said to have been
founded in the days of Constantine the Great and the Empress Helena
(first half of the fourth century A.D.). In Justinian's times (sixth
century) thousands of anchorites inhabited that region, and there were
various monasteries. Nowadays, there is only the monastery of St.
Catherine, and only about ten monks live there, though its monastic
order has still old branches at et-Tôr and at the Feirân Oasis, and some
of their monks live in Cairo. The Monastery of St. Catherine occupies an
area of nearly 300 by 250 feet, which is enclosed by a wall 40-50 feet
high. There is the "Big Church", a mosque, about twenty chapels, and
various other buildings. The precious library still contains about 3,300
manuscripts, in about a dozen languages, including some 2,300 Greek
codices, about 550 Arabic, 257 Syriac, ninety Georgian, forty-one
Slavonic, and six Ethiopic manuscripts. In 1950, an American expedition,
headed by K. Clark, was sent by the American Foundation for the Study of
Man (with the co-operation of the Library of Congress, at Washington) to
microfilm the more important manuscripts of the Sinaitic monastery. The
Expedition appears to have succeeded in its main task. Moreover, many
new manuscripts have been "discovered", various manuscripts reported
lost have been re-discovered, and a few important palimpsests have been
found.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000015.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-187}

[Fig. VII---12]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Earliest extant dated Syriac manuscript (British Museum, Add. MS.
12150). Written in estrangel at Edessa towards the close of A.D. 411,
preserved in the ancient convent of St. Mary Deipara in the Nitrian
desert in Egypt. The full page has three columns, but the innermost
column has been omitted to include in the illustration the marginal
annotation written in the Deipara Convent in A.D. 1087.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-460}

::: calibre15
:::

## [The Syriac Book []{#calibre_link-461 .calibre14}([Figs. VII--12](#calibre_link-187){.calibre13}-14)]{.style_2} {#the-syriac-book-figs.-vii12-14 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The terms "Syria" and "Aram", and the corresponding terms "Syrians" and
"Aramaeans" are synonymous. Indeed, the Hebrew Biblical word]{.style_}
[Aram]{.style_1} [is rendered in the Septuagint by Syria.
Conventionally, however, the term "Syriac" denotes the ancient Semitic
or Aramaic language and literature of the "Syrian Christians"; the
latter term denotes not "Christian inhabitants of Syria", but roughly
those Christians who spoke "Syriac", a daughter-language of ancient
Aramaic, or who were within the Syriac Church, which was under the
influence of Syriac thought and Hellenistic culture.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Antioch of Syria, one of the most important centres of early
Christianity, the city where "the disciples were called Christians
first" (]{.style_}[Acts]{.style_1}[, xi, 26), was the chief town of
Syria, but linguistically it was a Greek city, and it was an important
centre of Greek culture.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Edessa (now Urfa), the capital of the small kingdom Osrhoëne, situated
in north-western Mesopotamia, to the east of the Euphrates, was the
first centre and principal focus of the Christian Church in the
Syriac-speaking world. Christianity was preached here already in the
second century, and thence it spread to Persia.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Edessan dialect became the liturgical language of the Syriac
Church, the literary language of the Christian Aramaeans of Syria, and
likewise of neighbouring countries, even of Persia; it was indeed
the]{.style_} [lingua franca]{.style_1} [in Mesopotamia, Syria and
Persia. After Greek, it was the most important language in the Eastern
Roman Empire. Nisibis (situated about 120 miles almost due cast from
Edessa) was another important centre of the Syriac Christians; about
A.D. 300 it was recognized as an episcopal See. Both in Edessa and
Nisibis there were schools of theology, the influence of which extended
far into the Christian world.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-462}

::: calibre5
:::

## [SYRIAC LITERATURE]{.style_2} {#syriac-literature .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[A contract of sale, dated A.D. 243, comes from Dura Europos, and is the
earliest available Edessan Syriac document written on parchment in Es
rangel (]{.style_}[i.e.]{.style_1} [the early Syriac script). The
earliest dated Syriac manuscript (British Museum,]{.style_} [Add, MS.
12150)]{.style_1} [is probably the earliest dated codex available in any
language. It is dated in the year 723 of the Seleucid Era---A.D. 411:
[Fig. VII--12](#calibre_link-187){.calibre9}. The next oldest
manuscripts are: a palimpsest manuscript, British Museum,]{.style_}
[Add. MS. 11512,]{.style_1} [fol. 67-124, dated in 771 Seleuc.
Era---A.D. 459-60, and]{.style_} [Add. 14425,]{.style_1} [fol. 1-116,
containing a copy of]{.style_} [Genesis]{.style_1} [and]{.style_}
[Exodus,]{.style_1} [dated in A.D. 464. (As a matter of fact,]{.style_}
[Add. 14425,]{.style_1} [as at present bound up, consists of two
originally distinct manuscripts, and the date refers to the first half
of the codex; the second part, containing]{.style_} [Numbers]{.style_1}
[and]{.style_} [Deuteronomy,]{.style_1} [belongs to a later
period.)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The extensive Syriac literature is a Christian literature in a very
special sense, nearly all the manuscripts extant dealing solely with
Christian subjects. The Syriac literature flourished mainly in the
fourth to seventh centuries. The internal religious conflicts are
reflected in the writings of the sixth and seventh centuries.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Indeed, with the great schism in the seventh century between the
Nestorians, or East Syrians, and the Monophysite Jacobites, or West
Syrians, a separation took place, which implied a severance of tradition
in the literature which emanated from the two sects. The Melkites, or
"Royalists", continued to carry on in union with Constantinople, whereas
the Maronites, who were originally Monophysists or Monothelites, about
1102 became united to the Roman Catholic Church. Syriac religious
literature, however, never regained its former glory, though it
continued to be produced for many centuries. In the thirteenth century,
Bar-Hebraeus, also known as Abufaraj or Abulpharagius, a celebrated
oriental writer of Jewish parentage, who became primate of the Jacobite
Church, tried to revive both the Syriac language and its
literature.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-463}

::: calibre5
:::

## [SPREAD OF THE NESTORIAN AND THE JACOBITE CHURCHES]{.style_2} {#spread-of-the-nestorian-and-the-jacobite-churches .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-189}[([Figs. VII--13](#calibre_link-188){.calibre9} and
14)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[After the Arab conquest, far from declining in vigour under Moslem
rule, the Nestorians and the Jacobites began a remarkable period of
missionary expansion throughout Central Asia. Indeed, the Syriac Church
spread widely in the east. For some time in the Middle Ages there were
150 Jacobite archbishoprics and bishoprics.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Nestorian Church especially---or the Church of the East, which is
the term preferred by its followers---was widely scattered through the
countries of central and eastern Asia. After the secession of the
Nestorian Church from the Imperial Orthodox Church of Byzantium, the
Nestorian faith became the official religion of the then flourishing
Persian Church, and the city of Seleucia became the seat of their
Patriarch, or]{.style_} [Catholicos.]{.style_1} [Their hostility towards
Constantinople and its Imperial Church gained the Nestorians the
popularity of the Sasanian rulers of Persia, who were "sworn" enemies of
the Roman or Byzantine Empire; naturally, the Nestorian Church leaders
did not fail on occasion to emphasize their loyalty to the Persian King
of Kings and their enmity towards the Roman Emperor.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is only by casual literary evidence that we learn of the existence
of richly illustrated Persian books of the Sasanian period (A.D. 226---
636)---see the forthcoming book on]{.style_} [Illumination and
Binding.]{.style_1} [There can be no doubt that, thanks to the
Nestorians, Persian book production, including book illumination, spread
far beyond the territories of the Sasanids. Moreover, some modern
scholars consider the Nestorians as a connecting link in book production
between the Copts and Central Asia.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Under the Arabic dynasties, the Nestorian Church---as well as the
Jacobite Church---retained the allegiance of large sections of the local
population, and, as Sir Thomas Arnold pointed out, "their patriarchs
were wealthy and powerful and at times exercised considerable influence
at court. Some estimate may be formed of the wealth enjoyed by these
Christian communities from the record of the magnificent churches they
from time to time erected\.... There must have been an ecclesiastical
art corresponding to the wealth and extension of these two Oriental
Churches, but very little evidence of it appears to have survived in the
form of pictorial art\...."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the seventh and eighth centuries, Nestorian missionaries preached
Christianity in China, and in the eighth century a Nestorian bishop of
Tibet was appointed. After the Mongol conquests had brought under one
sceptre a territory stretching from Syria to the shores of the China
Sea, and after the re-opening of the trade routes into Further Asia, a
new outlet was offered for the Nestorian missionary effort. The
Nestorians eagerly seized this opportunity. Marco Polo tells us that in
his times the trade routes from Baghdad to Peking were lined with
Nestorian chapels. In 1265, there were twenty-five Asiatic provinces,
with seventy bishoprics, in Persia, Mesopotamia, Khorasan, Turkestan,
India, and China.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[At one time it even looked as though the Mongol emperor, Qubilay Khan
(1216-94), might adopt Christianity. His brother H l g Khan, who in 1258
captured Baghd d and put an end to the splendid 'Abb sid Caliphate, and
was the first to assume the title of Il-Kh n, had a Christian wife; he
accorded special favours to the Nestorian patriarch and to his
Church.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Half a century later, the seventh Khan chose Islam as the state
religion. There was then a growing bitterness between the Nestorian
Church and the Moslem leaders, who could not forget the overbearing
attitude of the former towards Islam in the period of the Mongol
conquest, when the new rulers were still heathen. It is quite possible
that this bitterness produced the last straw in Moslem intolerance
towards Eastern Christianity.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000016.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-188}

[[Fig. VII---13](#calibre_link-189){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Nestorian book.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Gradually all the activities of the Nestorians ceased and nothing
remained to tell the glorious tale except the numerous sepulchral and
other inscriptions and some illuminated Church service books in various
parts of central and eastern Asia. There are now some 60,000 members of
this once glorious Church.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The paramount influence, directly or indirectly exerted by Nestorian
culture and book production upon Central Asia and the Far East, has left
indelible traces in the Mongolian and Manchurian alphabets:
see]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [Fig. 148.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[[Fig. VII--13](#calibre_link-188){.calibre9} shows a Nestorian book
completed in the year A.D. 892; it contains about 800 pages measuring
28.5 by 22.5 cm. Its author was a monk who had devoted his life to
Christian research and meditation. He had travelled to China to
disseminate Christian religion. In returning to his native country after
many years of absence, he desired a life of seclusion; so he went up to
the Hikari Mountains and dug out a cave in which to dwell, meditate and
write his book. He was fed on milk supplied by the passing shepherds and
on vegetables which he produced by his own labour. Having completed the
manuscript, he considered his life as finished, prayed for death, and
prepared himself for this great event by digging his grave in a corner
of the cave that had been his abode for forty years. Years after his
death, shepherds seeking shelter from a storm, found the manuscript
wrapped in many layers of skin bound securely with thongs; they gave it
to a priest who had happened to be a member of the monk's
family.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The book was found to contain meditations, prayers, sermons, chronology
dating from the earliest Disciples, and other Christian matter. The
manuscript became a sacred book, and even was used as a pillow to place
under the head of the sick "producing miraculous cures". It continued to
serve the great purpose until the Mongol invasion in the fourteenth
century, when---for precaution---it was buried in a cemetery. After the
danger passed, the remainder and the descendants of those who had fled
to the mountains returned to the village, found the place of the hidden
treasure---which had been marked by a stone bearing the name of the
writer---and unearthed the book in perfect condition. The manuscript,
again used as a sacred book, has since been kept by the descendants of
the monk's family. Thus runs the story.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(The present writer owes these notes and the photographs to his
colleague, the Rev. A. E. Goodman, University Lecturer in
Cambridge.)]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000017.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-190}

[Fig. VII---14]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Harqleian or Harqlensian version of the New Testament. In a neat
regular Jacobite cursive hand; it contains 216 leaves of vellum,
measuring by inches, and is dated A.Gr. 1481 corresponding to A.D. 1170
(University Library, Cambridge, Add. MS. 1700).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-464}

## [THE PESHIT]{.style_2} {#the-peshit .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The most important Syriac literary monument is the]{.style_}
[Peshit]{.style_1} [(it is called more often, but less
correctly,]{.style_} [Peshit]{.style_1} [), meaning "simple", perhaps in
contrast to the "learned" translation; or "common", possibly a term
corresponding to the Latin "Vulgate". It is a standardized but faithful
Syriac version of the Old and New Testament. The date of its origin is
uncertain. Some scholars put it back to the third or even the second
century. Until about twenty years ago it was generally held that the
whole Peshit was composed A.D. c. 200 and that it was used by the great
theologian Aphrahat or Aphraates, who flourished from 336---45, and by
St. Aphr m (Ephraem), the greatest of the early Syrian fathers, who
lived in the second half of the fourth century.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to the late Prof. Burkitt, however, this belief is unfounded,
and there is no evidence that---as far as it concerns the New
Testament---this version existed before the fifth century. The earliest
copy extant of the Old Testament (of]{.style_} [Genesis]{.style_1}
[and]{.style_} [Exodus]{.style_1}[) dates from the year 464 (see p.
296); it has thus "the distinction of being the oldest copy of the Bible
in any language of which the exact date is known" (Kenyon). Recently, it
has been suggested that the Peshit version of the New Testament was the
work of Rabb l , bishop of Edessa from 411 to 435, of whom it is known
that he translated the New Testament from Greek into Syriac, and ordered
a copy to be placed in every church in his diocese.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Of the total number of 243 early Syriac manuscripts extant, nearly
half, including most ancient ones, were discovered in the monastery of
St. Mary Deipara (in the Nitrian Desert of Egypt), probably having been
brought there from Nisibis; in 1842 they were secured for the British
Museum. Two of them belong to the fifth century, the oldest
being]{.style_} [Add. MS. 14459,]{.style_1} ["and at least a dozen more
are not later than the sixth century, three of them bearing precise
dates in the years 530-9, 534, and 548" (Kenyon).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-465}

::: calibre5
:::

## [OTHER SYRIAC VERSIONS OF THE BIBLE]{.style_2} {#other-syriac-versions-of-the-bible .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Peshit is not the only Syriac version of the Bible. An important
manuscript of the Syriac collection of the Nitrian Desert ---now known
as the]{.style_} [Curetonian]{.style_1} [manuscript (from the name of
Dr. Cureton of the British Museum who edited It)---contains an earlier
Syriac version of the Bible; this manuscript, of eighty leaves, contains
the Gospels and is from the fifth century. The Old Syriac version is
represented also in a Syriac palimpsest manuscript discovered in 1892 by
Mrs. Lewis and Mrs. Gibson in the Convent of St. Catherine on Mt. Sinai.
Although the text of the Sinaitic manuscript differs somewhat from the
text of the]{.style_} [Curetonian]{.style_1} [manuscript, in Prof.
Burkitt's opinion, they both represent the same Old Syriac version which
dates to A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 200.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Three other Syriac versions of the Bible may be mentioned: the first,
the Philoxenian Version, a revision of the Peshit , made in 508 by
Polycarp, and ordered by Philoxenus, Bishop of Mabbug, in Eastern Syria;
it is represented by a manuscript in the John Rylands Library in
Manchester, published in 1897. More important, however, is the later
revision, known as the arqleian or arqlensian Version, from the name of
Thomas of arqel who made it in 616; he, too, was Bishop of Mabbug. About
fifty manuscripts extant contain this version; many of them are in
England; apparently the best []{#calibre_link-466}([Fig.
VII--14](#calibre_link-190){.calibre9}), written in 1170, being in the
Cambridge University Library, while two of the tenth century are in the
British Museum; two manuscripts, of the seventh and eighth centuries,
are in Rome, and one, dated A.D. 757, in Florence. The third, or
Palestine-Syriac version of the Bible, probably made in Antioch in the
sixth century, is known from fragments in the Vatican Library, in the
British Museum, in the Bodleian Library, at Oxford, in the Leningrad
Public Library, and in the Convent of St. Catherine on Mt.
Sinai.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Amongst the volumes at this Convent was found, some twenty years ago,
by Prof. Rendel Harris, an interesting Syriac book, containing a very
early Christian work, hitherto supposed to be lost, the]{.style_}
[Apology]{.style_1} [of Aristides.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-467}

::: calibre5
:::

## [SYRIAC TRANSLATORS OF GREEK LITERATURE]{.style_2} {#syriac-translators-of-greek-literature .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is commonly believed that the]{.style_} [Renaissance,]{.style_1}
[the rediscovery of the treasures of classical antiquity, took place in
the fifteenth century A.D., in what is known as the period of
Renaissance. This conception is misleading. The "renaissance" began in
the "Dark Ages" with the translation of Greek works into Syriac and
Arabic, mainly made by Syriac scholars. The original works were known to
but a few, and since then many of them have been lost. The part played
by the Syrians in the east may be compared to that the Arabs and the
Jews played in western Europe.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["More than any other one people the Syriac-speaking Christians
contributed to that general awakening and intellectual renaissance
centred in 'Abb sid Baghd d which became and remained the chief glory of
classical Islam\.... The Arabian Moslem brought with him no art, science
or philosophy and hardly any literature; \... In a few decades after the
foundation of Baghdad (762) the Arabic-reading public found at its
disposal the major philosophical works of Aristotle and the Neo-Platonic
commentators, the chief medical writings of Hippocrates and Galen, the
main mathematical compositions of Euclid and the geographical
masterpiece of Ptolemy. In all this the Syrians were the mediators"
(Hitti).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The great scholar, the "sheikh of the translators", Hunayn ibn-I q
(Johannitius; he lived from 809 to 873), a Nestorian Christian from al-
rah, has been called by a modern French historian of medicine "the
greatest figure of the ninth century". unayn is supposed to have written
many books in Syriac and in Arabic, and to have translated, apart from
the Old Testament from the Septuagint (his version has not survived),
the works of Galen, Hippocrates, Dioscorides, Plato
(]{.style_}[Republic]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[,]{.style_1} [Aristotle
(]{.style_}[Categories, Physics,]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [Magna
Moralia]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[,]{.style_1} [and others. His search for
Greek manuscripts led him all over the Near East and to Alexandria. He
must have seen and compared hundreds of them and accumulated a large
collection of his own.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[From his report we learn how these translators worked, comparing
defective manuscripts, restoring, explaining, excerpting. In some thirty
years more than 130 books ascribed to Galen or his school were
translated; of the listed 179 Syriac and 123 Arabic translations, Hunayn
himself had done ninety-six and forty-six, respectively, besides the
numerous revisions of translations done by others; eighty-one versions
were done for Arab clients, seventy-three for people who knew Syriac. As
a rule, the books were translated from Greek into either Arabic or
Syriac.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-468}

::: calibre5
:::

## [The Armenian and Caucasian "Book"]{.style_2} {#the-armenian-and-caucasian-book .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[(See also the forthcoming volume on]{.style_} [Illumination and
Binding]{.style_1}[, in which specimens of illuminated Armenian and
Georgian books are reproduced.)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The section belongs geographically to the next chapter, but as the
earliest extant Armenian and Georgian books are strictly connected with
Syriac Christianity, they may justifiably be dealt with here.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-469}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ARMENIA]{.style_2} {#armenia .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[This country, lying to the north of Eastern Syria (or northern
Mesopotamia), between the Roman and Parthian empires, possessed no
literary language, nor even a script, before Christianity reached it and
the Armenian Church became independent in 369. Between A.D. 390 and 400,
St. Mesrop or Masht'oz ("the saint"), in collaboration with St. Sahak
and a Greek from Samosata, called Rufanos, created the Armenian
alphabet, which is admirably suited to the Armenian speech:
see]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp. 320-2.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The fifth century was the Golden Age of Armenian literature. A famous
school of translators (]{.style_}[thargmanitchk']{.style_1}
[or]{.style_} [surb thargmanitchk',]{.style_1} ["translators" or "holy
translators"), founded by St. Sahak, produced a translation of both the
Old and the New Testaments, partly from Greek and partly from Syriac.
This version shows a marked affinity in the Gospels with the Old Syriac
(see p. 301 f.). About the year 433 these translations were revised with
the help of Greek manuscripts brought from Constantinople. The result
was the present Armenian version, which has an interesting although very
mixed kind of text. Some masterpieces of Greece and Rome were also
translated into Armenian.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest extant manuscript of the Armenian Gospels is dated 887: it
was published in Moscow in 1899; there are probably two other
manuscripts of the ninth century, and six of the tenth (the facsimile of
an important manuscript of 989 was published by E. Mader). The majority
of the Armenian codices, including copies of the whole Bible, belong,
however, to the twelfth and later centuries. The illumination of these
codices will be discussed in the book on]{.style_} [Illumination and
Binding.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Armenian script and the versions of the Bible were the chief means
of crystallizing Armenian speech, which was the main factor in upholding
the existence and unity of the Armenian Church and nation.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-470}

::: calibre5
:::

## [GEORGIA]{.style_2} {#georgia .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The ancient Colchis or Iberia, a part of the southern Caucasus, has
been inhabited from about the seventh century B.C. by Georgians: the
indigenous term is K'art'li or K'art'velni. This ancient people employs
nowadays both in printing and in handwriting the]{.style_}
[Mkedruli]{.style_1} [(from]{.style_} [mkedari,]{.style_1} ["knight,
warrior") or "the warriors', military, lay" script, of forty letters.
Formerly, however, they also employed the]{.style_} [Khutsuri]{.style_1}
[(from]{.style_} [khutsi,]{.style_1} ["priest") or "priestly,
ecclesiastical" writing, an angular character of thirty-eight letters,
in two forms (capitals,]{.style_} [Aso-mtavruli,]{.style_1} [and
minuscules,]{.style_} [Nuskha]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The origins of the Georgian scripts and written literature are
uncertain; they seem, however, to be connected with the spread of
Christianity into Georgia. Indeed, the Georgian Khutsuri script may be
regarded as a Christian creation. Traditionally it is considered as St.
Mesrop's invention, parallel to that of the Armenian writing. The
earliest Georgian inscriptions extant go back to the fifth century A.D.,
while the oldest preserved manuscripts belong to the eighth century A.D.
The Golden Age of Georgian literature was the twelfth and early
thirteenth centuries under kings David II and George III, and Queen
Tamara, and lasted for almost a century until the defeat of George IV by
the Mongols in 1223.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Modern scholars, such as F. C. Conybeare in England and R. P. Blake in
America, have shown that the Georgian version of the Bible, probably
accomplished in the fifth century A.D., was made from an Armenian
manuscript, and Blake concludes "that the Greek text on which it is
ultimately based was of the Caesarean type. It is therefore a useful
witness for the reconstitution of the Caesarean text."]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-471}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE ANCIENT ALBANS]{.style_2} {#the-ancient-albans .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The ancient Albans or Alvans also lived in the Caucasus---their
territory, roughly corresponding with the present-day Soviet Republic of
Azerbaijan, was the classical kingdom of Albania, the native name for it
being Aghvanir or Shirvan. They were quite important in ancient times,
especially during the wars between Rome and Mithridates of Pontus (first
half of the first century B.C.).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to Armenian tradition, the Alban alphabet was also created by
St. Mesrop. No original Alban documents are extant, but I. Abuladze has
recently identified the Albanian alphabet in an Armenian manuscript of
the fifteenth century A.D.: this manuscript, which is now at Etchmiadzin
(MS. No. 7117), contains a collection of the Greek, Syriac, Latin,
Georgian, Albanian and Coptic alphabets, and Indian and Arabic cyphers,
with Armenian transcriptions.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000018.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-191}

[Fig. VII--15]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Caucasian Albans, similarly to the Armenians and Georgians, are
known to have developed a rich Christian literature between the fifth
and eleventh centuries A.D.; but at the end of that period they
disappeared as an ethnic entity.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-472}

::: calibre5
:::

::: calibre15
:::

## [The Coptic Book ([Figs. IV--14](#calibre_link-116){.calibre13}, []{#calibre_link-473 .calibre14}and [VII--15](#calibre_link-191){.calibre13} and 16)]{.style_2} {#the-coptic-book-figs.-iv14-and-vii15-and-16 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[We pass now from the eastern lands of early Christianity to its
southern territories; these, however, were part and parcel of Eastern
Christianity.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[COPTIC]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Coptic (from the Arabic]{.style_} [qopt]{.style_1}[,]{.style_} [qubt,
qibt]{.style_1}[, a corruption from Greek]{.style_}
[Aigýptios---gýptios]{.style_1}[) is the last stage in the development
of the Egyptian language. Curiously enough, Coptic was mainly a
Christian language, at least in the manuscripts extant. It was the
language which was used by the natives of Egypt at the time when early
Christianity spread into that country; but it formed essentially the
non-cultivated speech of its population, for the Egyptian aristocracy
was then thoroughly Hellenized.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Even Coptic has a large admixture of Greek elements, especially in all
that belongs to Christian doctrine, life and worship. This borrowing of
Greek Christian terminology is due mainly to the fact that, as already
mentioned, Greek was the main language of early Christianity. A new
alphabet, based mainly on Greek, was devised for Coptic (see]{.style_}
[The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp. 467-71). This script became the
mainspring of the spread of Christianity amongst the
Egyptians.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[SPREAD OF CHRISTIANITY]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is known that Christianity came to Egypt at a very early date;
Alexandria, then the headquarters of Hellenic culture,]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[[Fig. VII--15](#calibre_link-191){.calibre9}
(]{.style_}[opposite]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Specimens of Coptic books.]{.style_} [Above]{.style_1}
[(]{.style_}[left]{.style_1}[), Portion of the New Testament on vellum
in Sahidic, fifth or sixth century A.D. (University Library,
Cambridge,]{.style_} [Add. MS. 1876. 12);]{.style_1}
[(]{.style_}[right]{.style_1}[) specimen from Herbert Thompson
collection of Coptic manuscripts.]{.style_} [Psalm]{.style_1}
[118]{.style_}[,]{.style_1} [v. 124-51 (ibidem.]{.style_} [Or. 1699).
Below]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[left]{.style_1}[), Bohairic liturgical
hymns (with Arabic headings). on paper, fourteenth or fifteenth century
A.D. (ibidem,]{.style_} [Add. MS. 1886]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}
[24]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[;]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[right]{.style_1}[)
Arabic text, written in Coptic Bohairic hand, paper, fourteenth century.
Apparently the text was read aloud and taken down in Coptic script
(ibidem.]{.style_} [Add]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}
[MS]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [1886.3]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[had commercial and cultural intercourse with Palestine, Syria and Asia
Minor; large numbers of Jews, who spoke Greek from Hellenistic times
onwards, lived there for centuries, and their highly developed religious
thought and philosophy had already produced the earliest version in
Greek of the Hebrew Bible: the Septuagint. It is of interest, too, that
an Alexandrian Jew, Apollos, was a disciple of St. Paul.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The early Egyptian Christians, however, came mainly from the lower
classes, and only after the fourth century did Christianity become more
firmly established. In time "civilization" passed into the hands of the
Christian Egyptians; and the great Coptic monasteries founded in the
Akhmimic territory (such as the White Monastery and the Red Monastery)
became centres of religious and literary activity. Nevertheless, pagan
culture did not disappear until towards the end of the fifth century.
Generally, Coptic was the speech of the Christian rural districts, and
for this reason it was able more easily to survive the Arab
conquest.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE COPTS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Nowadays, the term Copts is employed to indicate the indigenous
population of Egypt, who after the Arabic conquest (in A.D. 641)
maintained their Christian monophysite faith, the Coptic religion, and
who, until the thirteenth century A.D., continued to use Coptic as their
spoken and written language, and later as the liturgical language of
their Church. While Arabic became the speech of every-day life, Coptic
lingered on until the seventeenth century; indeed, in some Christian
villages of Upper Egypt, it is used to this very day.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[COPTIC LITERATURE]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Some early Coptic inscriptions can be attributed to the second or third
centuries A.D.; but the earliest manuscripts which can be definitely
dated belong to the fourth century A.D. Apparently there were five main
Coptic dialects: the actual number is still uncertain, although the
papyri recently discovered in Egypt have added considerably to our
knowledge of them. Already in the tenth century, Coptic writers (such as
Severus of Eshmunain, author of a history on the Patriarchs of
Alexandria) employed Arabic for literary purposes, but Coptic lingered
on as a literary language at least until the fourteenth
century.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Coptic literature is almost exclusively ecclesiastical---[Figs.
IV--14](#calibre_link-116){.calibre9},
[VII--15](#calibre_link-191){.calibre9}, 16. It consists for the most
part of translations from Greek, and includes versions of the Bible (Old
and New Testaments)]{.style_} [Apocrypha]{.style_1} [of the Old
Testament (such as the]{.style_} [Testament of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob;]{.style_1} [three]{.style_} [Apocalypses,]{.style_1} [of late
Jewish origin) and of the New Testament (]{.style_}[Life of the Virgin,
Falling Asleep of Mary,]{.style_1} [the]{.style_} [Death of
St]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [Joseph, Acta Pilati,]{.style_1}
[the]{.style_} [Gospel of the Twelve,]{.style_1} [the]{.style_} [Gospel
of St. Bartholomew, Protoevangelium Jacobi,]{.style_1} [and especially
the apocryphal legends of the Apostles, including]{.style_}
[Preachings]{.style_1} [of St. James, St. Andrew, St. Philip),
the]{.style_} [Martyrdoms]{.style_1} [and the]{.style_}
[Lives]{.style_1} [of Saints. Here it will suffice to mention]{.style_}
[Papyrus 8502]{.style_1} [of Berlin (seven leaves of papyrus, containing
part of the]{.style_} [Acta Petri]{.style_1}[) and]{.style_} [Copt.
Papyrus I]{.style_1} [of Heidelberg (containing a portion of
the]{.style_} [Acta Pauli]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[,]{.style_1} [which
contain these apocrypha in their original form, including the]{.style_}
[Acta Pauli et Theclae.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[BIBLICAL VERSIONS IN COPTIC DIALECTS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Versions of the New Testament have been identified in manuscripts
written in all the main Coptic dialects---thus, including the Fayyûmic,
that current in the district of Fayyûm, west of the Nile and south of
the Delta; the Akhmîmic, perhaps the earliest Coptic dialect, spoken in
Akhmîm, the ancient Panopolis: indeed, the most ancient Coptic
manuscripts are in this dialect; and the Middle Egyptian, spoken mainly
in the region of Memphis. Apart from a few Middle Egyptian fragments,
versions of the Old Testament are extant only in the two more important
Coptic dialects, which comprise also the chief New Testament
versions.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[These dialects are (1) the Sa'idic or Sahidic (from]{.style_}
[es-Sa'id,]{.style_1} ["the High", the Arabic name of Upper Egypt) or
Thebaic (from the name of the ancient Egyptian capital Thebes, now Luxor
and Karnak), which was current in Upper (i.e., southern) Egypt, of which
the chief city was Thebes; and (2) the Bohairic---it has been explained
as the dialect of Bohaireh or the Region of the Lake (Mariût?) or as a
derivation from Bohaïrah, the Arabic name of Lower, or northern Egypt.
This dialect is also known as Memphitic (from Memphis, which was the
ancient capital of Lower Egypt); but the latter term is not exact,
because (a) the dialect was spoken in the coastal district of
Alexandria, and (b) another dialect was spoken in Memphis (see above).
As a liturgical language, Bohairic was probably used in the north, as
early as the Sahidic dialect in the south, but the preserved Sahidic
manuscripts are older than the Bohairic, and the most ancient relics of
Coptic liturgy are in Sahidic. Bohairic, however, was the most developed
and most literary of all the Coptic dialects; as Alexandria was the seat
of the Coptic Patriarch, Bohairic became the liturgical language of the
Jacobite patriarchs when they gave up Greek; by degrees it replaced the
other dialects, and ultimately (about the fourteenth century) it drove
them out.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Although the earliest Coptic manuscripts extant belong to the fourth
century ([Fig. IV--14](#calibre_link-116){.calibre9}), there is no doubt
that the translation of the Biblical books into the native Egyptian
dialects was accomplished much earlier. According to Sir Frederic
Kenyon, "by or soon after the end of the second century it is probable
that the first Coptic versions had been made". Concerning the Old
Testament books, "The Sahidic version was probably made before the end
of the second century, the Bohairic somewhat later". Of the New
Testament, the "Sahidic version is probably somewhat earlier than the
Bohairic, but there need not be much interval between them". The date of
the Bohairic New Testament version "is probably in the first half of the
third century".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[AKHM MIC PAPYRI]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Two important papyrus codices in the Akhmimic dialect may be mentioned,
a fourth-century manuscript preserved in Berlin and a seventh- or
eighth-century manuscript of Strasbourg, both containing (the former
being almost complete) the]{.style_} [First Epistle]{.style_1} [of
Clement to the Corinthians under its primitive title]{.style_} [Epistle
to the Romans.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[SAHIDIC MANUSCRIPTS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Sahidic Biblical version is mainly known from fragments, but some
of these go back to the fourth century: the British Museum acquired in
1911 a copy of the books of]{.style_} [Deuteronomy, Jonah,]{.style_1}
[and]{.style_} [Acts,]{.style_1} [which is the oldest substantial
manuscript written in Coptic. It is a papyrus codex, and a note at the
end (written in a common non-literary hand, and, therefore, easily
datable) belongs to the middle of the fourth century; the manuscript may
thus be assigned to the first half of that century. Its editor---E. A.
Wallis Budge---considers it as the oldest known copy of any translation
of any considerable portion of the Greek Bible. The codex (now, British
Museum,]{.style_} [Or. MS. 7594]{.style_1}[) contains 109 leaves, but
when complete it must have contained about 133 leaves.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[To a slightly later period belongs the earliest preserved copy
of]{.style_} [St. John's Gospel,]{.style_1} [discovered in 1923 by J. L.
Starkey in the course of one of Sir W. M. Flinders Petrie's expeditions,
and now in the collection of the British and Foreign Bible Society; it
is assigned to the second half of the fourth century. The manuscript is
now known as]{.style_} [Papyrus]{.style_1} [Q ([Fig.
IV---14](#calibre_link-116){.calibre9}). It contains forty-three papyrus
leaves, most of them in good condition. In the opinion of its
editor---Sir Herbert Thompson---the book must have been "made by taking
twenty-five square sheets of papyrus about ten inches each way and
laying them one above the other, each with its horizontal fibres
upwards, and then folding the whole mass in half, so as to form a volume
of a single gathering or quire". See also p. 163. The book originally
consisted of fifty leaves or 100 pages, all being numbered in Coptic
letters. Some of the stitching which originally held the book together
still remains. The largest leaf now measures 25 × 12.5 cm. The text is
written on both sides in a single column. The number of lines on a page
is mainly thirty-four or thirty-five. The number of letters to a line
varies between sixteen and twenty-three. The manuscript is written
throughout---including the corrections---by "the hand of a very
practised writer, a professional copyist of literary work" (Thompson).
According to Sir Frederic Kenyon and Sir W. M. Flinders Petrie there is
a strong resemblance between the handwriting of this manuscript and
the]{.style_} [Codex Vaticanus]{.style_1} [(see p. 197 f.), allowance
being made that one is on papyrus and the other on a very fine
vellum.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Five single-quire Coptic books previously known also belong to the
fourth or fifth century A.D.: the so-called]{.style_} [Pistis
Sophia]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [Askew Codex]{.style_1} [(preserved at
the British Museum) and the]{.style_} [Bruce Codex]{.style_1} [(Bodleian
Library, at Oxford) belong to the fourth century A.D.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The British Museum has also some seventh-century Sahidic copies of Old
Testament books (a complete]{.style_} [Psalter]{.style_1}[; sixty-two
leaves of]{.style_} [Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Songs of Solomon,
Wisdom,]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [Ecclesiasticus]{.style_1}[; and a
palimpsest of]{.style_} [Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Judith]{.style_1}
[and]{.style_} [Esther]{.style_1}[). There are important codices of the
Sahidic version in various other collections, the most important being
the manuscripts in the Pierpont Morgan Library, New York (]{.style_}[M
566]{.style_1}[---]{.style_}[8]{.style_1}[), containing 1 and
2]{.style_} [Kingdoms]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[i.e.]{.style_1}
[I---II]{.style_} [Samuel]{.style_1}[),]{.style_} [Leviticus, Numbers,
Deuteronomy,]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [Isaiah]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Numerous homilies and sermons are extant, including those of St. John
Chrysostom, St. Cyril of Alexandria, St. Gregory of Nazianzus,
Theophilus of Alexandria, St. Ephraem the Syrian, St. Basil, St.
Athanasius, and Proclus of Cyzicus.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[BOHAIRIC MANUSCRIPTS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Over a hundred Bohairic Biblical manuscripts are extant, but they are
mainly of late date. A single leaf of the]{.style_} [Epistle to the
Ephesians]{.style_1}[, now in the British Museum belongs, however, to
the fifth century. Otherwise, the oldest and best is a manuscript of
the]{.style_} [Gospels]{.style_1} [at Oxford, dated 1173---4; there is
also a manuscript at Paris dated 1178---80, and one in the British
Museum, dated 1192; other manuscripts belong to the thirteenth and later
centuries.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[About forty complete homilies or sermons of St. John Chrysostom, and
several of St. Cyril of Alexandria, St. Gregory of Nazianzus, Theophilus
of Alexandria, and St. Ephraem the Syrian are extant.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Hamouli Library]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The largest and oldest collection of complete Sahidic manuscripts of
one provenance was casually discovered in 1910 on the site of an ancient
monastery at Hamouli, in southern Fayyûm. Apparently sixty books were
found, many of them still in their original bindings. Hyvernat suggested
that the find represents the library of the convent "Archangel Michael",
which "Very likely in a time of exceptional danger, the monks, fearing
for their lives as well as for their most valued possessions, buried . .
. within the precincts of the monastery. . . ." On the whole, the
Hamouli collection gives a good idea of an ancient Coptic monastic
library. "\... it was, broadly speaking, a liturgical library, or rather
a library of the Lectern. With the exception of the biblical
manuscripts, which may have been intended for private reading in the
individual monastic cells or the common library, they were all to be
read in church, either as part of the service proper or for the
edification of the public. These books of edification,
containing]{.style_} [Lives of the Saints, Acts]{.style_1} [of
Martyrs,]{.style_} [Homilies]{.style_1} [and]{.style_}
[Discourses]{.style_1} [attributed to the Fathers of the Church, etc.,
constituted the Synaxary, corresponding to the Martyrology of the
Western churches."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Hamouli collection now consists of fifty-six codices, some
containing as many as 170 folios. Almost every branch of religious
literature is represented. There are ten manuscripts of the Old
Testament (including the]{.style_} [Pentateuch, Samuel]{.style_1}
[and]{.style_} [Isaiah]{.style_1}[) and the New Testament (the]{.style_}
[Gospels]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [Epistles]{.style_1}[), some
apocryphal works (]{.style_}[Paralipomena of Jeremiah]{.style_1} [and
the]{.style_} [History of the Death of Isaac]{.style_1}[), liturgical
books (such as collections of hymns), patristic works, such as homilies
and encomiums ascribed to the Fathers of the fourth and fifth centuries
(Cyril of Jerusalem, Athanasius, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Basil, Gregory
of Nazianzus, Proclus, Sevrian, Ephraem) or to leaders of the
Monophysite Church (Dioscorus, Theodosius, Severus of Antioch), or else
to native writers, some unknown hitherto even by name; there are
the]{.style_} [Acta]{.style_1} [of martyrs (Colluthus, Epime,
Phoebammon, Ptolemy, Cyprian, Victor Claudius, Mercurius, Philotheus),
Athanasius's]{.style_} [Life of Antony, Histories of Apollo]{.style_1}
[(a fugitive from Justinian's persecution),]{.style_} [of Lucius and
Longinus]{.style_1} [(Lycians, fifth century A.D.),]{.style_} [of
Hilaria]{.style_1} [(the daughter of Emperor Zeno),]{.style_} [of
Samuel]{.style_1} [(a martyr of Heraclius' period); many of the works
were hitherto unknown.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000019.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-215}

[Fig. VII---16]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Specimens from Herbert Thompson collection of Coptic manuscripts
(University Library, at Cambridge, MS. Or. 1699). Above (left),
Apocryphal book on Resurrection; (right), Homilies by Shen te. Below,
Martyrology and Homilies.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[All the manuscripts are in the Sahidic dialect, excepting one which is
in Fayyûmic. The size of leaves in each manuscript often varies,
especially from quire to quire, as does also the number of lines from
page to page, and sometimes even from column to column in the same page.
All the manuscripts are written in the enlarged minuscule character. A
few volumes contain the title both at the beginning
(]{.style_}[incipit]{.style_1}[) and at the end
(]{.style_}[explicit]{.style_1}[), but the original]{.style_}
[incipit]{.style_1}[-titles have been replaced by the later copyists by
lengthy titles, including summaries. Twenty-one of the manuscripts are
precisely dated---the earliest in A.D. 823, the latest in 914; the
absence of date in the other manuscripts is partly due to the fact that
the fly-leaf at the end of the book has disappeared, and in a few cases
it "may point to a somewhat earlier period, when the dating of
manuscripts had not become the rule" (Hyvernat). However, the whole find
has been assigned]{.style_} [en bloc]{.style_1} [to the ninth century
A.D.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[All the manuscripts are more or less decorated, and more than twenty
contain frontispieces. These will be dealt with in the book on]{.style_}
[Illumination and Binding]{.style_1}[. The covers are made of papyrus
pulp pressed into pasteboard, protected on the inner side by a sheet of
papyrus or parchment and on the outer side by brown or dark-red leather
stamped with geometrical designs. (For further detail see]{.style_}
[Illumination and Binding]{.style_1}[.) Most remarkable are the covers
of a binding assigned to the sixth century A.D. On the inner margin of
the lower cover is embroidered the name of the convent, "Parchangelos
Micha". The manuscript of this binding is assigned to the eighth or
ninth century; it contains the]{.style_} [Four Gospels,]{.style_1}
[written on 113 leaves (measuring 39 x 30 cm.), in two columns of about
thirty-seven lines.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In 1911, all the manuscripts still obtainable were bought by John
Pierpont Morgan (later he presented them to the British Museum). Repair,
rebinding, and photography (as many as 3,277 folios were photographed)
were at once set about, in the]{.style_} [atelier]{.style_1} [of the
Vatican Library, under the direction of the American Professor H.
Hyvernat. The repair was particularly necessary and urgent. In ancient
times (before the manuscripts were put in their hiding-place) the
papyrus boards of the covers disintegrated almost completely under the
attacks of bookworms, and in modern times (in the short period elapsing
between the discovery and the acquisition of the manuscripts by Pierpont
Morgan) more than thirty books have been more or less damaged by rot due
to the exposure to dampness. Moreover, great injury resulted to some
manuscripts from the fact that their "illuminators" did not yet know how
to mix their colours properly, and their pigments were not suited to
"illumination" of manuscripts. The paint passed from the decorated page
not only to the one facing it, but also, in some copies, to the
underlying leaf.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The White Monastery Collection]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The famous White Monastery, near Sohâg, in Upper Egypt, is a huge
complex of religious and secular buildings situated on the edge of the
Libyan desert opposite Akhmîm. It was described by Curzon as not unlike
the bastion of some old-fashioned fortification. In the course of the
last century and a half, many Coptic manuscripts, written in the Sahidic
dialect and discovered in the White Monastery, have found their way into
the great European and American collections.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[That monastery was]{.style_} [par excellence]{.style_1} [the]{.style_}
[scriptorium]{.style_1} [of the Egyptian Church during the purest and
most prolific period of Coptic literary activity, from the time when
Sinuthius or Shen te, the long-lived monk of Atr pe, near Akhmim (he
died in 451), the one great native writer, became archimandrite, and
down through the Arab invasion, until gradually Upper Egypt lost its
Christian character, the Sahidic dialect died out, and the territory and
the monastery passed into Moslem control. The community of monks was
dispersed, the buildings fell into disrepair, and the monastic books,
well hidden for centuries from thieves and enemies, began at length to
arrive piecemeal in the shops of the dealers, or were unearthed by lucky
travellers, or were bought by collectors from the few poor monks that
remained.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[[Figs. VII---15](#calibre_link-191){.calibre9}---16 show specimens from
Sir Herbert Thompson's collection, purchased by him from Hyvernat, which
come ultimately from the White Monastery. This collection (containing
some eighty folios, now preserved in the University Library, at
Cambridge,]{.style_} [Or]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [1699]{.style_1}[), is
made up for the most part of two, three, or four consecutive leaves from
various old books and is a fair example of the work done by the Coptic
monastic scribes. It comprises letters, homilies, and instructions of
Sinuthius himself,]{.style_} [Lives of Saints, Martyrdoms,]{.style_1}
[expositions of the Scriptures, liturgical fragments, pages from the Old
Testament and the New, including a very remarkable bilingual of part of
the]{.style_} [Pastoral epistles.]{.style_1} [Many of the leaves have
been identified as belonging to the same books as leaves in the Vatican
Library, in the National Library, at Paris, and the University Library,
at Louvain. Most interesting are fragments of]{.style_} [Rules for
monks, Lectures]{.style_1} [on Easter, part of the]{.style_} [Apostolic
Constitutions,]{.style_1} [the]{.style_} [Lives of John]{.style_1} [(of
Lycopolis) and of Pachomius, the]{.style_} [Martyrdoms]{.style_1} [of
Apa Pteleme, Cyprianus, Justina, and Theoktistus, and the works of St.
George.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A great part of the White Monastery collection is in the Pierpont
Morgan Library.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Other Collections]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The]{.style_} [Edfu Collection]{.style_1} [consists of twenty-three
manuscripts, of which one is in the Pierpont Morgan Library, at New York
(]{.style_}[M 633]{.style_1}[), and all the others in the British
Museum. The earliest dated manuscript of this collection is later by
forty-six years than the latest dated Hamouli codex.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The other collections consist mostly of fragments. One is supposed to
have come from Hou, about thirty miles to the south of Denderah (Upper
Egypt). It was bought by Lord Amherst of Hackney in 1905---6. It
consists of twenty-nine fragmentary codices, which probably were part of
a monastic library. This collection is now in the Pierpont Morgan
Library, at New York.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[RECENT MISCELLANEOUS FINDS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The present writer has received the following valuable information from
Mr. Cyril Moss of the British Museum. During the last war Gnostic texts
in Coptic were found belonging to a quite early period. An account of
the discovery and a summary of the contents are given in]{.style_}
["VIGILIAE CHRISTIANAE",]{.style_1} [vol. 2 and 3. One of the treatises
was edited by the late Toga Mina, of the Coptic Museum, at Cairo.
Perhaps even more important is the recent find of the Coptic Manichaean
texts. Some of these have been published (]{.style_}[e.g.]{.style_1}
[the second half of the]{.style_} [Psalms]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[Hymns]{.style_1} [recited by the Manichaeans at the festival of the
Bema) by the late Charles Allberry. Part of the]{.style_}
[Homilies]{.style_1} [was published by Polotsky, and part of
the]{.style_} [Kephalaia]{.style_1} [by C. Schmidt. According to de
Ghellinck (]{.style_}[Patristique et Moyen Age,]{.style_1} [vol. 2,
Brussels-Paris, 1947), this important find, made at Medinet Madi, to the
south-west of Fayyûm, consisted in a wooden box containing a certain
number of "paper-books" (]{.style_}[cahiers]{.style_1}[) of papyrus; it
was probably the library of a follower of Manichaeism. The manuscripts
apparently belong to the latter half of the fourth century A.D. or to c.
400. One part of the "library" was sold to the State Library, at Berlin,
the other to Mr. Chester Beatty. Finally, an article by the late W. E.
Crum on an]{.style_} [Egyptian Text in Greek Characters,]{.style_1}
[published in "THE JOURNAL OF EGYPTIAN ARCHAEOLOGY", vol. xxviii (1942,
pp. 20---31) deals with a Coptic text dated A.D. 150, which thus could
be considered as the "incunabula" of the Coptic language and
script.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-474}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Nubian Manuscripts]{.style_2} {#nubian-manuscripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Nubia, anciently known as Ethiopia, was an ancient kingdom (with no
precise limit) situated to the south of Egypt. In earlier times, it was
under Egyptian political domination and cultural influence. It became
independent about the ninth to eighth century B.C., but continued to
employ the Egyptian language and script. The Napatan kingdom, as it was
then known, flourished mainly from the White Nile to the Aswân cataract,
until about 300 B.C., when the sovereignty passed from the city of
Napata to Meroë.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Under the rule of the Meroitic kings, Nubian culture became more
independent and started to employ its own language; at the end of the
third or during the second century B.C., the indigenous script, known as
Meroitic, would seem to have been created (see]{.style_} [The
Alphabet]{.style_1}[, pp. 180---91).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The rise of the Ethiopic kingdom of Axum (see p. 318) brought final
disaster to Meroë, which was destroyed about A.D. 350. There was still,
however, a more or less independent Nubian kingdom. In the following two
or three centuries Christianity spread to that country, and finally a
form of Christianity based on the foundations laid by Julianus and
Longinus became the official religion of Nubia and remained so until the
thirteenth century, when the Christian barrier fell before the Moslems.
Dongola, the Nubian capital, had been destroyed some considerable time
previously.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Following the Moslem Conquest, many Arabs settled in the country and
won over a proportion of Nubians to the Moslem faith, but little is
known of those centuries. However, about A.D. 1200 the Armenian Ab li ,
who visited Nubia, found there seven bishoprics, including that of
Dongola.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[There are not many literary remains of the Nubians today. Some
fragments---now preserved in the British Museum and in Berlin---belong
to the ninth, the tenth and the eleventh centuries A.D. All of them deal
with Christian subjects. They are written in the native script, based on
the Coptic alphabet, to which three signs were added from the Meroitic
cursive script for Nubian sounds which could not be expressed by Coptic
characters. One of the Nubian manuscripts (British Museum,]{.style_}
[Or. 6805]{.style_1}[) has been published by E. A. Wallis Budge
(]{.style_}[Texts Relating to Saint Mena of Egypt and Canons of Nicaea
in a Nubian Dialect,]{.style_1} [London, 1909). This manuscript is
assigned to the ninth or tenth century A.D.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-475}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Ethiopia (Abyssinia)]{.style_2} {#ethiopia-abyssinia .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[SABAEAN---ITS FIRST LITERARY LANGUAGE]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is generally accepted that the South Arabian colonies, established
in the second half of the first millennium B.C. in the territory now
known as Abyssinia or Ethiopia, introduced in those regions the South
Arabic or South Semitic speech and script; indeed, as Dr. E. Ullendorff
points out, "a fairly large number of South Arabian inscriptions have
been discovered on many sites" in the territory of the ancient Axumite
Empire, corresponding with northern Abyssinia and southern
Eritrea.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The South Arabic Sabaean soon became the literary language and script
of Ethiopia, but Ethiopic was its spoken language and, according to
Ullendorff, "the unvocalized Ethiopic script must have been used in the
first and second centuries A.D." In the first half of the fourth century
A.D., Ethiopic speech and vocalized script were adopted for literary
purposes by the kings of Axum, although Sabaean speech and script
continued to be employed for ornamental and archaizing purposes until
the seventh or eighth century.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-476}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ETHIOPIC LITERATURE]{.style_2} {#ethiopic-literature .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[From the fourth century onwards, after the conversion of the Axumite
Empire to Christianity (according to tradition, by Syrian missionaries),
there came into being a literature which was essentially Christian, more
especially because of the intensification of Christian propaganda by
many Syrian monks, who introduced Greek and Syriac influences.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[At this time the literary and ecclesiastical language of Ethiopia was
Ge'ez (]{.style_}[lesana ge'ez]{.style_1}[). This language has long been
dead as a form of speech, but it has been preserved to this day as the
language of the Ethiopian Church and of ancient Ethiopic literature.
This Ge'ez literature consists largely of translations of ecclesiastical
works from Greek and---after Arabic superseded Greek and Coptic in
Egypt---particularly from the Christian Arabic literature which then
flourished in Egypt.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-477}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ETHIOPIC MANUSCRIPTS]{.style_2} {#ethiopic-manuscripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[There are numerous Ethiopic manuscripts extant; some 400 of them are
preserved in the British Museum, which acquired them at the time of the
Abyssinian war in 1867. They are mainly of very late date, some being as
late as the seventeenth century, and only a few going back to the
fifteenth (British Museum]{.style_} [Or. 719]{.style_1} [was written
before A.D. 1434;]{.style_} [Or. 650]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [Add.
11678]{.style_1} [were written between 1434 and 1468, and]{.style_} [Or.
706]{.style_1} [between 1478 and 1494). The earliest preserved Ethiopic
manuscripts are in the National Library, at Paris, and in the Vatican
Library, and belong to the thirteenth and the fourteenth centuries. The
Paris manuscripts as catalogued by Zotenberg (]{.style_}[Catal. des MSS.
éthiop. de la Bibl. Nation.,]{.style_1} [Paris, 1877) are: Nos. 3
(an]{.style_} [Octateuch),]{.style_1} [5 (I---IV,]{.style_}
[Kingdoms]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [Chronicles]{.style_1}[), 32
(]{.style_}[Gospels]{.style_1}[), and 131 (]{.style_}[Lives of Saints
and Martyrs]{.style_1}[) belonging to the thirteenth century; and Nos.
10 (]{.style_}[Psalms]{.style_1}[), 40 (]{.style_}[fragments of St.
Luke]{.style_1}[) 45 (]{.style_}[Pauline Epistles]{.style_1}[), 52
(]{.style_}[Acts of the Apostles and Evangelists]{.style_1}[), and 79
(]{.style_}[Ritual]{.style_1} [on taking the monastic habit), which are
of the fourteenth century. The Vatican manuscript]{.style_} [Borg.
Aeth]{.style_1}[. 3 (]{.style_}[Kingdoms]{.style_1}[) belongs to the
thirteenth or fourteenth century; and]{.style_}
[Vat]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [Aethiop]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}
[21]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[Prayers]{.style_1}[) to the
fourteenth.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Nevertheless, the Ethiopic Version of the Old Testament is very
interesting. According to some scholars, it was made in the fourth
century A.D. from the Septuagint, and is associated with the name of the
presbyter Lucian of Samosata, a leading scholar at Antioch (who suffered
martyrdom during the persecution of Maximinus, A.D. 311); according to
other scholars, this version is based on an Arabic revision of the
fourteenth century, founded on the Arabic translation of the Jewish Gaon
Saadya (first half of the tenth century).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, the Ethiopic version includes two books
(]{.style_}[Jubilees]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [Enoch]{.style_1}[) which
have no place in our Old Testament, or our]{.style_}
[Apocrypha]{.style_1}[. The original Greek of the book of]{.style_}
[Jubilees]{.style_1} [remained unknown until 1886, when a little vellum
codex (containing the first thirty-six chapters) was discovered at
Akhmim, in Egypt; still more recently the last eleven chapters have been
recovered from one of the Chester Beatty papyri. In early March, 1949, a
few Hebrew fragments of the]{.style_} [Jubilees]{.style_1} [were
discovered among the]{.style_} [Dead Sea Scrolls]{.style_1} [(see p.
187).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000020.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-192}

[Fig. VII--17]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The superb Hebrew codex known as the Kennicott Bible (Bodleian Library,
Oxford, Ken. 1).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-478}

## [Hebrew Books ([Figs. IV---12](#calibre_link-94){.calibre13}, 15,]{.style_2} [d]{.style_2}[, 17,]{.style_2} [b]{.style_2}[; V---3---8; VII---17)]{.style_2} {#hebrew-books-figs.-iv12-15-d-17-b-v38-vii17 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Bible, "The Book"]{.style_} [par excellence,]{.style_1} [is the
immortal witness of the genius of the ancient Hebrews: and while the
Bible was the creation of the Jews, the Jews were a creation of the
Bible. With the final Roman conquest of the Holy Land, the factious
disputations of Pharisee and Sadducee, the fanaticism of the Zealots,
the eccentricities of the Essenes, the worldliness of the priests, the
formalities of the Scribes, the cruelty, the profligacy, the domineering
and hardhearted ambition of the Roman world, the effete rhetoric of
Hellenism---all these things, at least in the forms in which they were
then known, gradually died away in the Jewish world (although as
indirect influences they survived for ages) doomed externally by the
Romans and internally by the Rabbis.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[POST-EXILIC JUDAISM]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Judaism became a close religious community and until the nineteenth
century, the greater part of Jewish literature and Jewish thought
centred round and was derived from the Bible. Thus, the annihilation of
Judaea did not annihilate Judaism. To avert extinction, the great rabbis
planned that the Bible, The Book, should become the dominating factor in
Judaism.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["The Book; yes, their Book. They had no state to hold them together, no
country, no soil, no king, no form of life in common. If, in spite of
this, they were one, more one than all other peoples of the world, it
was the Book that sweated them into unity. Brown, white, black, yellow
Jews, large and small, splendid and in rags, godless and pious, they
might crouch and dream all their lives in a quiet room, or fare
splendidly in a radiant, golden whirlwind over the earth, but sunk deep
in all of them was the lesson of the Book\.... They had dragged the Book
with them through two thousand years. \... They had given it to all
peoples, and all peoples had embraced it" (L. Feuchtwanger).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Before our discussion of the Hebrew literature of medieval Jewry, we
may mention the religious literature produced by three Jewish sects: (1)
the Samaritans---the remainder of an ancient sect of Samaria, numbering
today only a few hundred people; of great importance is the recension of
the Hebrew Pentateuch in use among the Samaritans; (2) the Falashas, now
living mainly in the district of Gondar (Ethiopia), have produced a
small but interesting religious literature, all written in Ge'ez;
finally, (3) the Karaites, who as an organized sect arose in the seventh
or eighth century A.D., notwithstanding their small number, have
produced a considerable religious literature in Hebrew, Arabic, and
other languages.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE TALMUD]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The two great centres of Jewish scholarship were Palestine and
Babylonia, the former having its headquarters successively at Jamnia (or
Jabneh) and Tiberias, the latter at Sura and Babylon.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The]{.style_} [Talmud]{.style_1} [is broadly speaking a record of the
discussions at these Jewish academies, each of which preserved to some
extent distinct traditions of text, explanation, interpretation and
application of the Bible. The]{.style_} [Talmud]{.style_1} [taken as a
whole presents the appearance of a disorderly mass of the most
heterogeneous material, relating to religion, ethics, history, legend,
folklore, astronomy, mathematics, linguistics, law, physical life,
medicine, hygiene, botany, and almost everything else. Actually it is a
collection of Jewish books on the traditions, laws, rules and
institutions by which, in addition to the Hebrew Bible, the conduct of
Jewry is regulated. The]{.style_} [Talmud]{.style_1} [has moulded the
Jewish nation; stimulating their spiritual and religious life, and
promoting their intellectual and literary activity, it helped to
preserve the existence of Judaism. Only one complete manuscript of
the]{.style_} [Talmud]{.style_1} [has come down to us: it is preserved
in the State Library, at Munich (]{.style_}[God.
No]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [95]{.style_1}[).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The]{.style_} [Talmud]{.style_1} [("Study", abbreviation of]{.style_}
[Talmud Torah]{.style_1}[, "Study of the]{.style_} [Torah]{.style_1}[)
consists of the]{.style_} [Mishnah]{.style_1}[, "Oral Teaching"
(sixty-three "tractates" or books) and its]{.style_} [Gemara,]{.style_1}
[or "Completion."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[PIYYU IM]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Another branch of Hebrew literature---indirectly connected with the
Bible---are the "liturgical poems" or the]{.style_} [piyy im]{.style_1}
[(pl. of]{.style_} [piyy]{.style_1} [, which is derived from a Greek
word, out of which the word "poct" has also descended). Many of these
beautiful lyrical poems find a place in the Jewish prayer-books, whilst
others have not survived.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[While early medieval Judaism was mainly creative, late medieval Judaism
was mainly preservative. To be sure, it too possessed creative minds,
philosophers, codifiers, teachers, commentators, polemical writers,
grammarians, poets, philologists, but their common starting-point was,
generally speaking, the]{.style_} [Talmud]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[CULTURAL BRIDGE BETWEEN MOSLEMS AND CHRISTIANS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[On the other hand, the Jews played a vital part in the transmission of
ancient knowledge to Christian Europe in the early centuries of the
present millennium. In this period, the Graeco-Roman learning and
culture were lost to Christian Europe, but they were cultivated in
Moslem lands. These were, however, cut off from the Christian world by
differences of language, religion and tradition. "The Jews were . . .
peculiarly qualified to serve as a bridge between these mutually
exclusive and mutually intolerant worlds\.... It was hence to the Jews
(in most instances) that Christian students had recourse for some
inkling of the intellectual achievements of the Arabs, and even the
ideas of the sages of ancient Greece. There have survived many hundreds
of translations carried out by Jews in the medieval period, illustrating
. . . their fruitful participation in every branch of intellectual
activity of the age" (C. Roth).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[DESTRUCTION OF HEBREW BOOKS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is common knowledge that the Hebrew literary production over the
past three thousand years has been very vast---traditionally the Jews
are called]{.style_} ['am ha]{.style_1}[-]{.style_}[sepher]{.style_1}[,
"People of the Book"; but only a small portion of this literature has
survived. It is not difficult to indicate the main reasons for this
fact. Already in the time of the persecution by Antiochus Epiphanes or
"Illustrious" (175---164 B.C.) there is a pointer: "And they rent in
pieces the books of the law which they found, and set them on fire. And
whosoever was found with any book of the Covenant, and if any consented
to the law, the king's sentence delivered him to death" (1]{.style_}
[Macc]{.style_1}[., i, 56---7).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The darkness which closed in upon the Jews after the loss of their
independence lasted for over seventeen hundred years. Through all these
long centuries the clouds of prejudice and of persecution hung low and
lowering over all the countries in which Jews dwelt, and it was only
here and there, and for a comparatively short interval, that there was
any break in the gloom.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Through all those centuries, the Jews were "outcast under the lash of
the Church and under the ban of the State". "Church and State changed
faiths and names, old dynasties and old beliefs gave place to new,
boundaries were shifted, and civilization took fresh forms," but the
various inquisitions and all kinds of censorships, the burning of books,
the frequent attempts to eradicate Hebrew literature altogether, never
stopped in all those centuries. In Paris, in June, 1242, twenty-four
cartloads of Hebrew manuscripts were publicly burnt, and similar
destruction occurred at various times in various places.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[PRESERVATION OF HEBREW LITERATURE]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[And still, as the author of]{.style_} [Maccabees]{.style_1} [adds
(after a reference to "the public archives and the records that concern
Nehemiah, and how he, founding a library, gathered together the books
about the kings and prophets, and the books of David, and letters of
kings about sacred gifts"): "And in like manner Judas also gathered
together for us all those writings that had been scattered by reason of
the war that befell, and they are still with us" (2]{.style_}
[Macc]{.style_1}[., ii, 13---14). And so despite the numerous attempts
at the annihilation of Hebrew literature, in all these centuries, there
was hardly a period in which Hebrew books were not written and
published.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[As already mentioned, only a portion of the great wealth of Hebrew
literature---including the invaluable Books of the Bible---has survived.
The]{.style_} [Dead Sea Scrolls]{.style_1} [have been discussed on pp.
176---189. The previously known Biblical and other Hebrew manuscripts
belong to a much later date than the]{.style_} [Dead Sea
Scrolls]{.style_1}[, with the exception of some fragments written on
papyrus, the earliest being the]{.style_} [Nash Papyrus]{.style_1}
[([Fig. IV---12](#calibre_link-94){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[b]{.style_1}[).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-479}

::: calibre5
:::

## [HEBREW BIBLICAL MANUSCRIPTS []{#calibre_link-480 .calibre14}([Figs. VII---17](#calibre_link-192){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#hebrew-biblical-manuscripts-figs.-vii17 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Hebrew Biblical manuscripts are generally classified into two main
groups, codices and Synagogue-scrolls. The preserved Hebrew Biblical
codices fall into four main families: the Eastern, the
Hispano-Portuguese, the Italian, and the Franco-German. This distinction
is based---apart from illumination, for which see the book on]{.style_}
[Illumination and Binding]{.style_1}[---upon external and internal
criteria.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The main external criteria are: (]{.style_}[a]{.style_1}[) the
script---the great majority of the Hebrew Biblical codices are written
in the Square Hebrew character (]{.style_}[The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp.
261---7), though some in Rabbinic hand, and a few in cursive hand; the
local Hebrew scripts were strongly influenced by the non-Jewish script
and art of their region; as a result, there appear the elegant forms of
the Italian Hebrew scripts, and also---owing to the Hispano-Arabic
influence---the Spanish Hebrew codices are written in elegantly formed
letters; the Franco-German manuscripts are written in a comparatively
rude and inelegant character; Hebrew Eastern scripts have a particular
style of their own. Particularly, the identification of the
Franco-German and the Eastern hands is relatively easy.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(]{.style_}[b]{.style_1}[) The writing material: with the exception of
the Eastern codices, frequently written on Oriental paper, hardly any
Hebrew Biblical codices are written on paper. From the fifteenth century
onwards, the Italian Hebrew codices were written on superfine vellum,
and also the Hebrew Spanish and Portuguese codices are written on fine
and flexible vellum, whereas it is seldom the case of the Franco-German
manuscripts.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[) The format: the Franco-German codices are
for the most part of large size, the Spanish-Portuguese manuscripts are
mainly of medium size, and the Italian codices of small size.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Internal criteria: (]{.style_}[a]{.style_1}[) Eastern codices are often
written on pages containing only one column; with the exception of some
earlier codices, this is seldom the case of manuscripts belonging to the
three other main families; numerous Franco-German codices have three
columns to the page, whereas the majority of the Hispano-Portuguese and
the Italian codices have two columns to the page.
(]{.style_}[b]{.style_1}[) Unlike the manuscripts of the other families,
the Franco-German codices display a certain amount of divergence from
the Massoretic, or traditional, text, and follow the order of the books
of the Hebrew Scriptures as given in the]{.style_}
[Talmud]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is known that the Hebrew Scriptures are separated into three
divisions:]{.style_} [t rah]{.style_1} [("Law",]{.style_}
[Pentateuch]{.style_1}[),]{.style_} [nebi'im]{.style_1} [(Prophets)
and]{.style_} [ketubîm]{.style_1} [("writings" or]{.style_}
[hagiographa]{.style_1}[). In the Prophets and the Writings the order of
the books varies in manuscripts. The Massoretic order is]{.style_}
[Joshua, Judges, Samuel, Kings, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel]{.style_1}
[(according to the]{.style_} [Talmud: Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
Isaiah]{.style_1}[), the]{.style_} [Twelve; Psalms, Proverbs,
Job]{.style_1}[,]{.style_} [Song of Songs, Ruth, Lamentations,
Ecclesiastes, Esther, Daniel, Ezra]{.style_1}[,]{.style_}
[Nehemiah]{.style_1}[, and the]{.style_} [Chronicles]{.style_1}
[(according to the]{.style_} [Talmud: Ruth, Psalms, Job, Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, Song of Songs, Lamentations, Daniel, Esther,
Ezra,]{.style_1} [the]{.style_} [Chronicles]{.style_1}[).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[) Finally, numerous Hebrew codices also
contain]{.style_} [haphtar th]{.style_1} [(prophetic lectionary)
and]{.style_} [targumîm]{.style_1}[, or (Aramaic) "translations";
the]{.style_} [haphtar th]{.style_1} [vary in the various families, and
also the disposition of the]{.style_} [targumîm]{.style_1} [diverges.
There are, besides, a few minor criteria, which help to classify the
Hebrew Biblical codices; for instance the number of the]{.style_}
[Psalms]{.style_1} [is generally 150 in the Hispano-Portuguese and the
Italian codices, and commonly 149 in the Franco-German manuscripts,
where the first two]{.style_} [Psalms]{.style_1} [are taken as
one.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Numerous fragments of Hebrew "Babylonian" Biblical manuscripts were
discovered in the famous Cairo]{.style_} [Genizah]{.style_1} [(lumber
room in which defective manuscripts were laid aside), and these partly
belong to the eighth century A.D. Probably the oldest book of any part
of the Hebrew Bible existing in vellum codex form, is a British Museum
manuscript (]{.style_}[Or. 4445]{.style_1}[); it is written in three
columns to the page (hence, it was probably copied from a roll); it is
undated, but is generally considered to have been written not later than
the ninth century, or---at the latest---in the early tenth
century.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest Hebrew manuscript containing a precise statement of its
date, a statement that evidently can be trusted, is the
Leningrad]{.style_} [Prophet-Codex,]{.style_1} [written in 916---17. It
is a vellum codex containing the Latter Prophets, and is written in
double columns.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Some other Hebrew codices, for example, the]{.style_} [Codex of the
Prophets]{.style_1} [preserved in the Synagogue in Cairo, the
Aleppo]{.style_} [Ben-Asher Codex]{.style_1}[, the Oxford]{.style_}
[Codex Laudianus,]{.style_1} [the]{.style_} [De'Rossi Codex No.
634,]{.style_1} [the Cambridge University Library manuscript bearing the
date of 856, whether dated or undated, are attributed to the ninth or
tenth centuries; but there is much doubt as to some of the datings. The
majority of the Hebrew codices are of the twelfth to sixteenth
centuries, the numbers increasing with the later dates.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Synagogue-scrolls are rolls of parchment containing the]{.style_}
[orah]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [Pentateuch]{.style_1} [and are reserved
for use in the public reading of the Jewish worship. Indeed,
the]{.style_} [Qeriath ha-Torah,]{.style_1} [or "Reading of the Torah",
is the central feature of the synagogue service; every synagogue must
contain at least one copy of such a scroll. The scrolls are placed in
the holy shrine (in the direction of Jerusalem), before which burns a
perpetual light. The preparation of the Scroll of the Law is a task
requiring much care, erudition, and labour.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The dates of such scrolls are very difficult to be determined, as the
science of dating of the Hebrew writing of these documents has not yet
been put on a firm basis. An added difficulty is that the Square
character shows little change with the progress of the centuries. See
also pp. 148 ff., 175---189.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-481}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Arabic Books ([Figs. IV--15](#calibre_link-117){.calibre13}, f; VII-18 and 19)]{.style_2} {#arabic-books-figs.-iv15-f-vii-18-and-19 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[By the pen and what they write]{.style_1}
[(]{.style_}[Koran]{.style_1}[, S ra lxviii, 1).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The maxim "The Book follows Religion" can be exemplified by reference
to the Arabic "book", the history of which is, indeed, relatively short.
Arabic tribes are known to have roamed through the vast Syro-Arabian
desert for thousands of years, and numerous North and South Arabian
inscriptions are extant, dating from the eighth century B.C. onwards
(see]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp. 223---34). Nothing is
known, however, of written Arabic literature prior to Mohammed and to
the compilation of the Koran, the sacred book of Islam.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This holy book was the mainspring of the Arab conquests of the seventh
and eighth centuries A.D., which caused the vast expansion of the
religion of Mohammed. Thanks to the diffusion of the Koran, Arabic
became one of the chief languages of the world. Indeed, it is the
literary language, and, in some form or other, also the spoken language
in use throughout the vast territories lying between India and the
Atlantic Ocean. It was formerly spoken, as well as written, in parts of
Spain, in the Balearic Islands and in Sicily; Maltese seems to be a
descendent of Arabic, perhaps with some traces of earlier neo-Punic
influences.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[SPREAD OF ARABIC SCRIPT]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Even more than Arabic speech, the Arabic script was widely adopted,
thanks to the diffusion of the Moslem holy book. Becoming in turn the
script of the Persian and, especially, of the Ottoman Empire, its use
spread in time to the Balkan peninsula, to what is now the south-eastern
portion of European Russia, to India, to central and south-eastern Asia,
and to a great part of Africa. Thus, the Arabic alphabet had to be
adapted not only to Semitic languages (such as Hebrew), but also to
languages belonging to other linguistic groups, such as Slavic (in
Bosnia), Spanish (the Arabic script employed for Spanish is
called]{.style_} [aljamiah]{.style_1}[), Persian, Pashtu, Balochi,
Balti, Urdu and other Indian languages---all these forms of speech
belonging to the Indo-European linguistic family---and, in addition, to
Turco-Tatar and Caucasian languages, to various Malay-Polynesian
languages, and various African languages (such as Berber, Swahili, and
[]{#calibre_link-200}Sudanese)---[Fig.
VIII---2](#calibre_link-193){.calibre9},]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[, 3 and
12.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Apart from Arabic inscriptions and coins, the earliest written
documents extant are a number of papyri discovered in Egypt, some of
which (now preserved in Vienna) belong to the first half of the seventh
century A.D., but the greater part (now mainly in Cairo) are assigned to
the second half of the same century and to the eighth century: [Fig.
IV---15](#calibre_link-117){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[f]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000021.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-194}

[Fig. VII---18]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[A very elegant copy of the Koran, measuring by inches, of 13 lines to a
page. The copyist names himself Husain Fakhkhâr. There are pages
entirely gilt, or written on a dyed ground or ornamented with gold,
blue. etc. The text is written in Naskhi, but the first and last lines
as well as the middle line dividing the page into two equal
squares---are written in large Th lth (India Office Library, No. 32 A;
Loth's Catalogue, No. 16).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-482}

## [KORANIC MANUSCRIPTS []{#calibre_link-483 .calibre14}([Figs. VII---18](#calibre_link-194){.calibre13} and 19,]{.style_2} [c]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#koranic-manuscripts-figs.-vii18-and-19-c .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest preserved Koranic manuscripts are written on broad
parchment sheets and, with one or two exceptions, in the heavy lapidary
Kufic style (see]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp. 272---3).
These manuscripts are seldom complete and rarely dated, and are very
difficult to date. The earliest dated copy is the complete Koran, now in
Cairo, dated A.H. 168 (=A.D. 784---5).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A.H. =]{.style_} [Anno Hegirae]{.style_1}[, or "In the year of the
Hegira",]{.style_} [i.e]{.style_1}[. the Flight of Mohammed from Mecca
on 13th September, A.D. 622; the Moslem era dates from this
event.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Most of the dated early copies belong, however, to the third century
A.H.: mention may be made of the Paris manuscript dated A.H. 229 (=A.D.
883-4) and A.H. 277 (=A.D. 890---1), as well as the manuscript, dated
A.H. 256---64 (=A.D. 870---7). Part of the last manuscript is preserved
in the University Library of Cambridge]{.style_} [Add. 1116]{.style_1}
[]{#calibre_link-196}[(see [Fig.
VII---19](#calibre_link-195){.calibre9},]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[). It
is the oldest dated Koranic manuscript in England: it formed part of
the]{.style_} [waqf]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[i.e.,]{.style_1} [charitable
foundation) of Amadjur, Governor of Damascus (A.D. 870---7), and was
purchased in 1878 from Prof. Palmer and the representatives of C. F.
Tyrwhite Drake.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A Koranic palimpsest in the Cambridge University Library
(]{.style_}[Or. 1287)]{.style_1} [is of special interest: the lower
script is mostly Syriac of the fifth or sixth century A.D., the upper
script is a copy of the Koran in ancient Kufic. It is undated, but
according to a leading authority it may be assigned to the eighth or,
perhaps even to the seventh century A.D. This codex, bequeathed by Mrs.
Agnes Smith Lewis, consists of ninety-four leaves. The University
Library of Cambridge (]{.style_}[Add]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}
[1138]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [Qq. 285]{.style_1}[) possesses also a
Kufic fragment on parchment of the tenth century and an interesting
Arabic book (]{.style_}[Kit bu 'l-mu'ammar n,]{.style_1} ["The Book of
the Long-lived"), written in A.D. 1036-7. See [Fig.
VII---19](#calibre_link-195){.calibre9},]{.style_} [b.]{.style_1}

[]{#calibre_link-484}

::: calibre5
:::

## [CHRISTIAN ARABIC BOOKS ([Fig. VII---19](#calibre_link-195){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [d, e]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#christian-arabic-books-fig.-vii19-d-e .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Not only was the spread of the Arabic language and script closely
connected with the spread of Islam; orthodox Moslems---at least in the
early period---were opposed to the non-Moslems using Arabic; Omar, in
the charter given to the Christians expressly stipulated that they shall
not read Arabic or use the Arabic language; pious grammarians would
sooner starve than teach an Unbeliever the Koran, or even the grammar in
which verses of the holy book were to be found. But in the course of
time, this rule had to be relaxed, and Christians as well as members of
other tolerated faiths were often qualified for clerical work.
Nevertheless, Arabic never became the religious language of any
non-Moslem faith. Syriac and Coptic remained liturgical languages long
after the majority of the people had ceased to understand them. Syrians,
Jews, and Samaritans, even when writing Arabic, often preferred to
employ their national alphabets, especially when they wrote for purposes
connected with the religious communities to which they
belonged.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000022.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-195}

[[Fig. VII--19](#calibre_link-196){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Arabic books. a, Compilation of historical notes and anthology of prose
and poetry by an author who died in 1166. In a fine, bold Naskhi of c.
1200, and almost completely vowelled (Rylands Arabic MS, 694); b. the
Book of the Long-lived, A.D. 1036--7 (University Library, Cambridge, Qq.
285); c, earliest dated Kufic manuscript in England (ibidem, Add. MS.
1116): it bears the dedication of Amadjur, Governor of Damascus (A.D.
870-7); part of the manuscript is in Cairo (No 40160); d, the oldest
dated Christian Arabic manuscript: Treatise on Christian Theology,
attributed to Theodorus Ab Kurrah, bishop of Harran (British Museum. Or.
MS. 4950; A.D. 876); e, Gospels A.D. 1281 (Convent of St. Catherine on
Mt. Sinai, Arab. MS. 104).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, a considerable number of books written by Christians and Jews
are extant, which are written in Arabic; there are also Hebrew books
written in Arabic script. Here we are concerned with the Christian
Arabic books. At least in the early period, these were mainly intended
for the public market, not specifically Christian. Such were medical and
philosophical treatises, or books dealing with science. "But even
translations of the Old and New Testaments were often intended for all
classes of readers" (D. S. Margoliouth). As a result, the script of the
Christians (as well as of the Jews) was, as a rule, assimilated to that
of the Moslems, and it is rather difficult ---especially for a
non-palaeographer---to distinguish Christian from other Arabic writing,
though some specialists hold that the qualification "Christian type" may
be assigned to some handwritings; and that some types show a tendency to
introduce Syriac forms into Arabic letters, or at least give the latter
a suggestion of Syriac script. Moreover, the later "Christian type" is
more stiff and artificial than the Moslem type.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-485}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ARABIC THE MAIN VEHICLE OF CIVILIZATION]{.style_2} {#arabic-the-main-vehicle-of-civilization .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the last centuries of the first millennium A.D., and in the first
centuries of the second millennium, Arabic became the vehicle for
research work in science, especially in medicine, optics, astronomy,
astrology, alchemy (the ancestor of chemistry), geography, botany,
mathematics, as well as in philosophy, history, ethics and literature,
especially wisdom-literature, the theory of music, jurisprudence,
Islamic theology, Arabic grammar, poetry and lexicography. " \... it was
chiefly from Moslem Spain that Arab culture advanced to interpenetrate
the Christian culture of the early Middle Ages to produce the
civilization which we inherited." "Between the middle of the eighth and
the beginning of the thirteenth centuries . . . the Arabic-speaking
peoples were the main bearers of the torch of culture and civilization
throughout the world, the medium through which ancient science and
philosophy were recovered, supplemented and transmitted to make possible
the renaissance of Western Europe. . . . Several of the principal towns
possessed what might be called universities, chief among which were
those of Cordova, Seville, Malaga and Granada\.... Side by side with the
universities, libraries flourished. The royal library of Cordova became
the largest and best" (Hitti).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Cordovan library was supposed to contain some 400,000 (or even
600,000) volumes, their titles filling a catalogue of forty-four
volumes. Cordova was then, undoubtedly, the greatest centre of science
and art of medieval Europe. There were other great centres of learning
in Arab lands. The library of the F imids in Cairo is supposed to have
contained 100,000 volumes.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-486}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PRODUCTION OF ARABIC BOOKS]{.style_2} {#production-of-arabic-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[As will have been gathered, the Islamic production of books was very
great. There were numerous scholars, and some of them were extremely
prolific; for instance, Ibn al-Kh tib wrote more than sixty books
(dealing with philosophy, medicine, history, geography, as well as
poetry)---only about twenty have been preserved. To 'Ali ibn-Hazm
(994--1064) as many as four hundred works are attributed. Local
manufacture of paper facilitated Arabic literary production.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[After the Christian conquest of Spain, in Christian Europe not many
Arabic books were allowed to come down to us. "Granada was the scene of
a bonfire of Arabic manuscripts" (Hitti). Still, as late as the second
half of the sixteenth century, Philip II succeeded in collecting some
two thousand volumes for the famous library of the Escurial Monastery
(Province of Madrid). In the following century a few thousand were added
to the collection, which has become one of the richest in Arabic
manuscripts.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Sicily was another meeting-point of Islamic and European cultures. From
the late eleventh century onwards, the Norman courts of Palermo and
Naples became the centres of a syncretic culture based on the ancient
Graeco-Roman civilization, imbued with Syrian-Arab influences, and
dominated politically by Christian Teutonic Normans and culturally by
the neighbouring Italians. The rich collections of Arabic books at
Palermo and Naples bear witness to the Islamic book production of Sicily
and southern Italy in the pre-Norman and early Norman period.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-487}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE 'ABB SIDS, THE F IMIDS, THE S M NIDS]{.style_2} {#the-abb-sids-the-f-imids-the-s-m-nids .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Arab-Persian literary production of some other countries, although
inferior to that of Spain, and of minor influence on western
civilization than that of Sicily, was nevertheless
outstanding.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The splendid 'Abbasid dynasty (c. 750-1258), the founders and builders
of Baghdad---the city of fairy tales, but once also renowned for its
learning, culture and art, for its flourishing trade and the oriental
splendour of its imperial palace---is notable for the establishment of
numerous colleges and libraries, for the encouragement of literature and
the arts, for the translations from the Sanskrit and Greek languages
into Arabic of works on astronomy, mathematics, metaphysics, medicine
and philosophy. "It was under the 'Abb sids that Islamic civilization
experienced its golden age" (Hitti). Under the Caliph Har n al-Rash d
(763--809), the contemporary and friend of Charlemagne, Baghdad became a
brilliant centre of the learning, culture and art of the Moslem
world.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["The height of Greek influence was reached under al-Ma'mun," or
'Abdullah III, a son of Har n al-Rash d. "In 830 he established in
Baghdad his famous 'house of wisdom', a combination of library, academy
and translation bureau which in many respects proved the most important
educational institution since the foundation of the Alexandrian Museum
in the first half of the third century B.C." (Hitti).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The F imid dynasty established itself in Tunis in 909, but later the
centre of its power was transferred to Egypt, where in 968 the city
el-Kahira ("the victorious")---a name which was gradually corrupted into
Cairo---was founded, and reached great heights of splendour. The
library, which the F imids founded in Cairo (see p. 332) became the most
important in the Moslem world. But the F imid power did not last long;
it was overthrown in 1171 by the great Salah-ed-din Yusuf (known as
Saladin), who fought against the Crusaders.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Even minor Moslem dynasties greatly contributed to the spread of
knowledge. Prof. Arberry---dealing with Avicenna's]{.style_}
[Autobiography]{.style_1} [describing the private library of the S m
nids (a minor Persian dynasty, which ruled in Bukhara A.D. c.
872--999)---says that "this description takes the breath away". Avicenna
writes: "I entered a mansion with many chambers, each chamber having
chests of books piled one upon another. In one apartment were books on
language and poetry, in another law, and so on; each apartment was set
aside for books on a single science. I glanced through the catalogue of
the works of the ancient Greeks, and asked for those which I required;
and I saw books which I had never seen before and have not seen since. I
read these books, taking notes of their contents; I came to realize the
place each man occupied in his particular science. . . ."]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-488}

::: calibre5
:::

## [DESTRUCTION OF ARABIC BOOKS]{.style_2} {#destruction-of-arabic-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is not difficult to realize why relatively few early Arabic books
have come down to us. The reasons are the same as those already
mentioned in connection with Latin or Hebrew books, destruction by
fanatics or enemies.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Prof. Grohmann gives the following description of the sack, in 1068, of
the F imid Library in Cairo. The precious leather bindings were torn
from the manuscripts to make shoes for negro slaves; the leaves of the
manuscripts were burned, and the remains blown by the wind into heaps,
which could still be seen near the ruins in Maqr z 's time and were
known as the "mounds of the books".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Crusaders "left in their wake havoc and ruin and throughout the
Near East they bequeathed a legacy of ill-will between Moslems and
Christians\...." (Hitti). They burned or plundered numerous libraries,
including that of Tripolis, said to contain 3,000,000 volumes.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Further to the cast, in the thirteenth century, Genghis or Chinggiz
Khan, having united Mongolia, in a few years extended his dominion from
Korea to southern Russia and to Persia, everywhere spreading havoc and
destruction. "Before them the cultural centres of eastern Islam were
practically wiped out of existence, leaving bare deserts or shapeless
ruins where formerly had stood stately palaces and libraries" (Hitti).
Her t, Bukh r , Samarqand, Balkh, Khwarizm, and other glorious cities
and towns were devastated.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[From 1253 onwards, with H l g , Chinggiz Khan's grandson, the second
wave of Mongol hordes came on, and in 1258 the crowning horror of the
sack of the splendid capital, Baghd d, marked the end of the 'Abb sid
Caliphate. To give an idea of the immense plunder of the libraries, it
will suffice to mention that the scholar N ir ad-Din s , who accompanied
the Mongol armies, succeeded in saving more than 400,000 volumes. How
many thousands of volumes have been destroyed will never be known, as it
is uncertain how many books were destroyed previously at Her t, which is
said to have contained 395 colleges with libraries, or at Bukh r , where
the Mongols are said to have stabled their horses in the great mosque,
and to have torn up priceless manuscripts of the Koran, to serve as
litter for their horses.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Apart from plunder and destruction by enemies, other disasters,
particularly fire, were responsible for the loss of Arabic books: the
rich library of the Mosque of the Prophet in al-Med na was destroyed in
1237 by a sacristan who happened to drop a lighted candle in it, and the
valuable library of the Grand Master of the Assassins in Alam t also
perished in flames in 1257.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-489}

::: calibre5
:::

## [DECADENCE OF ARABIC]{.style_2} {#decadence-of-arabic .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, quoting again Prof. Hitti, we may say that "Medieval times,
with their Dark Ages, held no black-out for the Arab lands; but modern
times did. Throughout the four centuries of Ottoman domination,
beginning in 1517, the whole Arab East was in a state of
eclipse."]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-490}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BIBLIOGRAPHY]{.style_2} {#bibliography-5 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In addition to]{.style_} [The Alphabet, passim]{.style_1}[, and the
literature quoted there, see also:]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[P. K. Hitti,]{.style_} [The Arabs,]{.style_1} [London, 1948;]{.style_}
[History of the Arabs,]{.style_1} [4the ed., London, 1949;]{.style_}
[History of Syria,]{.style_1} [London, 1951.]{.style_}
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: {#calibre_link-197 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-14}

::: calibre7
:::

### [CHAPTER VIII]{.style_2} {#chapter-viii .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

### [OUTLYING REGIONS (I) : ANCIENT MIDDLE EAST, CENTRAL AND SOUTHERN ASIA]{.style_2} {#outlying-regions-i-ancient-middle-east-central-and-southern-asia .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

[IT must be emphasized that in the present connection the regions are
outlying only in the sense that the particular mode of development
associated with each is, generally speaking, away from the main stream
of book development from the modern standpoint; this started in Egypt,
and reached the modern world through the Graeco-Roman and Christian
civilizations. In a certain respect China is an important exception, in
that it gave us the invention of paper, although printing, which it also
invented, was later invented, perhaps quite independently, in
Europe.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ANCIENT MIDDLE EAST AND CENTRAL ASIA]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A few "outlying regions" of the ancient Middle East have already been
noticed; they have at least an indirect connection with our modern book
in as much as their book production was mainly due, at least originally,
to the same influence as that noted in the case of early medieval
Europe, i.e. to the spread of Christianity. In this chapter, the book
production of some other ancient peoples will be briefly
examined.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-491}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Iranians []{#calibre_link-199 .calibre14}([Figs. VIII--1](#calibre_link-198){.calibre13}--3)]{.style_2} {#iranians-figs.-viii13 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Old Persian, which has already been mentioned, was the ancient language
of Persia proper, which roughly corresponds to the modern province of
Fars, in the south-west of present-day Persia. It was the official
language of the Achaemenid dynasty, under whose rule---from the middle
of the sixth century B.C., until the victories of Alexander the
Great---the Persians came to occupy the foremost place in the then known
world.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000024.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-198}

[[Fig. VIII--1](#calibre_link-199){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a, Manichaean; b, eastern Pahlavi and c, Yezidi (Kitab al-Jalweh or The
Book of the Revelation).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Persia proper is, however, only a small part of a vast geographical,
ethnic and linguistic unit, called Iran. The Iranian group of languages
(which constitutes an important branch of the Indo-European linguistic
family) is, or was, spoken throughout the vast territory lying between
Kurdistan in the west and the Indus Valley in the east, between the Aral
Sea in the north and the Gulf of Oman in the south; thus comprising the
present countries of Kurdistan, Persia, Baluchistan, Afghanistan,
Tadjikistan, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan, as well as parts of South
Russia, and of Chinese Turkestan. Even far beyond this area, Iranian
tribes are known to have led a nomadic existence.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This group of languages is commonly divided into two groups, a western
and an eastern. This distinction applies also to the oldest preserved
forms of Iranian: Old Persian belongs to the western group, while the
language of the earliest part of the Avesta may be considered to belong
to the eastern group.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-492}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE AVESTA ([Fig. VIII--2](#calibre_link-193){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#the-avesta-fig.-viii2 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Somewhere in the sixth century B.C. there arose Spitama Zarathushtra or
Zoroaster, who preached a new gospel, Mazdayasnianism, i.e. the worship
of the God Ahura Mazdah ("Lord Thoughtful"). He left seventeen poems,
which are grouped in five G th s. These form part of a vast collection
of sacred literature known as Avesta: the meaning of this word is
uncertain; according to the German scholar F. C. Andreas, it derives
from]{.style_} [upasta,]{.style_1} [meaning "Foundation",
"foundation-text".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[More recent and much more probable is the explanation suggested by
Prof. W. B. Henning: the name Avesta should be connected with Apast
k/Abast g, and means "The Injunction (of Zoroaster)".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Avesta literature is a complex collection of books containing the
liturgies, the law, solemn invocations, prayers, and other writings, and
is still used among Parsecs in India (numbering about 90,000) and in
Persia (about 10,000) as a kind of Bible and prayer-book.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Avesta, in the form in which it has come down to us, is written in
a script, known as Pazand or Avesta, which seems to be an artificial
creation based on the cursive Pahlavik and Parsik scripts (see]{.style_}
[The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp. 306--9). Paleographical considerations
suggest that the invention of this alphabet and the recording of the
Avesta took place some time between the fourth and the sixth centuries
A.D., at a time when the Sasanian rulers of Persia (A.D. 226--651) found
it convenient to revive and promote a national religion. This is
confirmed by the late Zoroastrian tradition, which tells us that after
Alexander's invasion of Iran, the Avesta had been repeatedly scattered
and collected again, and that the final collection was made in Sasanian
times.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000025.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-193}

[[Fig. VIII--2](#calibre_link-200){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Iranian manuscripts. a, Khordah Avesta, A.D. 1723 (India Office
Library, Z & P.21); b, Pazand: Shikand Gumani Vijar, A.D. 1737 (ibidem,
Z & P.23); c, Pashtu: qissah-i-Bahramgor, A.D. 1750 (ibidem, Pash.
B.28).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000026.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-201}

[Fig. VIII--3]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Persian manuscript (Bodleian Library, Oxford, MS. Ouseley Adds. 176,
fol. 337).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Avesta manuscripts extant are relatively late. They fall into two
classes: (i) the Indian, written in rather straight and pointed
characters, the oldest manuscripts of which date from the thirteenth and
early fourteenth centuries A.D.; and (2) the Persian manuscripts,
written in a very vigorous cursive and oblique hand, which do not go
further back than the seventeenth century, but surpass their Indian
contemporaries in correctness and execution.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[For the employment of leather in ancient Persia, see p. 189 f. For
Persian-Arabic book illumination see the section on Moslem illumination
in the book on]{.style_} [Illumination and Binding.]{.style_1} [See
[]{#calibre_link-493}also [Fig.
VIII--3](#calibre_link-201){.calibre9}.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-494}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Manichaean and Mandaean Books]{.style_2} {#manichaean-and-mandaean-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Manes or Manichaeus (born about A.D. 215 in Babylonia, of Persian
parentage, and crucified about 273) founded in 247 the religion known as
Manichaean, which for a millennium---from the third to the thirteenth
century A.D.---was one of the most widely disseminated throughout the
world. At the end of the third and during the fourth century it spread
through western Asia, southern Europe, and northern Africa, through
Spain and Gaul, but by the seventh century it was practically extinct,
or absorbed, in these regions. On the other hand, during the fourth
century it was carried into Eastern Turkestan, and in the early seventh
century into China, where it flourished during that and the following
century.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[After the fall of the Uighur Empire, in 840, Manichaeism continued to
hold its own in the successor states until about the thirteenth century.
In some parts of China it lingered on, but before the middle of the
present millennium it had been exterminated everywhere through the
repressive measures of Moslems and Chinese alike.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-495}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MANICHAEAN MANUSCRIPTS ([Fig. VIII--1](#calibre_link-198){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [a]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#manichaean-manuscripts-fig.-viii1-a .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Manes and his followers employed a clear, legible and very beautiful
script known as the Manichaean alphabet (see]{.style_} [The
Alphabet]{.style_1}[, pp. 291--4). It was believed by the adversaries of
Manichaeism to have been a secret, devilish script invented by Manes
himself. A few interesting Manichaean inscriptions of magic texts on
earthernware bowls are extant, but much more important are the
Manichaean manuscripts, of which many fragments have been found in
ancient convents in Eastern Turkestan,. They are beautifully written on
excellent paper in various coloured inks and are ornamented with
surprisingly beautiful miniatures. These manuscripts are written in
different languages, more especially in a number of Iranian and Turki
dialects.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It was always known that the Manichaeans, following the example set by
their founder, held the arts of painting and of book illumination in
high honour; they had also recognized the advantage to be derived from
representational art for the purpose of religious propaganda. In the
ancient Western and Eastern literatures there are many references to the
magnificent manuscripts of the Manichaeans, with their fine leather
bindings. It will suffice to mention St. Augustine's challenge
(]{.style_}[Contra Faustum]{.style_1}[, xiii, 18):]{.style_} [incendite
omnes illas membranas elegantesque tecturas decoris pellibus
exquisitas]{.style_1}[. But whatever illuminated manuscripts existed,
they perished in the ruthless destruction of them at the hands of the
Moslem fanatics. We are told, for instance, that in A.H. 311 (=A.D.
923), at the public gate of the palace in Baghdad, Mani's portrait was
burned with fourteen sacks of "heretical" works, out of which fell gold
and silver.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[No wonder, therefore, that no authentic example of Manichaean book
illumination was known to have survived up to modern times, until---in
1904---the German Professor A. von Le Coq discovered a few fragments of
Manichaean paintings in a ruined city near Turfan (see p. 344 ff.), some
frescoes on the walls of the ruins of a Manichaean temple, and fragments
of illuminated Manichaean manuscripts. A Manichaean miniature of the
eighth or ninth century A.D. represents a priest holding in his hands a
book splendidly bound in red and gold; its boards seem to be decorated
on the margins with green and white ivory or bone, and may be considered
as made of wood. Some fragments of excellent Manichaean bookbindings
have also been discovered, and---as already mentioned---Prof. Grohmann
has suggested that the art of bookmaking reached the Manichaeans from
Egypt.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, Le Coq was so impressed by his finds and by other evidence
that he considered the Manichaean the basis of almost all Islamic
miniature painting. According to other eminent scholars, such as
Grohmann, the Manichaean school of painting must almost certainly have
had a strong---if not exactly a decisive---influence on early Moslem
miniature art.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Moreover, it is not at all improbable that the art of the Manichaeans,
long after the disappearance of their religion from Persia, continued to
linger on in the ancient Persian territories, and that its traditional
methods were kept alive by the Moslem descendants of the old Manichaean
artists who had practised it. It has already been pointed out that the
sect of al-Hallaj (annihilated in the year 921--2), who were strongly
influenced by Manichaeism, were famous for their finely produced
books.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The reputation of M n as a painter long outlived all remembrance of him
in Persia as the founder of a religion, and his name came to be
proverbially used to describe any skilful artist. Indeed, over five
hundred years after Manichaeism was uprooted in Persia, "the highest
praise that could be bestowed by a Persian upon the illustrious Bihz d
was to describe him as painting with the brush of M n " (Arnold). A
reproduction of M n 's picture book, which is known in Persian
literature by the name of Arzhang, was still to be seen in the treasury
of the capital city of Ghazna by the author of a work on the various
systems of religion who wrote in the year 1092. Sir Thomas Arnold, who
mentions this fact, has suggested that the illustrator of al-B run
's]{.style_} [al- th r l B qiya]{.style_1}[, compiled A.D.]{.style_}
[c.]{.style_1} [1000, may have used the same reproduction or a copy of
it. If this suggestion be right, then in the codex dated 1307-8 and
preserved in the University Library of Edinburgh---this manuscript being
a copy of the work of al-B run ---we may have examples of the survival
of the Manichaean type of book illumination.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-496}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MANDAEAN MANUSCRIPTS]{.style_2} {#mandaean-manuscripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The gnostic pagan Jewish-Christian sect of the Mandaeans is known also
under other terms, such as Nazaraeans or Nasurai, Galileans or
Christians of St. John: the indigenous term is Mendai, the Moslems call
them abi'un, Sabba or ubba. Their religious writings seem to have been
composed between the fifth and the seventh centuries A.D. They are
written in a relatively late eastern, or Babylonian, Aramaic dialect,
but later became slightly influenced by the neighbouring Arabic and
Persian languages. It is the most corrupt of all Aramaic dialects. The
Mandaean script differs also very much from the other members of the
Aramaic branch of alphabets.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Nowadays the Mandaeans are almost extinct; they inhabit only a few
villages in the marshes near the junction of the Tigris and the
Euphrates; according to the 1932 census they numbered 4,805.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Very few inscriptions have survived. There are some lead amulets, the
earliest belonging probably to the early part of the sixth century A.D.,
and some magic texts inside earthenware bowls, of the seventh and eighth
centuries A.D.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[There are, however, numerous, although late, Mandaean manuscripts in
the British Museum, in Oxford, Paris, Berlin, and in the Vatican. They
belong mainly to the period extending from the seventeenth to the
nineteenth centuries A.D., the oldest in Europe being of the sixteenth
century A.D.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-497}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Sogdian []{#calibre_link-203 .calibre14}([Fig. VIII--4](#calibre_link-202){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [left]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#sogdian-fig.-viii4-left .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Sogdians were an ancient population speaking an eastern dialect of
middle Iranian, who inhabited Eastern Turkestan. Sogdiana (Old
Persian]{.style_}
[Sug]{.style_1}[(]{.style_}[u]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[da]{.style_1}[,
Avestic]{.style_} [Sughda]{.style_1}[, Greek]{.style_}
[Sogdian]{.style_1} [, Latin]{.style_} [Sogdiana]{.style_1}[) was a
province of the Achaemenid Empire, corresponding roughly to Samarkand
and Bukh r , now the Soviet Republic Uzbekistan. In Hellenistic times it
was united with Bactria.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["Sogdian" was little more than a name until the beginning of the
twentieth century. The epoch-making discoveries of British-Indian,
German, Russian, Japanese, French, and other expeditions, have yielded
extremely important results (see]{.style_} [The Alphabet]{.style_1}[,
pp. 310--13).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is now known that the Sogdian speech and script were widely used in
Central Asia for many centuries, and particularly in the second half of
the first millennium A.D. Sogdian was actually for a long time
the]{.style_} [lingua franca]{.style_1} [of Central Asia. The limits of
its diffusion were indicated, in the north, by the trilingual
inscription (Turki-Sogdian-Chinese) of the ninth century A.D. found in
the vicinity of Qara Balgasun (the then capital of the vast Uighur
Empire), on the River Orkhon, and, in the south, by a stone inscription
consisting of six lines, discovered at Ladakh, on the Tibetan frontier.
It is also worth while mentioning that the Uighurs adapted the Sogdian
alphabet to their own language. As the result of the Mongolian and
Moslem conquests, Sogdian slowly died out, although "a poor descendant"
of it is still to be found in the valley of Yaghna°b.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-498}

::: calibre5
:::

## [EASTERN TURKESTAN]{.style_2} {#eastern-turkestan .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[This Chinese province, known also as Sinkiang, is now almost wholly a
sandy waste, but in the first seven or eight centuries of the Christian
era it was a land "of smiling cities with rich sanctuaries and
monasteries stocked with magnificent libraries". Nowadays it is
inhabited by a sparse population mainly of Turkish tongue and Moslem
religion, but at that time it was a melting-pot of peoples using quite
different forms of speech (Iranian, "Tokharian", Indian, Chinese,
Tibetan, Turki, and others), producing books written in different
languages and scripts, and professing different religions (Buddhist,
Manichaean, Nestorians, and others).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000027.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-202}

[[Fig. VIII--4](#calibre_link-203){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Sogdian (left) and Kök Turki (right) books.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Very few complete Sogdi an books are extant, but numerous fragmentary
manuscripts were found in Eastern Turkestan, at Ch'ien-fo-tung, the
"Caves of the Thousand Buddhas", in Tun-huang. The earliest fragments
extant, a collection of paper documents, previously attributed to a
period not later than the middle second century A.D., are now assigned
to A.D. 313 or 314. It is interesting to note that the paper of these
documents is made entirely from rags of fabrics woven from Chinese hemp
(]{.style_}[Bochineria nivea]{.style_1}[).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The great majority of the Sogdian texts belong, however, to the eighth,
and perhaps the ninth century A.D. The manuscripts are preserved for the
most part in London (British Museum and India Office Library), Paris
(National Library), Leningrad (Academy of Science), and Berlin (Academy
of Science). Amongst these manuscripts are most extensive texts, which
come from Tun-huang, some belonging to the seventh century, and others,
such as Buddhist s tras, to the tenth century. It may be noted that
Sogdian books are written in three scripts, each of them peculiar to a
distinct religion,]{.style_} [viz.]{.style_1} [Buddhism, Manichaeism,
and Christianity.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The important Sogdian books which were deposited in the National
Library, at Paris, were believed lost for a number of years, but were
rediscovered by M. Filiozat in 1936, and were admirably published in
1940. The majority of these manuscripts contain Buddhist texts, mostly
translated from Chinese originals. Of the non-Buddhist texts, Henning
considers the following books as worth mentioning: P 13, a fragment of
the]{.style_} [Tale of Rustam;]{.style_1} [P 19, a small medical
fragment, containing three prescriptions, one each for an emetic, a
purgative, and an aphrodisiac; P 25, a learner's first attempt at
writing Sogdian, full of mistakes; P 3, a Shamanist rainmaker's
handbook, which is a Central Asian rather than Indian production, and
contains a number of Iranian terms rot found in Buddhist texts. "Of
great value is colophon of P 8, with its long list of personal
names\.... The name of the painter of P 26 is not]{.style_}
[twγryk]{.style_1}[, 'Tokharian', but]{.style_}
[twγryl]{.style_1}[=Toγrïl, a common Turkish name" (Henning). The very
long text P 2 (containing nearly 1,250 lines) is the dullest of
all.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-499}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Agnean, Kuchean and Khotanese]{.style_2} {#agnean-kuchean-and-khotanese .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Until 1890, when the first manuscripts written in these languages were
found, and until 1893, when these manuscripts were published by Dr. A.
F. R. Hoernle, nothing was known of the existence of these forms of
speech. Later, many more documents were discovered. Their decipherment
was facilitated by a prior knowledge of the relative scripts (variants
of the Indian Brahmi Gupta characters), and by the discovery of some
bilingual manuscripts (one of the two languages being
Sanskrit).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-500}

::: calibre5
:::

## ["TOKHARIAN" AND ITS DIALECTS]{.style_2} {#tokharian-and-its-dialects .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The contents of these documents revealed that in the latter part of the
first millennium A.D., the population living between the River Tarim and
the Mountains T'ien-shan, including the territories of Turfan, Qarashahr
and Kucha, spoke a language---of which at least two dialects can be
distinguished---belonging to the centum group of the Indo-European
family of languages.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This language, however, now commonly, though probably wrongly, known as
"Tokharian", presents several features not parallelled in the other
Indo-European languages, and its relationship with the other groups has
not yet been sufficiently cleared up. Partly on Prof. H. W. Bailey's
suggestion, the two dialects, previously distinguished as "Tokharian
Dialect A" or "I A", and "Tokharian Dialect B" or "I B", are now often
termed Agnean (from the ancient kingdom Argi or Agni, later known as
Qarashahr), and Kuchean, the latter being the language of the ancient
kingdom of Kucha or Kuci.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-501}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE KHOTANESE LANGUAGE]{.style_2} {#the-khotanese-language .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The other documents are written in a form of speech now generally
considered as the Khotanese language, which was spoken in the ancient
kingdom of Khotan, called in Sanskrit Gaustana, and in Tibetan Khu-then;
the indigenous term for the kingdom was Hvatana- (later Hvamna-), the
adject. nom. sing. being Hvatanai (later Hvamnai). This language was
formerly called North Aryan (by E. Leumann), East Iranian (by French
scholars), Saka (by Lueders), Khotani or Khotani Saka (by S. Konow), but
at present H. W. Bailey's term "Khotanese" is preferred, though he
himself is now prepared to accept the opinion that Khotanese belongs to
the Saka group of the Iranian languages.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[There are some indications to show that Khotanese was reduced to
writing in the second century A.D., although the manuscripts extant are
considerably later (ninth or tenth centuries), the earliest ones
belonging probably to the eighth or at most the seventh century
A.D.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-502}

::: calibre5
:::

## [AGNEAN AND KUCHEAN MANUSCRIPTS]{.style_2} {#agnean-and-kuchean-manuscripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-207}[([Fig.
VIII--6](#calibre_link-204){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[a]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The numerous Agnean and Kuchean manuscripts extant---recently
discovered---are now in collections in London, Oxford, Paris, Calcutta,
Leningrad, Berlin, Peking, and (before the last war) in Dairen. They
were found in the eastern part of the Tarim basin (Eastern Turkestan),
and belong to the second half of the first millennium A.D. The texts are
largely religious, but in Kuchean business documents and medical
manuscripts are also extant.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-503}

::: calibre5
:::

## [KHOTANESE MANUSCRIPTS ([Fig. VIII--6](#calibre_link-204){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [b]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#khotanese-manuscripts-fig.-viii6-b .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The many Khotanese fragmentary manuscripts have been discovered in
Eastern Turkestan and at Ch'ien or Ts'ien-fo-tung (the "Caves of the
Thousand Buddhas") in Tun-huang. They are now in London (British Museum
and India Office Library), Paris (National Library) and Berlin (Academy
of Science). The contents of these manuscripts are of great variety:
apart from official and business documents, there are translations of
Indian tales, Buddhist religious poems, medical texts, and other kinds
of literature. Some of the manuscripts extant contain a kind of cursive
Gupta]{.style_} [ABC]{.style_1} [(the alphabet, a syllabary, and
numerals); one manuscript contains 1,108 lines of writing. Three of the
more extensive and better preserved Khotanese manuscripts---belonging to
the Stein Collection in the India Office Library---have been reproduced
in facsimile by the leading authority in this field of study, Prof. H.
W. Bailey (]{.style_}[Codices Khotanenses]{.style_1}[, Copenhagen,
1938).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-504}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Early Turki Manuscripts]{.style_2} {#early-turki-manuscripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Apart from numerous "runic" inscriptions discovered near the River
Orkhon, to the south of Lake Baikal, and in other parts of southern
Central Siberia, north-western Mongolia, and north-eastern Turkestan,
mainly belonging to the seventh or eighth century A.D., some later
fragments of manuscripts, written in the same script, but in a more
cursive form, were found in Eastern Turkestan. This script is variously
termed Orkhon-script, Siberian, or Early Turki, also Kök Turki or
pre-Islamic Turki. ([Fig.
VIII--4](#calibre_link-202){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[right]{.style_1}[).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The language of these inscriptions and manuscripts is early Turki, this
being the oldest known form of the Turkish tongue; it differs very
widely from Ottoman Turkish. Although the earliest inscriptions extant
belong to the seventh century, the script must already have been in use
in the sixth century, and in the same period some literature may have
been written.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-505}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Uighur Manuscripts []{#calibre_link-206 .calibre14}([Fig. VIII--5](#calibre_link-205){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [above]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#uighur-manuscripts-fig.-viii5-above .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Uighurs, originally Toquz Oghuz (the "Nine Oghuz") were a strong
people of Turki speech and Shamanist religion. They founded a vast and
powerful empire in Mongolia, which had its capital at modern Qara
Balgasun, on the River Orkhon. Later, however, their kings embraced
Manichaeism, while a part of the population became Nestorians or
Buddhists. Subsequently, they became Moslems.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000028.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-205}

[[Fig. VIII--5](#calibre_link-206){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Uighur (above) and Mongolian (below) books. The Mongolian manuscript is
Altasamba, c. 1860 (India Office Library, R.305).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The destruction of the Uighur Mongolian Empire, about the middle of the
ninth century, did not mean the end of the Uighur influence. From the
cultural angle, the later Uighur kingdom of Eastern Turkestan was more
important than the former Uighur-Mongolian Empire. The Uighurs ruled
Kashgaria in the tenth-twelfth centuries: they subdued the whole of the
country, but intermixed so completely with the local population, which
was of "Tokharian" and Iranian origin, that they may conveniently be
called Turkized Indo-Europeans. However, the region became the "country
of the Turks", i.e. "Turkestan". After the conquest by Chinggiz Khan,
the Uighurs retained a semi-autonomy for some time.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The cultural influence of the Uighurs on the neighbouring countries is
best illustrated by the fact that in the thirteenth century their
alphabet was employed as the official script of the Mongolian Empire.
Numerous fragments of the Uighur manuscripts were discovered in Eastern
Turkestan at Turfan and in other places. Their contents are mainly
religious: Buddhist, Manichaean, and Christian (Nestorian): see [Fig.
VIII--5](#calibre_link-205){.calibre9}.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[With regard to script, the Uighur literary manuscripts have been
classified into three main groups. (1) A few fragmentary manuscripts,
belonging to the earliest period, are written in a script showing forms
of letters which frequently appear in Sogdian manuscripts. The Uighur
manuscripts of this group are in p th form (see p. 362); the leaves
(generally of paper, rarely of palm leaf or birch bark) measure about 30
x 10 cm.; the lines run longitudinally. (2) The script of a few other
Uighur manuscripts is more recent than that of group (1)---though it is
closely connected with it---and appears more seldom in Sogdian
manuscripts. The books are in p th form, but the format is much larger,
sometimes measuring as much as 54 x 23 cm.; the lines run not
longitudinally but across the leaves. (3) Numerous Uighur manuscripts
belong to this group. The script shows characteristics which do not
occur in Sogdian manuscripts. The book form is again the small form of p
th (about 29 × 12 cm.), and the direction of lines
longitudinal.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Apart from these main book hands there existed an extremely cursive
current hand as shown by Uighur documents; these "were exclusively
written with a brush on thinner, softer and coarser paper than the
religious texts. The script of the earlier ones is closely connected
with the Sogdian cursive; that of the more recent" (Le Coq) shows Arabic
influence. It was the Uighur current hand which was adopted as the
official script of the Mongolian Empire (see [Fig.
VIII--5](#calibre_link-205){.calibre9},]{.style_} [below]{.style_1}[;
see also]{.style_} [The Alphabet]{.style_1}[, pp. 316 ff.)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[With regard to contents and language, three main groups may be
distinguished: Buddhist, Manichaean, and Christian texts; the language
employed in the Manichaean manuscripts is apparently connected with Kök
Turki (see p. 348) and may represent a western Turki dialect.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000029.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-204}

[[Fig. VIII--6](#calibre_link-207){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a, Kuchean, b, Khotanese, and c, Sanskrit Br hm (India Office
Library).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The lines run vertically or horizontally. Of particular interest is the
punctuation in Buddhist and Manichaean manuscripts. The earlier Buddhist
texts contain little thick hooks, a sort of comma, written either singly
or double, which take the place of our comma, semicolon and full stop.
In later times, the commas were replaced by little oblique strokes
written singly or double. The end of a paragraph was sometimes marked by
a group of three, four or more hooks; if there were four, two were
placed on the height of the line, one above them and one below, thus;
The Manichaean punctuation consisted of little ovals, often in]{.style_}
[minium]{.style_1} [or vermilion, around one or two dots in black Indian
ink. These ovals were either single or double; sometimes they were also
placed at the beginning of the line. Le Coq points out that such a
punctuation is quite sufficient to denote a Manichaean text.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Uighur books show all the main forms of ancient and modern books: (1)
There was the roll-form; the roll was fastened to a rod, which was
ornamented at its ends or had projecting ornamental knobs made of bone,
metal, or ivory. For parallels in Mediterranean countries and in the Far
East, see pp. 129, 405. (2) There was the concertina-method book similar
to that in China (see p. 404 f). It was generally written on one side,
but sometimes, though rarely, it was written on both sides. (3) There
was the p th -form book, already referred to. The covering tablets and
all the leaves had---generally on the left-hand side---one or two string
holes for the passage of the tying string. There holes were sometimes
decorated with little circles painted in black or red Indian ink. (4)
Finally, there was the Western codex-form, which was preferred by
Manichaeans and Christians. The format varied between the folio and
quarto, and the duodecimo. Although various writing materials---already
referred to---were employed, the great majority of the preserved Uighur
manuscripts are of paper; palm-leaf and birch bark manuscripts have come
down to us only in fragments.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-506}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BIBLIOGRAPHY]{.style_2} {#bibliography-6 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[See]{.style_} [The Alphabet]{.style_1}[, pp. 292-4, 309, 312-13,
315-16, 349, 351--]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-507}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Kharoshthi Manuscripts ([Fig. I--9](#calibre_link-40){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [a]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#kharoshthi-manuscripts-fig.-i9-a .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Before examining the vast Indian branch, we may deal, briefly, with the
Kharoshthi "book". Kharoshthi is the only script not dependent on, or
connected with, the]{.style_} [Brahm ,]{.style_1} [th type of all the
other Indian scripts (see]{.style_} [The Alphabet]{.style_1}[, p' 328
ff.).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The term Kharoshthi, or]{.style_} [Kharo tr]{.style_1} [, now comme
appears in a Chinese Buddhistic work as early as A.D. 668. It is applied
to the script known from many Indo-Greek, Indo-Parthian, and
Indo-Scythian coins belonging to the period between 175 B.C. and the
first century A.D. It is, or was, also called Bactrian, Indo-Bactrian,
Aryan, Aryo-Indian, Bactro-Pal , North-western Indian, Aramaeo-Indian,
and so forth. Its importance was realized after the discovery, in 1836,
of a Kharoshthi inscription incised on a rock in the vicinity of
Shahbazgarhi, on the Indo-Afghan borders, giving a translation of A
oka's edicts, belonging probably to 251 B.C.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[KHAROSHTHI SCRIPT]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Kharoshthi script is undoubtedly a descendant of the Aramaic
alphabet. It has been suggested that it originated in the fifth century
B.C. in north-western India, at that time under Persian rule, which was
the best medium for the spread of the Aramaic speech and script. The
Persian administration probably introduced this script, adapting it to
their own needs and those of the native population. Its use was limited
to north-western India and to Indianized Iranian countries of Central
Asia,]{.style_} [i.e.]{.style_1} [to the territory occupied by the
Indo-Scythian empire of the Kushana (first century B.C. or A.D. to A.D.
225).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Kharoshthi is not a monumental script, but a popular cursive and
commercial, or literary and calligraphic book hand.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[KHAROSHTHI DOCUMENTS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Many Kharoshthi documents are extant. They are written mainly in Middle
Indian dialects, but some documents from Niya and Kucha are written in
Sanskrit.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Interesting Kharoshthi documents written in Indian ink on wood, skin
and paper were found in Niya and Lou-lan (Eastern Turkestan). The great
collection of wooden documents found at Niya formed part of archives of
the third century A.D. It shows that wood was not only the writing
material most commonly used in Central Asia before the invention of
paper (A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 105), but even afterwards it
remained the official writing material in Central Asia at least down to
about the end of the third century A.D.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["It was not until Sir Aurel Stein's discovery at Niya in 1901 that the
character of the early wooden stationery was known. It takes many forms,
from a mere rough twig to the ingenious double tablet of either 'wedge
shape' or rectangular, designed to be closed and sealed with as much
security against unauthorized inspection as the most carefully sealed
'cover' of today. The twigs, stick-like tablets, single rectangular
and]{.style_} [takhti]{.style_1} [shaped tablets are generally memos.,
accounts, casual unimportant communications and similar matter. The
double documents are more or less confidential letters, agreements and
official despatches\.... The two tablets fit together accurately\....
The seal, made of a specially prepared clay, is packed into the cavity,
embedding the crossing strings and is impressed with the sender's
seal\.... The written communication is on the two inner surfaces of the
tablets which when 'closed' are face to face and are therefore secure
from scrutiny until the string is cut and the tablets parted" (F. H.
Andrews).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-508}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PRESERVED MANUSCRIPTS ([Fig. I---9](#calibre_link-40){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [a]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#preserved-manuscripts-fig.-i9-a .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The most important Kharoshthi manuscript is the fragmentary manuscript
known as the]{.style_} [Dutreuil de Rhins Manuscript;]{.style_1} [it was
discovered in the ruins of Gosinga Vih ra (Khotan), and it contains a
version in north-western Prakrit of the Buddhist work]{.style_}
[Dhammapada.]{.style_1} [It is written on birch bark. Its date is
uncertain, but according to some scholars it belongs to the first or
second century A.D., thus being the earliest Kharoshthi manuscript
extant. Only very few fragments of Kharoshthi paper manuscripts have
been recovered (mainly at Lou-lan). See also p. 361.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The most recent Kharoshthi documents written on perishable material
were discovered in the Kucha region; their date is uncertain, but they
were found with non-Kharoshthi documents belonging to the seventh
century A.D. (The most recent Kharoshthi inscriptions seem to belong to
the fourth or fifth century A.D.)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. I---9]{.style_}[a]{.style_1}[, , reproduces a Kharoshthi "book"
written on wooden tablets.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-509}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BIBLIOGRAPHY]{.style_2} {#bibliography-7 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[See]{.style_} [The Alphabet]{.style_1}[, p. 304.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-510}

::: calibre5
:::

## [India, Tibet and Further India ([Figs. VIII--6](#calibre_link-204){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [c]{.style_2}[---16)]{.style_2} {#india-tibet-and-further-india-figs.-viii6-c16 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The problems connected with the history of the Indian "book" are so
vast and so complicated that it is impossible to deal with it in detail
in this book. The origin and development of the numerous Indian, Tibetan
and Further Indian scripts have been dealt with in]{.style_} [The
Alphabet]{.style_1}[, pp. 328---441.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-511}

::: calibre5
:::

## [INDIA: LANGUAGES AND SCRIPTS]{.style_2} {#india-languages-and-scripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Even if, for the sake of simplification, we accept the following
statement of a leading British student of Indian philology, F. W.
Thomas, it is only the beginning of the complication. "Linguistically
India is not, upon a superficial comparison, more complex than the area
with which it is usually compared, namely Europe exclusive of Russia. If
we set over against the Sanskrit and Indo-Aryan the Classical and
Romance languages, against the Munda and Dravidian the Celtic and
Teutonic, against the Iranian the Baltic and Slav, against the
Tibeto-Burman the Finno-Ugrian and Turkish, we have not much left on
either side, say the Albanian and Basque in Europe, the Austriac,
Burushaski, and Thai in India."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The main complication of India's linguistic problem lies not so much in
the fact that each of the main languages has numerous dialects, as in
the fact that not only may various scripts be used for a particular
language, but that the employment of these scripts presents various
combinations and alternatives: the Dev n gar character is used not only
for Sanskrit, but is also the main literary vehicle of various Indian
languages and dialects, amongst them these of the Western Hindi group,
of the Eastern Hindi varieties, of Mar th and Nep l ; at the same time,
Sanskrit, for which the Dev n gar is generally employed, is also written
or printed in all the chief alphabets. Hindustani can be written or
printed in both the Persian and Dev n gar characters.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Much of the Kashmir literature is written in Sanskrit and in the Dev n
gar character, but the Moslem Kashmir literature is written mainly in
the Arabic Persian character, and the Hindu Kashmir literature is
sometimes written in the ancient Kashmir script, termed rad . The
Moslems generally prefer the Arabic Persian alphabet (also for Punj b ,
Sindhi, Lahnda, and other languages), but the Bengali Moslems write
generally in the Beng l character. The Gurumukh is the character of the
Sikh sacred scriptures which are written in various Punj b and Sindhi
dialects and even in Hindi or Marath . Tamil is generally written in the
Tamil character, but some Moslems write it in the Arabic Persian
character; and the old Grantha alphabet of the Tamil country as well as
the Tulu-Malay am script were formerly used for Sanskrit only.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-512}

::: calibre5
:::

## [INDIA'S EARLIEST LITERATURE]{.style_2} {#indias-earliest-literature .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[This is not the place to discuss the early or later history of the
Indians or their early and later literatures. It may be
mentioned,]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000030.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-208}

[Fig. VIII---7]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Sanskrit manuscripts, written in Dev n gar , rad , and Nep l scripts:
a, Dev n gar (Alamkaraparisekara), c. 1800 (India Office Library,
E.2042); b, treatise on ritual in rad script, A.D. 1781 (ibidem, E.3326
a); c, Pañca Mah raksa s tr n , in Nep l script, A.D. 1677 (ibidem,
K.7754).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[however, that the immigration of Aryan tribes into India, is now
generally ascribed to the second half of the second millennium B.C., and
the ancient Vedic literature---the sacred scriptures of the ancient
Indo-Aryans, and undoubtedly the earliest religious literary monument of
Indo-European speech---is assigned to the same period, continuing, in
its later parts, into the first millennium B.C. It is a great literature
which grew in the course of many centuries, but for many generations it
was handed down orally.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest part of the Vedas, or]{.style_} [Rig-Veda,]{.style_1} [is
a kind of hymnbook, written in archaic language; the much later "Triple
Veda" consists of (1) the]{.style_} [Atharva-Veda,]{.style_1}
[containing charms, exorcisms and spells against wild animals, snakes,
pests and other diseases, as well as against poisons; marriage and
funeral hymns, and simple philosophical reflections; (2) the]{.style_}
[S ma-Veda,]{.style_1} [a book of tunes for verses taken mainly from the
Rig-Veda; and (3) the]{.style_} [Υajur-Veda,]{.style_1} [a ritual
manual.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Four other collections of books make up the religious literature of the
ancient Indians. The special ritual literature of the later period,
the]{.style_} [Br hmanas]{.style_1} [(perhaps derived from]{.style_}
[brahm ,]{.style_1} [meaning the prayer-energy, and]{.style_}
[mana,]{.style_1} [the hidden power which pervades the universe),
containing discussions among priests and serving for the training of
pupils; the]{.style_} [ranyakas,]{.style_1} ["forests texts" or books
"proper for study in the forests", which are an appendix to the
Brahmanas, and deal with ascetic practices, elaborate rituals, and
deeper professional discussions intended for Brahmans alone;
the]{.style_} [Upanishads,]{.style_1} [secret doctrines, or sessions of
intimate discussion, which are a sort of miscellaneous philosophical
literature, dealing with such matters as cosmogony, the essence of the
material and the spiritual, or the development of man and of other
living species; and the]{.style_} [Ved ngas,]{.style_1} [or Vedic
supplements, supplementary books of the Brahmanas in their exposition of
the older texts, dealing with miscellaneous subjects such as
lexicography, phonetics, etymology, grammar, astronomy and
astrology.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-513}

::: calibre5
:::

## [INDIA'S GREAT EPICS]{.style_2} {#indias-great-epics .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[This outline of the ancient Hindu literature will be concluded with a
reference to the two famous epic poems, the]{.style_} [Mah bh
rata,]{.style_1} [containing 100,000 couplets, and the]{.style_} [R m
yana,]{.style_1} [of 24,000 couplets. Actually, the first traces of epic
poetry are to be found in the Vedas, but it was only later that a whole
heroic literature grew up, sung by the sutas or bards at various
festivals. Many of these epics and ballads have been collected in
the]{.style_} [Mah bh rata]{.style_1} [(the longest epic poem in the
world), which seems to be the western Indian epic, and the]{.style_} [R
m yana,]{.style_1} [probably the eastern Indian epic.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Of a much later date (perhaps of the sixth to the eighth century A.D.)
are the]{.style_} [Pur nas]{.style_1} [(from Sanskrit]{.style_} [pur
na,]{.style_1} ["old"), or "Old Narratives", containing sacred Hindu
poetical works in Sanskrit. Then there are also ancient heroic songs,
fairy tales, and myths, together with a vast amount of gnomic poetry
which is perfectly executed.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Ancient Indian scientific work was not divorced from literature proper,
and verse has been the medium not only for biography and history, but
also for treatises on medicine, architecture, astronomy and astrology,
philosophy, and even law.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-514}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PRESERVED WRITTEN DOCUMENTS]{.style_2} {#preserved-written-documents .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Many thousands of Indian inscriptions, carved on stone, or engraved on
plates of copper, or on iron, gold, silver, brass, bronze, clay,
earthenware, bricks, crystals, ivory, and other hard material, have come
down to us. They are written in Sanskrit, P l , Sinhalese, Tamil,
Bengali, Or ya, Nep l , Telugu, Malayalam, and other languages. Numerous
ancient coins are also extant.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[On the other hand, relatively few documents written on perishable
materials, such as palm leaves or birch bark, have been preserved. The
earliest extant manuscripts on palm leaves seem to belong to the fourth
century A.D.---the most important being some fragments from Kashgar, in
the Godfrey Collection---or to the sixth century A.D., including the
famous Horiuzji manuscripts. These latter manuscripts are written in the
cursive hand of the Siddhamatrka character (known also as "nail-headed"
or "acute-angled" alphabet), which is the ancestor of Dev n gar , the
script mainly used for Sanskrit.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-515}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PALM-LEAF MANUSCRIPTS ([Figs. I---13](#calibre_link-47){.calibre13}; VIII---13, 15, 16)]{.style_2} {#palm-leaf-manuscripts-figs.-i13-viii13-15-16 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

["It cannot be doubted," wrote Buehler, "that the two large-leaved
palms, the]{.style_} [t at la]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[Borassus
flabelliformis]{.style_1}[) and the]{.style_} [t it li]{.style_1}
[(]{.style_}[Corypha umbraculifera, C]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}
[taliera]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[,]{.style_1} [which probably were
originally indigenous in South-India, but have now spread into the Punj
b, are the leaves which were principally employed" in India as writing
material. Hoernle has proved that this statement is not exact. In his
opinion, up to a certain point of time, the (true) Talipat
palm,]{.style_} [Corypha umbraculifera,]{.style_1} [also]{.style_}
[Corypha taliera]{.style_1}[, was the only palm, the leaves of which
were used throughout India, whereas the use of the leaves of the Palmyra
palm or Tarigach,]{.style_} [Borassus flabellifer]{.style_1} [(and
not]{.style_} [flabelliformis,]{.style_1} [as usually called), began at
a comparatively late period, and was, and is still, limited to the south
and east of India. The Palmyra palm was brought in from Africa, where it
grows wild and is called]{.style_} [Deleb]{.style_1}[, whereas the
original home of the Talipat palm is uncertain, though according to some
scholars it is indigenous to South India and grows wild in Ceylon and on
the Malabar coast, up to about the 13th Lat.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The following is the description of the two kinds of leaves as given by
Hoernle: Both the Corypha and the Borassus palms have plicate leaves
folding like a fan, consisting of a number of segments. Through the
middle of each segment, from end to end, runs a hard rib. The flabs on
both sides of the rib are tough and flexible; and these yield the
material which is prepared for writing purposes. They taper off from
their widest point towards both ends; accordingly suitable strips are
cut out from the middle, of such various lengths as the size of the
natural half-segment will admit. These strips are prepared for writing,
by boiling in water or milk; and finally, when wanted for writing a
book, the required number of strips are cut down to a uniform size.
Uniformity, however, was always more carefully attended to in point of
length than in point of breadth.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The manuscript leaves of the two palms can be easily distinguished from
one another. Those of the Talipat are thinner and broader, and possess
clearly marked cross-veins, in the form of rills, while the Palmyra palm
leaves rather present a pitted or pockmarked appearance. An analysis by
Hoernle of 134 manuscripts has shown that the width of the Palmyra palm
leaf never exceeds , and very rarely exceeds inches. The majority are
somewhat less than inches wide, but a width of less than 1 inch is very
rare. On the other hand, the usual width of the Talipat leaf varies
between and 3 inches, though leaves wider than inches are not common.
Manuscripts under inches wide are rare, and less than inches are very
exceptional. Thus, the width "is an almost absolute test; any leaf,
measuring and upwards is certain to be]{.style_} [Corypha
umbr.,]{.style_1} [while any leaf measuring or below, is almost certain
to be]{.style_} [Borassus fl."]{.style_1} [(Hoernle). Moreover, a
Talipat palm segment is much longer than a Palmyra palm segment, and it
tapers off far more gently than the latter, from its widest point to its
ends; besides, the half-segment (that is a segment divided
longitudinally along the central rib) of a Talipat palm leaf at its
widest point, may measure 3 inches, whereas in a Palymra leaf, it may
measure 2 inches, and usually measures less. Therefore it is possible to
cut much longer and wider strips from a Talipat leaf than from a Palmyra
leaf. As a rule, a prepared leaf measuring a length of more than 16
inches with a width of inches is more likely to be a Talipat palm
manuscript.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Finally, as Dr. Hoernle has remarked, of the Palmyra palm almost
everything can be used: its fruits and buds are edible, its juice i ;
made into liquor, its leaves can be used for domestic and literary
purposes, its trunks are shaped into boats. Of the Talipat palm, on the
other hand, neither the fruit is edible nor the juice
drinkable.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Of the 134 manuscripts examined by Hoernle, eighty-seven can be dated
with certainty (eighty-four of them bearing an actual date) and
forty-seven can be dated on palaeographic grounds; the three earliest
manuscripts belong to A.D. 450, 520, and 550, the latest to 1815. Only
two manuscripts dating before A.D. 1675 are written on Palmyra palm
leaves; they belong to 1587 and 1594, the former being only partially
(at the end) written on Palmyra leaves. On the whole, "we may take the
year A.D. 1675 as the epoch that marks the change from the use of
Corypha to that of Borassus\.... Borassus leaves were not used at all
for book writing in Northern India before the end of the sixteenth
century, nor used generally before about A.D. 1675."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Furthermore, according to Dr. Hoernle, the use of Palmyra leaves for
book writing was limited to North-Eastern India,]{.style_}
[i.e.]{.style_1} [to Beng l, Bihar, and Orissa. At the time when the use
of such leaves came in in North-East India (in the seventeenth century
A.D.), the use of paper had in Central and Western India long superseded
that of palm leaves, the latter having being discontinued by the middle
of the fifteenth century on the west coast, and in the interior
provinces some centuries earlier. In Beng l, the oldest preserved
palm-leaf manuscript belongs to A.D. 1360, but the Palmyra palm leaves
do not appear before the end of the sixteenth century. In Bihar, down to
the middle of the eighteenth century, only Talipat palm leaves were
employed as writing material for books. In both Beng l and Bihar paper
superseded the palm leaves in the early nineteenth century. In Orissa,
on the other hand, not a single manuscript is known to exist which is
written on Talipat palm leaves, all preserved palm-leaf manuscripts
being written on Palmyra leaves; it must be borne in mind, however, that
the earliest preserved Oriya manuscripts belong to the second half of
the seventeenth century, though manuscripts written in Oriya characters
probably already existed in the fifteenth century.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In South India, the Talipat palm leaves were used in very early times,
and also the Palmyra leaves were employed earlier than in other Indian
regions. "The earliest recorded Borassus manuscript may be referred to
about A.D. 1550, and since that time Borassus is generally, though not
exclusively, made use of, in Southern India, for book writing, Corypha
also being used occasionally." In Ceylon, on the other hand, Talipat
leaves were the predominant writing material for books until relatively
recent times.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The majority of the preserved Indian manuscripts belong to the ninth
and the following centuries. Numerous palm-leaf manuscripts, dating from
the tenth, eleventh and following centuries, which were recovered in
Gujarat, Rajputana and North Deccan, are written in the Dev n gar
script. According to Burnell, the oldest manuscript found in South India
is dated A.D. 1428.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-516}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BIRCH BARK WRITING MATERIAL FOR BOOKS]{.style_2} {#birch-bark-writing-material-for-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest extant Indian manuscript written on birch bark is the
Kharoshthi manuscript referred to on p. 354. It is variously assigned to
the first or second century A.D. Some fragments of it are preserved in
Paris, others in Leningrad. It is written on strips of bark which
measure about eight inches in width, but vary in length, one being over
four feet long. This fact has induced Hoernle to suggest that anciently
the strips of bark were used in their full size, perhaps in the form of
rolls similar to the Greek papyrus rolls. As the Kharoshthi manuscript
was written in a "period of a still strong Greek influence \... its
apparently roll-like form may be due to that influence" (Hoernle). Its
writing is in horizontal lines running parallel to the narrow side of
the strip.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The well-known]{.style_} [Bower Manuscripts]{.style_1} [are the
earliest extant documents written in Brahmi script on birch bark. They
were acquired by Lieutenant Bower in 1889 in the course of his journey
through Kucha (Eastern Turkestan). These manuscripts are written in
Sanskrit in a cursive round hand of the eastern Gupta variety of the
early Indian character. The]{.style_} [Bower Manuscripts]{.style_1}
[consist of several distinct works, such as medical treatises,
proverbial sayings and the like. They were edited in the years
1893---1912 by Hoernle.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[They have been assigned to A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 450, and are
in the typical Indian p th form, oblong like the Talipat palm leaf, with
a string hole; there are two distinct sizes, inches by inch, and 9
inches by 2 inches, but both imitate the Talipat leaf. (The Indian p th
book consists of separate leaves, not bound in "a book", but tied
together in a bundle, therefore generally the leaves have string holes
for the passage of the tying string.) The third earliest birch-bark
manuscript is the]{.style_} [Bakhsh l MS]{.style_1}[., assigned to the
tenth or eleventh century A.D. It measures about seven by four inches.
Thus, while the original width of the bark strip has been retained, its
length was cut up into smaller pieces (of about four inches each).
Nevertheless, the writing was made to run parallel to the narrow side of
the]{.style_} [original]{.style_1} [strip, though this narrow side
became the longer side of the leaves. The general form of the]{.style_}
[Bakhsh l MS.]{.style_1} [is the p th , consisting of a large number of
separate oblong leaves, though the oblong is not so decidedly elongated
as in the palm leaf, and the string holes are wanting, probably being
thought too risky for the material.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In still later times the strips of bark were cut into pieces of about
twelve inches, which were folded in the middle, making up a kind of
folio of two leaves or four pages. The writing was now made to run
parallel to the narrow side of the page, so that if the "folios" were
unfolded into the original strip, the writing would appear on each
"folio" as being in two columns with lines running parallel to the
longer side of the strip. In other words, the modern book form appears
to have been introduced.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-517}

::: calibre5
:::

## [INDIAN PAPER MANUSCRIPTS]{.style_2} {#indian-paper-manuscripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest of all preserved Indian paper manuscripts seems to be one
of the Calcutta Sanskrit College (]{.style_}[Library
Catalogue]{.style_1}[, No. 582): it is dated A.D. 1231. Another very
early paper manuscript is dated A.D. 1343. "They are both written in a
distinctly western type of N g r , and must have been written somewhere
in the NorthWest Provinces." They "point to their having been made in
imitation of such a birch-bark prototype as the]{.style_} [Bakhsh l
MS]{.style_1}[. The oldest \... has exactly the same squarish shape; it
measures 6 × 4 inches. The next oldest \... is rather more oblong,
measuring inches, but it has no string hole\.... It seems permissible to
conclude that when paper came into use, its leaves were cut and treated
in imitation of birch-bark book leaves in those parts of India where
birch-bark was the common writing material, and that it was cut and
treated in imitation of palm-leaf, wherever the latter material was used
for book-writing" (Hoernle).]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000031.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. VIII---8]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Marath and Gurumukh manuscripts. a, Marath manuscript in Modi script:
Notes on Nagpur, c. 1800 (India Office Library, Mar. B.15); b, Gurumukh
manuscript: Janam s hk , 1750 (ibidem, Panj. B.40).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Very early manuscripts from the Central Asian Collections called after
Weber and Macartney, which were edited by Dr. Hoernle in the closing
years of the last century, are written in Indian Gupta characters
(see]{.style_} [The Alphabet]{.style_1}[, pp. 345 ff.), and in Hoernle's
opinion, they must have been written by native Indians migrated to
Kuchar. These manuscripts consist of separate, elongated oblong leaves,
from to inches wide, with a string hole, and with the writing running
parallel to the longer side of the leaf. "Everything points to the
inscribed Corypha leaf as model, not even to a Borassus leaf." Hoernle
has suggested that the reason of the adoption by the people of Northern
India and of Central Asia of the shape of palm leaves for their paper
books lies in the sanction of immemorial usage of the palm leaf among
the literary classes of India, the learned and the "religious", those
who occupied themselves with the composing and copying of books; and
with the speed of Indian culture, through Buddhist propaganda, its
fashions of writing went with it beyond the borders of India.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In Western India paper superseded the palm leaf as writing material for
books faster and more thoroughly than in Eastern India. About the middle
of the fifteenth century (A.D.) in Western India palm leaf has ceased to
be used as the main writing material for books; apparently, the latest
palm-leaf manuscripts are dated A.D. 1400 and 1449. In Eastern India for
some centuries both forms of books were employed: although there was a
steady and marked rise in the number of paper manuscripts, the use of
palm leaves as writing material for books lingered on in Beng l and Bih
r until the early nineteenth century, and in Orissa until our own day.
The earliest Eastern Indian paper manuscript is a Maithil (Bih r)
manuscript dated A.D. 1354; the earliest Beng l paper manuscript is
dated 1404.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is generally agreed that the introduction of paper into India
occurred in the eleventh century A.D., and was due to the Moslems. "It
only very slowly and gradually displaced the Corypha palm-leaf, the use
of which had the sanction of age and religion among the conservative
Indian literates: they looked with distrust upon the product of the
Mlecchas." Indeed, until quite recent times the Indian paper-mills were
in the hands of the Moslems. There is no indigenous term for "paper";
the Hind word]{.style_} [k gaj]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [k
gad]{.style_1} [is a corruption of the Persian]{.style_} [k
ghaz,]{.style_1} [itself a derivation from the Chinese word]{.style_}
[kog-dz,]{.style_1} [the term for "paper made of the bark of the
paper-mulberry tree".]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000032.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. VIII--9 Limb , Hindi, and Gujar ti manuscripts, a, Limb
manuscript: alphabet, c. 1800 (India Office Library, Hodgson Collection,
87); b, Hind manuscript in Kaithi script: Santasagara, A.D. 1794
(ibidem, MS. Hin. B.55); c, Gujar ti: Pavagadhano garabo, c A.D. 1750
(ibidem, MSS. Guj. 17).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-518}

## [LITERARY SOURCES]{.style_2} {#literary-sources .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Hoernle has proved that the common assumption that the early Indian
words]{.style_} [t la]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [t li]{.style_1}
[indicate the Palmyra and the Talipat palms, respectively, is not
exact,]{.style_} [t la]{.style_1} [being simply the generic name of any
palm.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Chinese traveller Hiuen Tsiang (seventh century A.D.) stated that
"in all the countries of India the leaves of the Talipat palm are
everywhere used for writing on". He also mentions the existence of a
forest of Talipat trees near Konkanapura (the place has not yet been
identified), in South India. In the forest there was a
Buddhist]{.style_} [st pa]{.style_1}[. It is known that writing was
mainly carried on in Buddhist and other monasteries; some of them must
have possessed large plantations of Talipat palms.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Al-B run , the famous Moslem geographer (A.D. 973---1043), writes: "The
Hindus have in the south of their country a slender tree like the date
and coconut palms, bearing edible fruits, and leaves of the length of
one yard, and as broad as three fingers, one put beside the other. They
call these leaves]{.style_} [t r ,]{.style_1} [and write on them. They
bind a book of these leaves together by a cord on which they are
arranged, the cord going through all the leaves by a hole in the middle
of each." Further on, he says: "In Central and Northern India people use
the bark of the]{.style_} [t z]{.style_1} [tree. It is called]{.style_}
[bh rja.]{.style_1} [They take a piece one yard long and as broad as the
outstretched fingers of the hand, or somewhat less \[about eight
inches\] and prepare it in various ways. They oil and polish it so as to
make it hard and smooth, and then they write on it. Their letters, and
whatever else they have to write, they write on the bark of
the]{.style_} [t z]{.style_1} [tree." Although al-B run 's account is
not completely clear and---at least in Dr. Hoernle's opinion---contain
some misunderstandings and inaccuracies, it is nevertheless very
important, particularly if we consider the scanty survival of birch-bark
manuscripts. We may suppose that the vast majority of such manuscripts,
as indeed also of palm-leaf manuscripts, have been destroyed by action
of time and climate or through the agency of men---especially during the
political or religious troubles, which so frequently convulsed the
Indian continent: during the Moslem conquest, for instance, large
destructions of Hindu manuscripts are reported to have taken
place.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-519}

::: calibre5
:::

::: calibre15
:::

## [VERNACULAR BOOK PRODUCTIONS []{#calibre_link-520 .calibre14}([Figs. VIII---7](#calibre_link-208){.calibre13}---12)]{.style_2} {#vernacular-book-productions-figs.-viii712 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In India, two important linguistic events characterized the eleventh
and twelfth centuries A.D.: (1) the Moslem conquest brought the
Arabic-Persian script and language into use, and thus brought into being
a serious competitor to Sanskrit and its script, Dev n gar , as the main
literary language and the]{.style_} [lingua franca.]{.style_1} [(2) The
decadence of Sanskrit as the only literary vehicle; this was probably
one of the main reasons for the development of a few Indian vernaculars
into literary languages.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000033.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-209}

[Fig. VIII--10]{.style_1}

[Beng li and Kannada manuscripts. (Above) Beng li: Svarodaya, c. 1780
(India Office Library, MSS. Ben. F.3); (below) Kannada: Vireka
Chintamanya, c. 1790 (ibidem MSS. Kan. C.I).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-521}

## [NORTH-EASTERN INDIA ([Figs. I---13](#calibre_link-47){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [below]{.style_2}[; VIII---10,]{.style_2} [above]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#north-eastern-india-figs.-i13-below-viii10-above .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest proto-Bengali manuscripts belong to the eleventh or
twelfth centuries A.D. The early Nepali or New r character was closely
connected with the proto-Bengali script, and it maybe noticed that the
earliest New r written documents belong to the twelfth century. New r
has a considerable literature consisting of commentaries on, or
translations of, Sanskrit Buddhist works, dictionaries, grammars, and
dramatic works. The oldest work of an historical nature was written in
the fourteenth century. Modern Bengali literature goes back at least to
the fifteenth century A.D.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Oriya, Bih r , and Assamese---all sister languages of Bengali,
belonging to the eastern group of the Indo-Aryan linguistic
family---have rich literatures. Various scripts are employed, and some
of them, for instance Oriya, are peculiar. The peculiar shape of Oriya
letters seems to be due to the fact already mentioned, that the long and
narrow, and excessively fragile Talipat palm leaves were the only
writing material in ancient Odra as in other parts of the sea-coast
provinces of southern India. The local scribes employing an iron stilus
to scratch the letters---the scratches being later filled in with ink
rubbed on the surface of the leaf---were compelled to avoid long
straight lines, because any scratch in the direction of the longitudinal
fibre would split the palm leaf. Thus apparently arose the rounded
shapes of the Oriya letters. One variety of the Oriya writing, called Br
hm n (owing this name to the Brahmans of Orissa, who are generally the
writers of the Oriya]{.style_} [sastras]{.style_1} [or religious works),
is still mainly employed for writing on palm leaves.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The ancient non-Indo-Aryan Manipuris, using Manipuri or Meithei, a
Kuki-chin speech of the Tibeto-Burman linguistic branch, also have a
considerable literature,]{.style_} [Takhelgnamba]{.style_1}
[and]{.style_} [Samsokgnamba]{.style_1} [being their most important
ancient books.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-522}

::: calibre5
:::

## [NORTH-WESTERN INDIA ([Figs. VIII--6](#calibre_link-204){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [c]{.style_2}[, 9)]{.style_2} {#north-western-india-figs.-viii6-c-9 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Hindi and Gujar t are the most important Indian vernacular literatures
of the north-western and central groups of the IndoAryan languages.
There is also a vast Urdu literature, but this is mainly modern. Of
particular interest is the Sikh religious literature, composed---as
already mentioned---in various dialects belonging to Punjabi and other
important Indo-Aryan languages, and written in the Gurumukh character,
the invention of which is traditionally ascribed to A gad (the second
Sikh Guru (1538---52)). It is said that A gad found that Sikh hymns,
written hitherto in Landa character (see]{.style_} [The
Alphabet,]{.style_1} [p. 376), were liable to be misread, and therefore
he improved the script and enabled it to record accurately the holy
literature of the Sikhs.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000035.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-210}

[Fig. VIII--11]{.style_1}

[Lepcha and Telegu manuscripts. (Left) Lepcha manuscript, c. 1800 (India
Office Library, Hodgson Collection, 81); (right) Telegu,]{.style_1}

[Urzees, A.D. 1820 (ibidem, Tel. D.6).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-523}

## [DRAVIDIAN BOOKS []{#calibre_link-524 .calibre14}([Figs. VIII---10](#calibre_link-209){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [below]{.style_2}[; 11,]{.style_2} [right]{.style_2}[; 13,]{.style_2} [lowest leaf]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#dravidian-books-figs.-viii10-below-11-right-13-lowest-leaf .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Of the four main Dravidian languages (see]{.style_} [The
Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp. 378---87), Tamil, spoken by a population of
about 18,000,000, possesses by far the most important literature.
"Possessing a civilization as early as, if not earlier than, the Aryan,
the Tamils, the chief of the Dravidian people, were the last to be
Aryanized. Hence their literature shows least trace of Sanskrit
influence. Even in pre-Christian days we hear of three Sangams
(academies of scholars) at Wadur , the capital of the \[ancient\] Pandya
\[kingdom\], and how they adjudicated on new literary works\.... The
earliest extant Tamil work is the]{.style_} [Tol k p-piyam,]{.style_1}
[a versified grammar of about the first century A.D. But the literature
really begins with the]{.style_} [Kural]{.style_1} [of Tiru-Vulluvar"
(J. C. Ghosh).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The]{.style_} [Kural,]{.style_1} [a didactic poem, is assigned to the
period between the first and the fifth centuries A.D.; it is the most
important classical work of the Dravidians and it is even considered as
a kind of Tamil Veda.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Tamil possesses a copious body of literary texts, excellently
preserved, though in relatively late copies. These texts antedate the
earliest Tamil inscriptions by several centuries---excluding, however,
the so-called Dravidi inscriptions. The position regarding Kanarese or
Kannada is quite different: while the earliest Kanarese literary text
preserved, the]{.style_} [Kavirajamarga]{.style_1}[, dates from the
latter part of the ninth century (A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 877),
the earliest Kanarese inscription yet found, at Halmidi, is dated
A.D.]{.style_} [c.]{.style_1} [450.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[There are not many Dravidian literary remains extant, but the continued
employment of various very ancient literary hands may be regarded as
evidence that even in ancient times the main Dravidian peoples wrote and
read books.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Grantha (see,]{.style_} [e.g.]{.style_1}[, p. 355) is one of the most
ancient and most important scripts of South India. The term Grantha,
which already appears in the fourteenth century A.D., indicates that
this character was used for writing books. The oldest modern Grantha
manuscript extant belongs to the end of the sixteenth century B.C. There
are at present two Grantha varieties: the Brahmanic or "square" hand,
used chiefly at Tanjore, and the "round" or Jain hand, used by the Jains
still remaining near Arcot and Madras: the latter has preserved the
original characteristics of the early Grantha far better.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000036.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. VIII--12]{.style_1}

[Indian and Malayan manuscripts written in Persian-Arabic script, a
Urdu: Amwaj-i-kh di, A.D. 1667 (India Office Library, Hindust]{.style_1}

[B.2.); b, Malay: Shair jaran Tamas, c. 1800 (ibidem, Malay, D.6); c,
Sindhi: Shab-i-Mi'r j, A.D. 1807 (ibidem, Sindhi 14).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Tulu-Malay am character seems to have been formed in the eighth or
ninth century A.D. out of the Grantha, and like it, was originally used
only for writing Sanskrit.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Va eluttu, or "round hand", perhaps an ancient cursive or literary
hand of the Tamil character, was once widely used in all South India
south of Tanjore, and also in South Malabar and Travancore where it
still exists though in exceedingly limited use, and in a more modern
form. The Mappi as of the neighbourhood of Tellicherry and in the
islands used Va eluttu until modern times, when it was superseded by a
modified Arabic alphabet.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[See]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp. 307---8.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-525}

::: calibre5
:::

## [TIBETAN BOOKS []{#calibre_link-526 .calibre14}([Fig. VIII---11](#calibre_link-210){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [left]{.style_2}[, and 14, a)]{.style_2} {#tibetan-books-fig.-viii11-left-and-14-a .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The connection of Tibet with India is old and intimate. Directly or
indirectly, it borrowed from India the Buddhist religion, together with
its sacred scriptures and its writing. Moreover, intimate acquaintance
with Buddhism may also have been acquired by the Tibetans through their
invasion and conquest of Eastern Turkestan (where they found numerous
Buddhist monasteries and libraries in existence), as well as through
relations with China.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[With the establishment of the Tibetan state and of its capital at
Lha-sa (in the first half of the seventh century A.D.), the Tibetans
took kindly to writing and acquired an aptitude for literature. The
earliest extant Tibetan books belong to the latter part of the seventh
century A.D. and are mainly translations of Sanskrit books, but some of
these translations are extremely important, as they preserve works which
have been lost in their original language.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The cultural influence of the Tibetans on the surrounding peoples may
be seen from the fact that some of these peoples, such as the Lepchas,
of the State of Sikkim, adapted the Tibetan script to their own speech.
Tibetan writing was adapted also to the Nam language ---whose existence
was unknown until the recent discovery of Central Asian manuscripts, to
Mongolian (the Tibetan-Mongolian script being known as Hphags-pa) and
even to Chinese: three Chinese Buddhist manuscripts written in Tibetan
scripts were published in the years 1926---9.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000037.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-48}

[[Fig. VIII--13](#calibre_link-211){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) P li manuscript: a page, in square Burmese script, from the
sacred Buddhist book Kammuwa; (below) P li and Malay lam manuscripts on
palm-leaf; upper two leaves: Burmese P li (Mah vamsa, c. 1800) (India
Office Library, Pali 91); lowest leaf: Malayalam (Bh s ilparatanam, c.
1800) (ibidem, Mal. 3).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-527}

## [P LI LITERATURE ([Figs. I---13](#calibre_link-47){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [above]{.style_2}[; and VIII---13)]{.style_2} {#p-li-literature-figs.-i13-above-and-viii13 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The term "P li" means actually the "text", the text]{.style_} [par
excellence]{.style_1} [, the text of the Hinay na Buddhist scriptures,
but it indicates also the language in which the sacred scriptures of
Buddhism are recorded, and the script in which they are written. The P
li earlier scriptures (if the voluminous commentaries are disregarded)
contain a literature about double the size of the Bible, but if its
repetitions were discounted it would be somewhat smaller than the Bible.
It consists of three]{.style_} [Pitakas]{.style_1} [or "baskets" or
collections (hence]{.style_} [Tripitaka]{.style_1}[, "Three Baskets").
They are supposed to be the teachings of Buddha, which for many
generations were handed down orally. Probably at the end of the first
century B.C. (traditionally 80 B.C.) they were committed to
writing.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The first Pitaka, known as "Profound Purity", mainly for the laity, is
the]{.style_} [Vinaya]{.style_1}[, dealing with discipline, but
including also the]{.style_} [Mah vagga]{.style_1}[, a history of the
founding of the order of Buddhism, and the exposition of monastic rules.
The second, "Profound Mystery", for devotees such as the monks, is
the]{.style_} [S tra]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [Sutta Pitaka,]{.style_1}
[or collection of teachings, consisting mainly of dialogues between the
Buddha and various interlocutors, of books of meditation and devotion,
sayings by the Master, poems, fairy-tales and fables, stories about
saints, and so on. The third Pitaka, "Profound Spirituality", is a
metaphysical section known as]{.style_} [Abhidhamma]{.style_1}[, and is
the dogmatic statement of the psychological and philosophical
"discriminations", containing speculations and discussions on various
subjects.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Other ancient books written in the P li language are the]{.style_} [Mah
vansa]{.style_1}[, an historical work, the]{.style_}
[Dhammapada]{.style_1} [and the]{.style_} [Suttanipâta]{.style_1}[,
lofty and artistic ethical and religious verse; the highly
literary]{.style_} [J taka]{.style_1} [book of 547 stories of Buddha's
prior incarnations in various animal and human forms; the beautiful
poetic compositions of the]{.style_} [Ther -g tha]{.style_1}
[and]{.style_} [Ther -g tha]{.style_1}[, or "Songs of the Monks" and
"Songs of the Nuns"; the]{.style_} [Milinda-Pañha]{.style_1}[, which
contain supposed dialogues of the Buddhist monk N gasena with the Greek
king Menander.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-528}

::: calibre5
:::

::: calibre15
:::

## [BUDDHISM'S PART IN ASIA'S CULTURAL HISTORY]{.style_2} {#buddhisms-part-in-asias-cultural-history .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is well known that the cultural expansion of India into Ceylon,
Tibet, Burma, Cambodia, Cochin China, Siam, Malaya, Indonesia, was due
to a large extent to Buddhism. This religion penetrated deep into China,
Korea and Japan.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The scripts of the Buddhist monks became the vehicle of their culture,
and widespread organization. The Austro-Asiatic peoples of south-eastern
and far-eastern Asia fell into line with the spiritual thought emanating
from India, when they adopted and gradually assimilated Buddhism in one
form or another. A unique empire was built up: an empire, based not on
political and military unity, but on the common cultural and spiritual
life of politically more or less independent peoples.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The culture of Buddhist India has been one of the great civilizing and
humanizing agencies evolved by man. Buddhism, indeed, played a part in
Asia similar to that of Roman Christianity in Europe in the Middle Ages
(see pp. 205 f., 264 ff.). It must be stressed, moreover, that
Pali-Buddhism, that is the particular form of Buddhism which is based on
the sacred Pali books brought to Indo-China from Ceylon, was only a
reinforcing of earlier forms of Indian Buddhism. Already before A.D.
500, various kingdoms arose in Indo-China and Indonesia, ruled by Hindu
dynasties. In certain regions, indeed, the influence of Buddhism had
become so deeply rooted, that whereas in India, its place of origin,
where it suffered the effects of Moslem destruction, it ultimately gave
way to Hinduism, in Tibet, Ceylon, Siam and Indo-China, Korea, and
partly China and Japan, the Buddhist religion has been preserved up to
the present day. Buddhism, Buddhist literature and culture advanced hand
in hand. The scripts and the scriptures were the vehicles by which the
religion and the culture were spread.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-529}

::: calibre5
:::

## [NUMEROUS INTERESTING PROBLEMS: CEYLON, INDO-CHINA, SIAM, BURMA, INDONESIA]{.style_2} {#numerous-interesting-problems-ceylon-indo-china-siam-burma-indonesia .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-213}[([Figs.
VIII---14](#calibre_link-212){.calibre9}\--16)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Interesting though it may be, we shall not be able to deal with the
history of the Sinhalese books; of the books of the IndoChinese ancient
peoples---the Chams and the Khmers; of the ancient and modern Burmese
peoples---the Mons, the Pyu, the Karens, the Taungthu, the Yao, and
other peoples; of the numerous Shan or Thai peoples, including the
modern Siamese. (With regard to the Pyu, for instance, nothing was known
of this people and its language until, through the discovery in recent
times of numerous inscriptions---one even in four languages---of a
manuscript of twenty gold leaves containing extracts of the Pali canon,
of Sanskrit-Pyu bilinguals, and of other material, scholarship was
enabled to reconstruct the story of an eminent people.) Neither shall we
discuss the numerous problems connected with the history of "the book"
in relation to the Indonesian peoples or to the native peoples of the
Philippine Islands: some of these problems have already, however, been
mentioned in Chapter I, others have been examined in The Alphabet, pp.
401---41.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In Siam, until quite recent times, the Buddhist monasteries were the
main seats of learning, and almost the only Siamese institutions which
preserved written documents. Sacred works were written on Corypha palm
leaves, their edges being gilded or painted with vermilion, and the
leaves threaded on strings and folded like a fan. More important copies
of the religious books were engraved on ivory tablets.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000038.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-212}

[[Fig. VIII---14](#calibre_link-213){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a, Tibetan manuscript (India Office Library, Sir Aurel Stein's Central
Asian Collection); b, portion of the Siamese Patimokkha manuscript; c,
Javanese manuscript: Damar wulan, A.D. 1790 (India Office Library, Jav.
C1).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-530}

## [FORMS OF BOOKS INFLUENCED BY SOCIAL CONDITIONS]{.style_2} {#forms-of-books-influenced-by-social-conditions .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Fig. I---13---Fig. I---14]{.style_} [b]{.style_1}[;
VIII---13---16)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The material used for such work was an indication of the social
standing of the person for whom the book or the written document was
intended; the king's letters, for instance, were engraved on sheets of
gold when they were sent to princes, and written on paper, either black
or white, when addressed to lesser people. Corypha palm leaves, however,
were the material chiefly used for writing books, and, strangely enough,
the peculiar shapes of the modern Burmese characters are due mainly to
this fact.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the past the Burmese, in their more elegant books, wrote on sheets
of ivory, or on very fine Palmyra leaves. The ivory was stained black,
and the margins were ornamented with gilding, while the characters were
enamelled or gilt. On the Palmyra leaves, the characters were in general
of black enamel, and the leaves and margins were painted with flowers in
various bright colours.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-531}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BALI AND JAVA]{.style_2} {#bali-and-java .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Although only two miles separate the island of Bali (ninety miles by
fifty-five miles; 1,300,000 inhabitants) from Java, there is a curious
cultural break between them. Bali was never submerged by Islam, and
certain aspects of the ancient Hindu culture still survive here in full
vigour.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[On the island of Bali, some natives still use an iron stilus and cut
the symbols on a prepared palm leaf, in the same manner as was done in
ancient Odra (see p. 360 f.). This practice still obtains to a certain
extent in some parts of the more eastern portion of Java, and was no
doubt at a former period general throughout the island. Nowadays,
however, the Javanese usually write with Indian ink upon paper
manufactured by themselves, and sometimes on European or Chinese
paper.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-532}

::: calibre5
:::

## [SUMATRA AND CELEBES ([Figs. I---10](#calibre_link-38){.calibre13} and 11)]{.style_2} {#sumatra-and-celebes-figs.-i10-and-11 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The natives of these islands write by beginning at the bottom of the
page at the left-hand side, and placing letter above letter in a
vertical column till they reach the top, when they return to the bottom;
the columns follow each other from left to right. This curious method
has been explained by the fact that the material that had been---and is
still to some extent---used to write upon, consists of long strips of
bamboo welded by "beating" them together, then folded together,
accordion-like, between wooden covers, and bound together with a string
of woven rushes.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000039.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-49}

[[Fig. VIII--15](#calibre_link-214){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

[(Above) Burmese manuscript on palin-leaf: The evil Nats. 1805 (India
Office Library, Burm. 3449); (below) Siamese manuscript: Thao]{.style_1}

[Sawatthi racha (ibidem, Siam. 14).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Originally, the writing was from left to right in horizontal lines, one
line following the other, as in modern European writing, from top to
bottom. The completed book, however, when bound up was held upright for
purposes of reading at an angle of ninety degrees, so that the original
successive horizontal lines from left to right and from top to bottom
appeared as vertical columns consisting of letters written one above the
other from the bottom to the top; the columns consequently follow each
other from left to right.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Instead of bamboo strips, long strips of thin bark of trees are
sometimes used. As already mentioned, in Chapter I, the ancient books of
Sumatran peoples are written in brilliant ink on a kind of paper made of
tree bark. Dr. P. V. Voorhoeve, the leading authority in this field, has
remarked that while the use of books consisting of a long strip of
writing material, folded up like a concertina and written in lines
parallel to the folds, is not uncommon in Eastern Asia (see, for
instance, p. 404 f. and]{.style_} [passim]{.style_1}[), the use of
prepared tree bark for this purpose appears to be restricted to Sumatra.
This kind of book---known in North Sumatra, in Java, and in other
countries, with its Sanskrit term]{.style_} [pustaka]{.style_1}[, and in
South Sumatra as]{.style_} [pustaha]{.style_1}[---is still employed
among the Bataks, inhabiting North Sumatra, for magic and divination
texts. Dr. Winkler, a German missionary doctor living amongst the
Bataks, defined the]{.style_} [pustaka]{.style_1} [as a notebook of a
Batak medicine-man (]{.style_}[datu]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[,]{.style_1}
[dictated to his pupils or copied by them as a supplement to oral
instruction. An interesting]{.style_} [pustaka]{.style_1} [has been
reproduced in Chapter I ([Fig. I---11](#calibre_link-39){.calibre9};
another Batak divination book on bark is reproduced on [Fig.
I---10](#calibre_link-38){.calibre9}). The Batak]{.style_}
[pustaka]{.style_1} [may deal with magic medicine, domestic remedies,
"the art" of destroying life, and so on. A specimen of aggressive magic
(]{.style_}[pan]{.style_1}[-]{.style_}[gulubalang]{.style_1} [) is thus
explained by Voorhoeve: "The magician takes a toad and a lizard, feeds
them on his magic medicine, makes them wear sashes of earth-worms and
yokes them to a small plough. Out of the rib of a palm-leaf he makes a
whip with a hibiscus flower bound at its top by means of three-coloured
thread. Stark naked he goes to the battlefie'd and makes them plough
seven furrows. Then he throws away his whip and goes home. This practice
will cause storm and darkness that drive the approaching enemy
back."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In South Sumatra, apart from divination texts,]{.style_}
[pustahas]{.style_1} [were also used for codes of law and for legends,
but apparently they are no longer made nowadays. Voorhoeve considers the
collection of Van der Tuuk (now partly in Amsterdam, at the Indian
Institute, and partly in the University Library, at Leyden) as the most
complete collection of]{.style_} [pustakas]{.style_1}[. The best
collection in England is that of The John Rylands Library, at
Manchester, containing fourteen Batak books written on tree bark, nine
on bamboo, and three on paper. (See P. Voorhoeve,]{.style_} [Batak Bark
Books]{.style_1}[, "BULL. OF THE JOHN RYL. LIBR.," Manchester, vol. 33,
No. 2, March, 1951.)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000040.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-533}

## [BOOKBINDINGS []{#calibre_link-534 .calibre14}([Fig. VII--16](#calibre_link-215){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#bookbindings-fig.-vii16 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The bookbindings of central and southern Asiatic peoples in the past
differed totally from those which will be described in the book
on]{.style_} [Illumination and Binding;]{.style_1} [in fact, strictly
speaking, particularly from the modern standpoint, they are not
"bookbindings".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the "binding", the palm leaves were laid one over the other. They
were not sewn, as our books are, but were kept together by two cords or
twines. These were laced through two holes made in each of the leaves,
as well as in the lower covering, and were fastened to the upper
covering of the book by two knobs, often formed of precious metal, or
crystal, or other expensive material. Both boards were made of hard
wood, generally obtained from the jack tree.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Moreover, in the finer "bindings", the boards were beautifully
ornamented, painted and lacquered. Sometimes the edges of the leaves
were cut smooth and gilt and the title written on the upper board. More
elegant books were wrapped up in silk cloth, and bound round by a
garter, on which, sometimes, the title of the book was woven
in.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Some "bindings" were rather strange. The old East India Company's
library possessed a very elegant Burmese P li book, presented by Col.
Clifford, which was covered with coloured oriental paper painted with
grotesque figures; a Batak book made and presented by a cannibal chief
Munto Panei, which was bound with plain covers; and a book covered with
leather, dressed with the hair on. See also [Fig.
I---11](#calibre_link-39){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[above]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-535}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BIBLIOGRAPHY]{.style_2} {#bibliography-8 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[See]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp. 402, 412, 418, 431---2,
439---40.]{.style_}
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: {#calibre_link-216 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-15}

::: calibre7
:::

### [CHAPTER IX]{.style_2} {#chapter-ix .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

### [OUTLYING REGIONS (11) : THE FAR EAST AND PRE-COLUMBIAN AMERICA]{.style_2} {#outlying-regions-11-the-far-east-and-pre-columbian-america .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-536}

## [China []{#calibre_link-218 .calibre14}([Figs. IX---1](#calibre_link-217){.calibre13}---5, and 9)]{.style_2} {#china-figs.-ix15-and-9 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE first country to which we might naturally look for an independent
development of the book, a country whose civilization approaches in
antiquity those of Mesopotamia and Egypt, is China. Chinese civilization
is in one respect the oldest in the world, namely, it has come down to
us from a remote antiquity with relatively few changes, at least in
comparision with those of other countries. In other words, China is the
land of arrested development. To take only one instance, the evolution
of Chinese writing (see]{.style_} [The Alphabet]{.style_1}[, pp.
98---119) is in certain respects all but imperceptible, except for its
external evolution, notwithstanding its employment for almost four
thousand years by a literary nation comprising one-fifth of the
population of the world, in a country larger than the European
continent. Centuries before the Christian Era the inhabitants of China
had their settled civilization and religion. Although they were
sometimes invaded by more restless tribes, sometimes even conquered,
their culture and learning, their customs and traditions tamed their
conquerors. An old saying declares, "China is a sea that salts all
rivers flowing into it."]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-537}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ANCIENT CHINESE LITERATURE]{.style_2} {#ancient-chinese-literature .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In far distant ages the Chinese were respectfully mentioned by other
peoples as gifted scholars and most skilful artists and workers. The
Chinese themselves reverence literature above all things, but we must be
content to take the facts as we find them, and admit that China gives us
no aid in carrying back the authentic history of her literature for
anything like the time for which we have satisfactory evidence from
Egypt or Mesopotamia.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Although the oracle bone inscriptions ([Fig.
I---14](#calibre_link-51){.calibre9},]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[) cannot
be regarded as books, the pictographic form of certain characters which
appear on these inscriptions, confirms, according to Hummel, the view
based on literary references that books existed at that time, i.e. in
the fourteenth and the thirteenth centuries B.C. For instance, the
word]{.style_} [ts' ê]{.style_1}[, which nowadays may mean "volume",
appears both on the divination bones and on early bronzes. "The
pictograph represents several narrow slips of wood laid side by side and
held together by two cords, one near the top, another near the bottom.
This is the interpretation of the character given in the
dictionary]{.style_} [Shuo-wên."]{.style_1} [Hummel mentions that the
character]{.style_} [shu]{.style_1}[, meaning "to write" (later a noun
meaning "book"), is represented on at least two bronzes of the ninth
century B.C. as a hand holding some kind of pen to make marks on a
tablet.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Thus it may be assumed that in very early times the Chinese had already
quantities of books and a written language adequate to express any and
all human ideas, but at first, and for many centuries, "the book" was a
rarity; most of the school work done by children consisted in learning
by heart. Whole books of moral teachings, pious maxims, and historical
myths were thus committed to memory. Even in modern times, owing to the
complexity of Chinese writing, the old system of teaching was employed
in village schools; the teacher stood behind the class, and the children
recited in chorus the appointed lesson. They thus learned from his
spoken word instead of from books, the reading from a book being of the
nature of a treat for advanced students.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-538}

::: calibre5
:::

::: calibre15
:::

## [BOOK OF ODES]{.style_2} {#book-of-odes .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The]{.style_} [Book of Odes]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[Shih
Ching]{.style_1}[)---containing some 300 poems, lyrical and historical,
many of which treat of warfare and marital fidelity, others of
agriculture, hunting or feasting---"gives us, virtually untouched by
later hands, the finest picture we have of social conditions of the
eighth and seventh centuries B.C. Men sung of their courtship and
marriage, women of their errant lovers, soldiers of their misery and the
general devastation, princes of their unworthiness; all this and more,
together with popular myths and legends, were gathered together, as were
the Hebrew Psalms and the Song of Solomon, to form this book"
(Goodrich).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Other early books are omen and divination texts, histories of the royal
house and of a few states, and the rituals practised at court. In
Goodrich's opinion, these various books constitute a kind of Bible,
which was transmitted orally from one person to another and then from
manuscript to manuscript, often corrupted, that became the textbook for
every statesman, seer, and schoolboy for two thousand years.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-539}

::: calibre5
:::

## [CONFUCIUS]{.style_2} {#confucius .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It would be impossible to deal with the early Chinese literature and
book production without emphasizing the extraordinary importance of the
three main religions of China---Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism---in
the everyday life of the Chinese, and in their active intellectual
development during many centuries.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The great Chinese sage Confucius, or K'ung Fu-tz (c. 551---479 B.C.) is
sometimes---but wrongly, as we have seen---considered the founder of
Chinese literature. The]{.style_} [Ch'un Ch'iu]{.style_1}[, or]{.style_}
[Annals of Spring and Autumn---being]{.style_1} [a chronology of events
of the state of Lu (which was the state of Confucius)---is considered by
Eberhard as "the only book in which he personally had a hand", being
based on "the older documents available to him".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Confucius is credited traditionally with the authorship of the Classics
which form the "canonical" books of the Chinese. The]{.style_} [Shu
Ching or Canon of Documents,]{.style_1} [which contains some portions in
verse, two homilies against luxury, an allocution to an assembly of
nobles, etc., is considered by some scholars as the beginning of Chinese
literature. Of the other Classics the following are particularly
important:]{.style_} [I Ching, or Canon of Changes, Li Chi, or the Book
of Rites,]{.style_1} [dealing with ceremonial, the]{.style_} [Lun
Υü]{.style_1}[, or]{.style_} [Analects]{.style_1} [of
Confucius.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Confucianism]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Mencius (]{.style_}[c.]{.style_1} [372---289 B.C.)---"who played 'St.
Paul' to Confucius" (Goodrich)---and Hsün Tz (c. 298---238 B.C.) were
both followers of Confucianism, and both elaborated the ideas of
Confucius. "Hsün Tz 's chief importance lies in the fact that he
compressed and simplified the ideas of Confucius. In the strongest
contrast to his conservative tendency was the school of Mo Ti (at some
time between 479 and 381 B.C.)" (Eberhard). This school, which
championed the underdog, denounced war, and preached mutual love and
ascetism, altered the fundamental principles of society.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[From the second century B.C. onwards, Confucianism was steadily
growing. Goodrich mentions that a Confucian college of doctors had only
fifty students when it was established in 125 B.C.; three centuries
later there were thirty thousand. Thus education grew among the
privileged, this growth being due to the fact that "after 165 B.C. and
especially after 125, most members of the growing bureaucracy were
selected on the basis of written examinations, which generally included
the]{.style_} [Odes]{.style_1}[, the]{.style_} [Document of
History]{.style_1}[, the]{.style_} [Canon of Changes,]{.style_1} [one of
the]{.style_} [Rituals]{.style_1}[, the]{.style_} [Spring and Autumn
Annals,]{.style_1} [and sometimes the]{.style_} [Analects]{.style_1} [of
Confucius". Chinese history is rich in examples of politicians, who may
be considered both as scholars and as]{.style_} [literati]{.style_1}[.
Thus, in Chinese culture, learning and literature cannot be considered
as separate branches, but must be regarded as a unity, which moreover is
strictly connected with Confucianism.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000041.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-217}

[[Fig. IX---1](#calibre_link-218){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a, Chinese Taoist text on divination from vapours; b. illustration to
Chinese Taoist Calendar for the year A.D. 978. Found in Ch'ien-fo-tung
("Caves of the Thousand Buddha") and now preserved in the British
Museum.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-540}

## [TAOISM ([Fig. IX---1](#calibre_link-217){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#taoism-fig.-ix1 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Taoism mainly flourished under the Han Dynasty and under the Six Minor
Dynasties,]{.style_} [i.e]{.style_1}[. from the third century B.C. to
the seventh century A.D., and Buddhism flourished in the period between
Kum raj va and the end of the T'ang Dynasty,]{.style_} [i.e]{.style_1}[.
the fourth to the tenth centuries A.D., but Confucianism always formed
the spinc of Chinese literature and learning.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Lao---Tz]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[A famous Chinese sage, the philosopher Lao-Tz , according to Ss -ma
Ch'ien (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 100 B.C.)---the author of]{.style_}
[Shih chi]{.style_1}[, or "Historical Memoirs" (the first history "in
which truth was sifted from fancy")---was born in 604 B.C., but in the
opinion of other scholars he lived in the late fourth century B.C., or
even later. His "teaching is contained in a small book, the]{.style_}
[Tao Tê Ching]{.style_1}[, the 'Book of the World Law and its Power' "
(Eberhard). In the opinion of many modern scholars, much is merely
legendary in the story of Lao-Tz 's life.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The "Taoist" Chuang-Tz (late fourth century B.C.) "was probably the
most gifted poet among the Chinese philosophers" (Eberhard), but
"Tradition assigns the actual establishment of Taoism to a member of the
Chang family who lived during the second century A.D. in the region of
Szechuan, and who is said to have 'manufactured writings on the Tao to
deceive the people' " (Goodrich). In Eberhard's opinion, Chuang-Tz left
us the finest work of ancient times as regards form. He and his school
occupied themselves mainly with mysticism and mystical
puerilities.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the first half of the second century A.D., Wei Po-Yang wrote a book
describing "the process of preparing the pill of immortality"
(Goodrich). J. R. Ware has noticed striking similarities between this
process and the preparation of the philosopher's stone in]{.style_}
[Speculum Alchemiae]{.style_1} [(attributed to Roger Bacon), and has
suggested that European alchemy may have originated in China. According
to Goodrich, the first]{.style_} [Materia Medica]{.style_1} [that has
come down to us was prepared by a Taoist of the early third century A.D.
In addition to listing the medicines in use at that time, it gives
instruction for making pills, powders, and poultices from
drugs.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[An official chronicle of the sixth century A.D. mentions---with the
usual Oriental exaggeration---the "efficacious recipes and marvellous
formulae which existed by thousands and tens of thousands", but even
modern scholars, such as Goodrich, have emphasized that the Taoist
scientists "discovered many valuable herbs and experimented with
sulphur, arsenic, mercurial substances, compounds of zinc, of lead, and
of copper, and iron".]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-541}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BUDDHISM (see also p. 374 ff.)]{.style_2} {#buddhism-see-also-p.-374-ff. .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is known that in the first century B.C. Buddhism penetrated into
China, but until A.D. 220 had little real effect on China. With the
spread of Buddhism, especially amongst the lower and middle classes,
Indian influence expanded into various fields. Chinese language,
medicine, music, and folklore became greatly enriched; Indian
mathematical and astronomical ideas influenced Chinese literature;
Indian influence on architecture became apparent. But it would be wrong
to assume that the newcomers were exclusively from India.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Indian, Sogdian, and Turkestan monks were readily allowed to settle
by the alien rulers of China, who had no national prejudice against
other aliens. The monks were educated men, and brought much useful
knowledge from abroad. Such educated men were needed at the courts of
the alien rulers, and Buddhists were therefore engaged. "These foreign
Buddhists had all the important Buddhist writings translated into
Chinese, and so made use of their influence at court for religious
propaganda. Big translation bureaux were set up for the preparation of
these translations, in which many copyists simultaneously took down from
dictation a translation made by a 'master' with the aid of a few native
helpers" (Eberhard).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Two famous translators of Buddhist texts from Sanskrit into Chinese
were Kum raj va and Fa-hsien. Kumarajiva (second half of the fourth
century A.D.), the son of an Indian and a Kucha princess, as a prisoner
was taken to Ch'ang-an, where "working with a large corps of assistants,
he translated ninety-eight works (in 421 or 425 rolls), of which
fifty-two (in 302 facsimiles) have survived in the current Tripitaka, or
Buddhist canon". Fa-hsien, a Chinese from the province of Shan-si, of
the late fourth and early fifth century, went to Pataliputra, where he
collected and copied the sacred texts of the various schools. On his
return to China in 414 he reached Ch'ang-an with his books, and there
and in Nanking he worked on the translations and on his memoirs, in
which he described the various places he visited.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-542}

::: calibre5
:::

## [TAOISM]{.style_2} [versus]{.style_2} [BUDDHISM]{.style_2} {#taoism-versus-buddhism .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It was inevitable that these two movements, which in their antagonism
to Confucianism had much in common, should enrich each other, but
Buddhism, "which was the richer, was the greater giver" (Goodrich). The
slavishness with which the devotees of Taoism aped not only the ideas
but also the phraseology of their Buddhist rivals may be seen, for
instance, in the fact that "the Taoist canon falls into three main
divisions called 'Grottos' or 'Profundities', corresponding to the three
Buddhist Pitakas, but the familiar Eight Immortals have been replaced by
Nine" (Giles).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The controversies between Taoism and Buddhism started in the third
century A.D. The popular belief that Lao-Tz after having left China went
to the West and became the Buddha, induced a third-century Buddhist to
write]{.style_} [The Record of Central Asia]{.style_1}[, maintaining
that Lao-Tz went to Kashmir and paid homage to a statue of Buddha. About
300 this book was re-written by a Taoist, under the title]{.style_} [The
Conversion of the Barbarians,]{.style_1} [and it was asserted that
Lao-Tz went to India where he became the teacher of the Buddha; to which
the Buddhists replied that the latter preceded Lao-Tz by more than two
centuries. "And so this quarrel continued and widened, finally becoming
so fierce that]{.style_} [The Conversion]{.style_1} [was repeatedly
proscribed, even as late as 1281" (Goodrich).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The imperial decree of 843, prohibiting alien religions, was applied to
Buddhism, though by that time it was a Chinese religion, but it was not
applied to Taoism, because the ruling aristocracy was then Confucianist
and at the same time Taoist. A census of all the Buddhist clergy and
their property showed that there were approximately 4,600 temples,
40,000 shrines, and 260,500 monks and nuns. All the properties were
confiscated and all the books were burned; the monks and nuns were
secularized. But Buddhism was not destroyed. The imperial decree
contained a clause "that one Buddhist temple should be left intact in
every prefectural city", and some temples were rebuilt almost
immediately after 845.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, generally speaking, thinking Chinese culled from Buddhism and
from Taoism what they wished to accept and what Confucianism had never
provided---the doctrine of the universality of all existence and other
alien ideas---and discarded everything else. Thus the so-called
Neo-Confucianism arose, which took its form in the eleventh and twelfth
centuries. By then, China's civilization probably outdistanced that of
the rest of the world.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000042.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-223}

[Fig. IX---2]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Left) Earliest example of a Chinese dated colophon (Vinaya text, Pr
timoksa by Sarv stiv din, dated 10.1.406); (right) printed and
hand-coloured Chinese prayer-sheet dated 947; it gives the name (Lei
Yen-mei) of the first known printer (or rather blockmaker). Both
documents were found at the "Caves of the Thousand Buddhas" and are
preserved in the British Museum.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-543}

::: calibre15
:::

## [BOOK PRODUCTION IN EARLY CHINA]{.style_2} {#book-production-in-early-china .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[([Fig. IX---1](#calibre_link-217){.calibre9}---4, and 5,]{.style_}
[a---b,]{.style_1} []{#calibre_link-225}[also [Fig.
IX---9](#calibre_link-219){.calibre9})]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The literary output of the ancient Chinese has always been on a big
scale, whether it was on wood or bamboo, thin fibres of wood and grass,
silk or other textiles, in early times, or, in later periods, on paper.
The literature of the Han dynasty, for instance, covers practically
every branch, including poetry, history, lexicography, religious
literature. Indeed, the first national bibliography was prepared at the
end of the first century B.C. "by a corps of specialists in medicine,
military science, philosophy, poetry, divination, and astronomy"; "it
lists some 677 works written both on wooden tablets and on silk"
(Goodrich). Thus the wholesale destruction of books by the emperor Shih
Huang-ti of the Ch'in Dynasty, and the execution of some 460]{.style_}
[literati]{.style_1} [in order to eliminate all who dared to criticize
his politics, may have produced a reaction (which became one of the main
causes of the revival of learning under the Han Dynasty) in order to
restore the great loss. On the other hand, many modern scholars hold
that this wholesale destruction and the execution are more or less
legendary; at any rate, the preparation of the national bibliography may
show "that fewer books had been lost in the strife at the end of the
Ch'in Dynasty than was generally believed" (Goodrich).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Apparently the collection in the imperial library was completely
destroyed by fire in A.D. 23 and later; but fortunately other
collections were preserved, as may be shown by the fact that several
thousand fragments of manuscripts on wood, and a complete volume of
seventy-five tablets bound with the original thongs, have recently been
recovered from the refuse heaps near the ancient watch towers of central
Asia. See also p. 398 ff.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[An "important event occurred in 281 (A.D.) when the tomb of a prince or
some other person of rank who died nearly six centuries earlier was
opened. Over 100,000 bamboo tablets covered with writing were
discovered. Fifteen different works and fragments of other writings were
said to have been found in the tomb, among them a copy of the]{.style_}
[Canon of Changes,]{.style_1} [the]{.style_} [Romance of Mu, Son of
Heaven,]{.style_1} [and the official chronicle of the state of Liang or
Wei that ended in 299 B.C., the state of Chin, and the royal houses from
legendary times on." "An entirely unexpected result was the fact that
the sorting and cataloguing of these bamboo tablets led to a
classification system that has been used by Chinese librarians ever
since" (Goodrich).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The slips buried in this tomb in 296 B.C. were described as being bound
together with silk cords, each slip holding forty characters written
with ink. The shorter slips of the Han period are known to have held
from seventeen to twenty-five characters. According to modern research
the Classics appear to have been written on slips measuring two feet
four inches in length, "probably equivalent to three feet by the Chou
foot-measure". Similarly were the laws, which were often
called]{.style_} [san-ch'ih fa,]{.style_1} [or "laws on slips three feet
long".]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-544}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MAIN BRANCHES]{.style_2} {#main-branches .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Chinese literature is traditionally divided either into seven or into
four branches. The latter division is better known, and it has been
adopted for the]{.style_} [Ss -k'u ch'üan-shu,]{.style_1} [which is the
most important Chinese collection. The four divisions are:]{.style_}
[ching,]{.style_1} [which includes the Confucian Classics and their
commentaries, as well as works on philology, etymology, and phonology
(also including works on rhymes);]{.style_} [shih,]{.style_1}
[comprising works on history, geography, politics and law, as well as
catalogues and lists of contents of books;]{.style_} [tzu,]{.style_1}
[to which branch belong the philosophical works (excluding the Classics
and commentaries belonging to]{.style_} [ching]{.style_1}[) and books on
astronomy, calendars, mathematics, medicine, divination, calligraphy,
painting, religion, essays, and miscellanea; also foreign books on
science, learning, and art;]{.style_} [chi,]{.style_1} [poetry and
prose, including critical works, important collections of more
famous]{.style_} [literati]{.style_1} [and scholars. Until the end of
the Ch'ing Dynasty, dramas, novels and short stories were not considered
as "books"; afterwards, dramas were sometimes included in the]{.style_}
[chih]{.style_1} [group, and novels (together with essays) in
the]{.style_} [tzu]{.style_1} [group; nowadays, dramas, novels and short
stories are dealt with in a kind of appendix to the]{.style_}
[chi]{.style_1} [group. Natural sciences are hardly represented; indeed,
it must be emphasized that by far the greatest part of Chinese
literature has always been of humanistic nature.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to Prof. W. Simon, three aspects deserve to be specially
mentioned in Chinese book production, namely, encyclopaedias,
dictionaries, and the reprint series, the last of which is beyond the
scope of this book.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Encyclopaedias]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[In A.D. 220, when Ts'ao Ts'ao's son was about to inaugurate his rule
over North China, he ordered his ministers to compile an imperial survey
which would aid him in carving out an empire as great as the Han.
Although earlier rulers, such as the First Emperor, had endeavoured to
encompass all the existing knowledge themselves, the son of Ts'ao Ts'ao
realized the impossibility of doing this himself. Thus the first general
compendium, or summary of each subject, came into existence; it had many
successors for both imperial and private use. The survey made for the
Wei prince has long since been lost, but was said to run to over
8,000,000 words.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000043.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-222}

[Fig. IX---3]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) The earliest preserved printing: Japanese Buddhist charms
belonging to c. A.D. 770, in the Sanskrit language and in Chinese
characters: (below) the earliest preserved printed book: the Diamond
Sutra in Chinese, of A.D. 868 (British Museum).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Under the T'angs two Encylopaedias were compiled, "largely to aid
students in the civil examinations; these works must have had great
influence on the knowledge and writing of the educated youth of the
day". Their "subject matter ranged from government policy to crafts and
medicine". Another encyclopaedia, the]{.style_} [T'ung Tien,]{.style_1}
[completed in 801 by Tu Yu, "is a similar work of even greater
magnitude" (Goodrich). Extremely important work in this field was done
in the tenth to thirteenth centuries. Li Fang (925---96) and his
editorial board produced two encyclopaedias, the]{.style_}
[T'ai-p'ing'yü lan,]{.style_1} [containing 1,000 chapters, and
the]{.style_} [T'ai-p'ing kuang chi,]{.style_1} [containing 500
chapters, both dealing with matters of general knowledge and
literature.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Yüeh Shih (930---1007) edited a geography of the Eastern world in 200
chapters, under the title]{.style_} [T'ai-p'ing huan yü chi.]{.style_1}
[Chêng Ch'iao (1104---62) wrote a kind of encyclopaedia,]{.style_}
[T'ung chih,]{.style_1} [containing monographs on archaeology,
philology, phonetics and libraries, politics, family and clan, flowers
and insects. This work was brought up to 1254 by Ma Tuan-lin (c. 1275),
in]{.style_} [Wên hsien t'ung k'ao,]{.style_1} [containing 348 chapters.
But by far the most important encyclopaedia, according to P. van der
Loon, is the Υü Hai, which was compiled in 200]{.style_}
[chüan,]{.style_1} [or "scrolls", by Wang Ying-lin (1223---96), who was
the most learned scholar of the Sung period. Like most of the other
encyclopaedias, the]{.style_} [Υü Hai]{.style_1} [contains quotations
from the Classics, histories, philosophers,]{.style_}
[belles-lettres,]{.style_1} [biographies, and other useful material. The
main purpose of this encyclopaedia was to supply material, which would
assist candidates for the high degree of]{.style_} [po hsüeh hung
t'z]{.style_1} [(a kind of doctorate).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Another encyclopaedia of the thirteenth century was]{.style_} [Fo tsu
t'ung chi,]{.style_1} [published in 1269---71. In the same century,
Ch'ên Ching-i compiled a botanical encyclopaedia.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The most famous encyclopaedia is undoubtedly the]{.style_} [Υung-lo
ta-tien]{.style_1} [(1403---7), consisting of 11,095 volumes containing
22,877 chapters (exclusive of the table of contents), which was compiled
by 2,180 scholars. It was "a universal compendium of all existing
Chinese history, ethics, science . . . in a word, of all human knowledge
among the Chinese up to A.D. 1400" (Swingle). Finally, among the
illustrated encyclopaedias there are at least three which are considered
as outstanding. These are the]{.style_} [San ts'ai t'u hui,]{.style_1}
[published c. 1609 by Wang Ch'i and Wang Ss -i, and containing 106
chapters; the]{.style_} [Wu pei chih by]{.style_1} [Mao Yüan-i, 1628,
containing 240 chapters; and]{.style_} [T'ien kung k'ai wu,]{.style_1}
[by Sung Ying-hsing, 1637, of eighteen chapters. All three contain
woodcuts.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000044.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. IX--4]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Page from a Chinese book (The John Rylands Library, Manchester, Chin.
No. 465).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Dictionaries and Lexicography]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Goodrich mentions a tentative beginning of lexicography in
the]{.style_} [Literary Expositor]{.style_1} [by an unknown author of
about 200 B.C., but the first true lexicon was Hsü Shên's]{.style_}
[Shuo wên]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[or Shuo wên chieh tz ,]{.style_1} ["An
explanation of Ancient Figures and an Analysis of Compound Characters"),
of A.D. c. 100. It was mainly concerned with the written forms of
characters---giving an explanation of 9,353 symbols, and of 1,163 which
have a double use---but its author who travelled to many parts of China,
indicated also the sounds given to the words in the different regions.
Various lexicographical works were published in the second, the third,
the sixth, and the eleventh centuries, for instance, the important
work]{.style_} [Shih-ming,]{.style_1} [published in the third
century.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[One of the first Chinese philologists who dealt with "spelling" of
Chinese characters was Shên Yüeh (A.D. 441---513), but no works of his
have come down to us. Fragments of two dictionaries, published in 543
and 609, have survived, and both of them contain also "spelling". Three
famous Buddhist scholars must be mentioned: Hsün-tsang, who translated
Buddhist texts from Sanskrit into Chinese, devised a new method for
transcribing Sanskrit (A.D. c. 650). I-ching compiled or edited a
Sanskrit-Chinese lexicon of about 1,000 words (late seventh century).
Li-yen, from Kucha (eighth century), compiled a Chinese-Sanskrit lexicon
of about 1,200 words. He also translated a Sanskrit work on medicine and
medicinal plants.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the thirteenth century two important dictionaries were compiled, one
of them containing an analysis of 53,525 characters, "or more than are
included in the last standard dictionary compiled in 1716" (Goodrich).
In a lexicon of the fourteenth century the Chinese main characters were
reduced to 360.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Ch'ên Ti (c. 1541---1617) is considered as the founder of the science
of philology in China. His work represents "a systematic application of
the inductive method and a use of the very terminology we associate with
that method in the west" (Hummel).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Mei Ying-tso published in 1615 a dictionary,]{.style_} [Tz
-hui,]{.style_1} [containing 33,179 characters, and for the first time
reducing all Chinese characters to 214 categories. This number has been
used since both by Chinese and foreign (Japanese and Korean)
lexicographers. Mei's re-arrangement of the radicals and characters on
the basis of the number of strokes of each one has been generally
accepted.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Finally, the vocabularies compiled in the years 1382, 1549, c. 1620,
and 1630, are still preserved. "They indicate that a few scholars at
court had some knowledge, albeit scanty, of the languages of Korea,
Japan, Persia, Turkey, Champa, Siam, Malaysia, Annam, the Lew Chew
Islands, Mongolia, and Tibet, and of Uigur and Jurchen"
(Goodrich).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-545}

::: calibre5
:::

::: calibre15
:::

## [BOOK PRODUCTION OF THE TENTH CENTURY]{.style_2} {#book-production-of-the-tenth-century .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The first half of the tenth century A.D. was a period of political
instability in China; it was the period of the five minor Dynasties
between the two great Dynasties of the T'angs and the Sungs, but it was
notwithstanding a period of great literary activity. Book production,
including printing, and the formation of libraries were actively carried
out through the country, and gave great impetus to writing of all kinds
of books. Two facts of this period must be mentioned as having great
importance for the history of books in China: the beginning of official
printing under the direction of the government, a kind of His Majesty's
Stationery Office, attributed to Wu Chao-li, and the printing of the
monumental work of the Confucian Canon, in 130 volumes, commentaries
included; this was done during the years 932---53, and was due mainly to
the initiative of Fêng Ying-wang or Fêng Tao, traditionally considered
(however wrongly) as the inventor of printing.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-546}

::: calibre5
:::

## [COLLECTING, COLLATING AND COPYING BOOKS]{.style_2} {#collecting-collating-and-copying-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Analogously to the Alexandrian scholars of the third and second century
B.C. (see p. 155)---roughly at the same time or slightly later, there
were in China scholars who were fruitful in separating authentic from
spurious writings, in the revision of texts of, and commentaries upon,
the earlier Chinese works, and in useful collation of the best texts
from the enormous mass of literature, which had come down to them. The
present writer has it on the authority of his friend and colleague P.
van der Loon---who has prepared for publication an important article on
the transmission and collation of the works of Kuan-tz ---that
apparently the first organization for collecting and copying books had
been set up by Wu-ti in or shortly after 124 B.C. Van der Loon
quotes]{.style_} [Ch'i lüeh,]{.style_1} [by Liu Hsin (who died A.D. 23):
"Emperor Wu instructed the Chancellor Kung-sun Hung to provide ample
facilities for presenting books to the Throne. During the following
century books piled up like mountains. Outside the Palace there were the
storehouses of the Minister for Public Worship, the Grand Clerks, and
the Gentlemen of Wide Learning, and inside were depositories in the long
galleries, the spacious rooms, and the private apartments."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Kung-sun was Chancellor from 11.12.125 to 7.4.124 B.C., and---following
the imperial edict of July, 124---he presented a memorial with detailed
proposals for the appointment of Disciples to the Gentlemen of Wide
Learning. In that edict the Emperor had also expressed his concern for
books, so we may assume that the two matters were closely connected. "In
26 B.C.---writes van der Loon---it was decided to send out an emissary
to collect books from all over the Empire. At the same time, Liu Hsiang
was engaged in a thorough survey of all the material. He collated the
bundles of bamboo slips and scrolls of silk, which had come from many
different places, and therefore contained a large number of duplicates.
In this task, he was assisted by several scholars", such as the experts
in military science (Jên Hung), in cosmology and divination (Yin Hsien),
and in medical arts (Li Chuo-kuo), and other scholars (Fu Ts'an, Pan Yu,
and others), as well as by his son, Liu Hsin.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Liu Hsiang did not confine himself to the Palace library, but also made
use of other official and private collections. "Consequently he could in
many cases avail himself of several versions of the same texts." "Often
he found separate bundles of written slips which had a common origin or
alleged authorship, but which had been handed down independently\....
Each time he had finished collating a work, Liu Hsiang sent a memorial
of official presentation to the Emperor. In these memorials a table of
contents was followed by a description of the material from which the
collators had compiled their text. Then came a short biography of the
author, and an outline of the historical background, and finally a
discussion of the authenticity, transmission and value of the
work."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Following is an extract from the memorial on Kuan-tz as quoted by van
der Loon: "The Commissioner of the Eastern \[Metropolitan Area\]
Conservancy and Imperial Counsellor First Class, Your servant \[Liu\]
Hsiang speaking. 'The books by Master Kuan, which Your servant has
collated, consisted of 389 bundles in the Palace, 27 bundles belonging
to the Imperial Counsellor Second Class, Pu Kuei, 41 bundles belonging
to Your servant Fu Ts'an, 11 bundles belonging to the Colonel of the
Bowmen Guards, Li, and 96 bundles in the office of the Grand Clerks,
making a total of 564 bundles of books inside and outside the Palace. In
collating them, he has eliminated 484 duplicate bundles, and made 86
bundles the standard text. This he has written on bamboo slips to form a
basis for exact copies.' \..."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[See,]{.style_1} [now, P. van der Loon,]{.style_} [On the Transmission
of Kuan-tz ,]{.style_1} ["T'OUNG PAO", XLI (1952), 4---5, pp.
357---393.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-547}

::: calibre5
:::

## [EARLY CHINESE WRITING MATERIALS]{.style_2} {#early-chinese-writing-materials .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The date of the invention or creation of Chinese writing and its early
history are unknown. See p. 66 ff. We may assume that it was already in
existence in the early second millennium B.C., though the earliest
inscriptions ([Fig. I---14](#calibre_link-51){.calibre9}), on bones
discovered in 1899 near An-yang in northern Honan, belong to the
fourteenth and the thirteenth centuries B.C. These are, at any rate,
much more recent than the earliest available Sumerian documents (middle
fourth millennium B.C.) or the Egyptian ones (c. 3000 B.C.)---see pp. 54
and 58 ff.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[On the other hand, "most of the things used by these people \[i.e.
Chinese\], which might have come down to us as evidence of their
culture, were very perishable\.... Their books were written on tablets
of wood or bamboo. In the wet climate of China such materials decay
quickly" (Creel). According to the American scholar, A. W. Hummel, the
philosopher Wang Ch'ung (A.D. c. 82) wrote: "Bamboo is cut into
cylinders which are split into tablets. When brush and ink mark are
added we have writing---the Classics being inscribed on long tablets,
the historical records on shorter ones."]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-548}

::: calibre5
:::

## [WOOD AND SILK AS WRITING MATERIALS]{.style_2} {#wood-and-silk-as-writing-materials .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest preserved manuscripts of Chinese books are written on
thinly cut slips of wood. Together with hundreds of official or
quasi-official communications and records (such as administrative
orders, reports and account statements), all written on wood, various
manuscripts were found in 1907 by Sir Aurcl Stein, at the ruined
stations---chiefly among their refuse heaps---of the westernmost portion
of the Chinese frontier wall which had been constructed by the great
Emperor Wu-ti (second century []{#calibre_link-221}B.C.): [Fig.
IX---5](#calibre_link-220){.calibre9}, a.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Stein's discoveries have thrown much light upon the employment of
writing materials in China before the invention of paper (A.D. c. 105).
It has long been known that silk was used in early times in China as
writing material. Amongst Stein's discoveries are two letters on silk,
one long and well preserved, "which were found sewn up into a small bag
for holding some medicine or condiment---luckily with the surface turned
inside". The well-preserved letter is 58 mm. wide, after folding, which
would be of the right size for insertion into an envelope, such as the
small silk envelope, also found by Stein, which was used for a private
letter (as its address shows), and is 65 mm. wide inside.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Silk, as a material for books, is mentioned by a number of writers of
the fourth or the fifth century B.C., frequently with the implication
that it was used much earlier. For instance, "Mo Ti states that the
ancients handed down their counsels not only on metal and stone but also
on 'bamboo and silk'. Similar references to silk may be found in the
writing known as]{.style_} [Kuan-tz]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [Han
Fei-tz ."]{.style_1} [Silk was of course much more costly than wood, and
its use was much less general. But it had many advantages, and continued
to be used for painting, "even though as a book it went out of existence
soon after the manufacture of paper". Indeed, at first paper was looked
upon as an inexpensive substitute for silk, and was given the
name]{.style_} [chih,]{.style_1} [which had long been used to denote a
silk scroll. It is not surprising, therefore---writes Hummel---to hear
of a scholar named Ts'ui Yuan, who died thirty-seven years after paper
was first made, writing to a friend: "I send you the works of the
Philosopher Hsü in ten scrolls---unable to afford a copy on silk, I am
obliged to send you one on paper."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, the communications and records written on wooden tablets form
the vast majority of the documents recovered, and in their material and
shape they agree very closely with the Chinese records on wood
discovered by Stein in 1901 at Niya ("an ancient settlement of the Tarim
Basin abandoned to the desert sands in the 3rd century A.D.").]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[These office records consist of inscribed narrow slips of wood---[Fig.
IX---5](#calibre_link-220){.calibre9},]{.style_} [a]{.style_1}[---from 9
to inches in length ("roughly corresponding to the Chinese foot of the
Han period"), and from a to inch in width. They may be inscribed on both
sides, but ordinarily contain only one column of writing on either.
Owing to the traditional tenacity of Chinese convention, the "slip" form
of the ancient wooden writing material appears to be reflected in the
arrangement of the pink coloured letter paper which ordinarily served
for private correspondence in pre-Revolution China,]{.style_}
[i.e.]{.style_1} [until 1913. "The height of the vertical ruled lines on
it and the distance between them correspond exactly to the average
length and width of those ancient slips, each being meant to hold a
single column of]{.style_} [tz "]{.style_1} [(Stein).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Moreover, the words]{.style_} [ch'ih-tu,]{.style_1} [which the Chinese
still use to denote letter-writing or correspondence, mean literally a
"one-foot tablet"; and the phrase]{.style_} [i-ch'ih chih
shu,]{.style_1} ["a one-foot writing", means "brief note"
(Hummel).]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000046.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-220}

[[Fig. IX---5](#calibre_link-221){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a, Reconstruction of a Chinese book written on slips of wood; b, Mah
aprajña-paramitas tra, Ch. 110. Printed at Fêng-hua, A.D. 1162
(University Library, Cambridge); c, Lo-lo book written in horizontal
script.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The narrow form of the "slips" is due to the fact that originally the
slips were mainly made of bamboo sticks, but the great majority of the
inscribed wooden slips discovered by Stein are not of bamboo ---"a fact
easily accounted for by the great distance separating that westernmost
border of China Proper from the bamboo-growing regions of the Empire";
they are made from local varieties of trees, such as the cultivated
poplar or the wild poplar, or the tamarisk. There are also tablets made
of some conifer, including specimens containing more than one vertical
line of characters on either or both faces, though otherwise these
tablets conform in length and in character of contents to the narrow
slips.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[An interesting category of wooden slips, measuring up to fourteen
inches in length, are numerous fragments of calendars. The French
sinologist É. Chavannes has succeeded in restoring complete calendars
for the years 63, 59 and 39 B.C. and A.D. 94 and 153.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Apart from the narrow slip called]{.style_} [ts' ê,]{.style_1}
[or]{.style_} [chien,]{.style_1} [there were many other forms of wooden
stationery for which the names are known, but which cannot be described
with certainty. Two forms, however, are better known; there was the
rectangular tablet, called]{.style_} [fang,]{.style_1} [which could hold
up to a hundred characters, and was mainly used for imperial edicts or
government reports; and there was the triangular, prismatic form, known
as]{.style_} [ku,]{.style_1} [which in Hummel's opinion seems to have
served as a kind of horn book for elementary instruction.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Wooden slips were used by both the Mongols and the Manchus, before
their conquest of China, to record events and to convey orders. They had
the size and shape of Chinese slips of Han times, but had "perforations
at the ends to string them together, as was customary in Central Asia.
Though the general use of such slips was abolished by decree in 1645
they served for transmitting official orders within the Palaces till the
close of the dynasty" (Hummel).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-549}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BOOKS ON WOODEN SLIPS ([Fig. IX---5](#calibre_link-220){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [a]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#books-on-wooden-slips-fig.-ix5-a .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The oldest known manuscripts extant of a Chinese book are relatively
numerous fragments of a famous lexicographical text, the]{.style_} [Chi
chiu chang,]{.style_1} [which was composed in 48---33 B.C., and played
an important part in the primary education of China during the Later Han
period (A.D. 25---220). Some of the discovered specimens seem to be
"copy slips",]{.style_} [i.e.]{.style_1} [the text appears to have been
copied out as a writing exercise.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Amongst Stein's finds are also a few extracts from treatises on
divination and astrology; a fragment containing a passage from a
treatise composed in 229 B.C. (it was apparently known as]{.style_}
[Li-mo]{.style_1}[) and dealing with military affairs; a fragmentary
slip quoting the title of]{.style_} [Lieh nü chuan]{.style_1} [(the
"Biographies of Eminent Women"), a book composed in 32---7 B.C.; a brief
extract and a few fragments from medical treatises; a curious
multiplication table; and three slips containing fragments of
vocabularies as yet unidentified.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The importance of Stein's discoveries lies also in the fact that they
explain in a visible manner the reason why Chinese characters are
arranged in vertical columns to be read from top to bottom. Indeed, the
writing columns of any Chinese book present themselves like a series of
narrow wooden slips.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is known, however, that at first the direction of the lines of
writing was not fixed, though generally the lines seem to have run
vertically. Subsequently the vertical direction became exclusive, and
this still continues. It "has affected the writing of the Uigur, Mongol
and Manchu peoples, who in other respects have adopted the alphabetical
script of the Mediterranean peoples" (Goodrich). See also]{.style_} [The
Alphabet, passim.]{.style_1} [Hummel asks: Did the narrow slip of bamboo
or wood suggest a vertical rather than a horizontal column, and did the
predominantly downward strokes of the brush suggest a movement from
right to left? He states, "We may never really know why the Chinese
preferred, from ancient times, to write in vertical columns from right
to left\...."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[While some scholars hold the opinion that the vertical direction was
adopted in imitation of the funeral slabs set up at the graves of dead
ancestors, it is more probable that it was due to the influence of the
bamboo slips, on which most of the writing was done in ancient China and
in the other Far Eastern countries. Indeed, it was long believed that a
very early Chinese book consisted of a number of bamboo slips, the
ordinary method of writing being to scratch with a sharp instrument, or
stilus, the bamboo being held in the left hand, pointing directly away
from the body. At a later stage, scratching with a stilus was supposed
to have been replaced by writing in ink with a brush (see
below).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Chavannes, Hummel and others have rejected this theory. According to
Hummel, the old belief that in early times characters were engraved by
means of a metal stilus is probably an error due to a misinterpretation
of the term]{.style_} [shuo-tao,]{.style_1} [or "book-knife", which
frequently occurs in references to wooden documents. "More careful
reading makes it clear that the knife was used not to engrave characters
but to make erasures." Ink, whether derived from some colouring matter
or from resin, as it is today, may well have been employed from the time
that wooden slips were first used. On the other hand, early Chinese
sources refer to the use of lead in writing, and the]{.style_}
[ch'ien-pi,]{.style_1} [or "lead pencil", was used "for making notes as
early as the 2nd century, and probably earlier" (Hummel).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Stein's discoveries have enabled scholars to solve the problem of how
proper cohesion and sequence could be assured for the numerous slips
over which texts of any size written on bamboo or wood must necessarily
have extended. Chavannes observed that a number of slips bore one or
more notches on one of the edges, and he suggested that these notches
were intended to serve the purpose of uniting the slips in groups. For
instance, in one set, each slip has two notches on the right edge, one
above and one below, and a third notch placed in the middle of the left
edge: they all belong to a medical notebook; another set of slips of
wood, forming part of a calendar for 59 B.C., shows two notches
uniformly placed on the right edge of each slip; in a set of slips,
belonging to a calendar of A.D. 63, we find the left edge of each
provided with three notches at exactly uniform distances.]{.style_}
[See]{.style_1} [[Fig. IX---5](#calibre_link-220){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[a.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Moreover, Stein has remarked that no text is to be found on the reverse
of any of the notched slips belonging to sets (notwithstanding the
inconvenience which the bulk and weight of such books must have caused);
he has, therefore, suggested that the fastening, for which the notches
were undoubtedly intended, must have been arranged in a way that brought
the blank reverses of consecutive slips back to back and thus made it
inconvenient---indeed, if they were rigidly attached, it would be
impossible---to use the reverse surface for inscribing or reading any
portions of the text.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-550}

::: calibre5
:::

## [CHINESE PAPER BOOKS (for their forms see [Fig. IX---9](#calibre_link-219){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#chinese-paper-books-for-their-forms-see-fig.-ix9 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Similar methods were employed in the Chinese and Tibetan paper
manuscripts, discovered in the "Caves of the Thousand Buddhas" of
Tun-huang (see pp. 413---15). These manuscripts consist of long sheets
of paper made up of several joint pieces and folded up concertina-wise
into narrow pages; the reverse surface is always left blank: see below.
Moreover, even in Chinese printed books---which actually were an
adaptation to block printing of the concertina method, we find regularly
the reverse surface left blank.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-551}

::: calibre5
:::

::: calibre15
:::

## [THE FOLDED BOOK]{.style_2} {#the-folded-book .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[An important book discovered in the Caves, and now in the British
Museum, is a Buddhist sutra, or collection of aphorisms, dated A.D. 949.
It is a book folded concertina-wise, sometimes called]{.style_}
[orihon]{.style_1} [(which is still common in China and Japan). This
kind of book is printed (or written) on one side of a roll---indeed,
because of the fineness of the texture of the paper only one side can be
written or printed on---and it is then folded up concertina-wise across
the margin, into separate "pages". The blank backs of the "pages" are
pasted together or are so hidden that their existence is frequently not
realized, the final result resembling to a surprising degree the form of
the modern book. But if some of the leaves are cut, the real structure
of the book becomes evident, and it is then seen to consist of printed
pages and blank pages alternately.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In some instances two pages are written, or printed, upon one leaf,
which is then folded, and the leaves are sewn up in the open part, while
the closed side composes the outer margin; the blank half of the leaf
being thus joined, the written---or printed---part only is visible,
which from the thinness of the paper appears as if on opposite sides of
a single leaf. These leaves are then slightly stitched together in
fascicles, of the size of modern magazines, which are then bound
together so that a book may consist of four, six, or more
fascicles.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The accordion method was introduced sometime in the T'ang period (A.D.
618---907); the change (from the scrolls) merely involved folding the
scroll at measured intervals into accordion pleats like some railroad
time-tables. "Such a book, when unfolded, was still in fact a scroll,
but when folded it formed a rectangle which could be protected on two
sides with covers, and had the appearance of the book we know." The
advantages of the folded book, in comparison with the scroll, were in a
certain way similar to those of the Western codex (see pp. 161 ff. and
193 f.). Indeed, most important of all, "the folded book eliminated the
task of unrolling and made possible a book which could be consulted at
any point with facility" (Hummel).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is, however, doubtful whether Hummel is right in his dating of the
introduction of the folded book. Is it not possible that---analogously
to the roll form and the codex in the Western world---the two forms of
the scroll and the folded book were used side by side for many
centuries? It has already been mentioned, and Hummel has also pointed
out "that this folded book was called]{.style_} [ts' ê]{.style_1} [. . .
is worth noting, for that was the name of the ancient wooden-slip book
which presumably could also be folded into pleated, rectangular
sections". Priests in the monasteries found "the pleated book convenient
in chanting the sutras, and it came to be the form required in the
official examinations and for state documents where an uninterrupted
text was wanted" (cf. the Western codex). Finally, as Hummel mentions,
"it is also a form still favoured for albums of calligraphy and
painting".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The change of the Chinese book, from the concertina method to the paged
book with folded leaves, will be dealt with in the volume on]{.style_}
[The Printed Book.]{.style_1} [Here it may be mentioned that the Chinese
paged book, "such as has been common in the last five centuries", "is
still essentially an accordion-pleated book, but with the leaves
fastened down at the right-hand side" (Hummel).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-552}

::: calibre5
:::

## [CHINESE SCROLLS ([Fig. IX---9](#calibre_link-219){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [top, right-hand side]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#chinese-scrolls-fig.-ix9-top-right-hand-side .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The concertina method was not the only and not the main system of the
early Chinese books. It has long been known that both the Chinese and
the Japanese (as well as other Asiatic peoples) anciently used the roll
form of book, especially for all allegorical pictures, the ends of the
rolls being fastened in much the same manner as were the Graeco-Roman
books (see Chapter VI). The discovery of the numerous scrolls in the
Caves of the Thousand Buddhas (see further on, pp. 413---15), has shown
that the scroll was the main form of the book from the fifth century
A.D. to 1035---to which period the scrolls of the Caves belong. These
scrolls are up to 30 or 40 feet long, and 9 to 14 inches wide. The
scrolls are made up of sheets 18 or 19 inches long,]{.style_}
[i.e.]{.style_1} [2 feet by the Han foot-measure. This seems to have
been for centuries the standard length of the sheet that was used to
make the scroll, and is already referred to by Hsün Hsü (third century
A.D.). Hummel has pointed out that these sheets were ruled off
into]{.style_} [pien]{.style_1}[-]{.style_}[chun]{.style_1}[, or
"side-lines",]{.style_} [i.e.]{.style_1} [columns about the width of the
olden wooden slip, and probably in imitation of it. "In Buddhist sutras
it was common to write seventeen characters in each column."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Chinese scroll may have looked externally like a papyrus book roll
(see p. 129 ff.); similarly its inner end was wrapped round a wooden
roller, metaphorically called]{.style_} [chou]{.style_1} [(after the
axle of a cart). "In imperial collections these rollers had knobs of
sandal-wood, lacquer, tortoise-shell, glass or ivory---variously
coloured to differentiate the class of literature to which a work
belonged, and to obviate useless unrolling" (Hummel). Such a procedure
was unknown in the Western world.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the course of time the scroll form was discontinued for books, but
it still continues to be employed for specimens of calligraphy, as well
as for maps and especially for painting.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-553}

::: calibre5
:::

## ["BINDING" OF CHINESE WOODEN BOOKS]{.style_2} {#binding-of-chinese-wooden-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The method of "binding" of ancient Chinese wooden books is suggested by
F. H. Andrews: "Each 'slip',]{.style_} [i.e.]{.style_1} [small lath of
wood (belonging to a series which contained one text or connected
record), being a folio, it is clear that some means of binding must have
been employed to maintain the folios in correct collation. The small
notches observed on the edges of the 'slips', and the fact that these
exactly range when a number of 'slips' are collated, indicate that the
connecting binding must have been of the nature of a string, an
inference strengthened by the references in Chinese texts to silk or
leather cords uniting the fascicles of wooden or bamboo slips." Having
experimented with a fine raw silk thread, Andrews has suggested that the
Chinese "binding" of wooden books may have been done with the method
shown in [Fig. IX---5](#calibre_link-220){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[a.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[This suggestion has been verified by an extremely important find made
by F. Bergmann of Sven Hedin's Central Asian expedition. A wooden-slip
book was recovered, consisting of some seventy-eight wooden slips, all
in the original order, and tied together by hemp threads near the top
and the bottom, as the ancient pictograph]{.style_} [ts' ê]{.style_1}
[shows. "Each slip is 9 inches long and about inch wide---the total
length of the book being about 4 feet. The text, written between the
years A.D. 94 and 96, is an inventory of the weapons stored at the
military outpost where it was found" (Hummel).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-554}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BUTTERFLY-METHOD BOOKS ([Fig. IX---9](#calibre_link-219){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [top, left-hand side]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#butterfly-method-books-fig.-ix9-top-left-hand-side .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Hu-tieh chuang,]{.style_1} [or "butterfly format" owes its term to the
fact that "when such a book is opened the corresponding ends of a
(written or) printed sheet extend out from the spine like the wings of a
butterfly". This form of book was used until about the fourteenth
century A.D.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-555}

::: calibre5
:::

## ["BINDING" OF FOLDED AND "BUTTERFLY" BOOKS ([Fig. IX---9](#calibre_link-219){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#binding-of-folded-and-butterfly-books-fig.-ix9 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The cover is not glued to the leaves: it is a case wrapped round them,
in some parts double, and secured by a fastening of silk and bone. This
case or cover is sometimes formed of a brown stiff pasteboard, made of a
species of smooth and strong paper. For common books, in addition to the
case, a cover of fancy paper is used, while for more important books
silk is employed, or a species of taffeta with flowers, which is only
used for this purpose. More expensive books are covered with red
brocade, ornamented with flowers of gold and silver. The title, written
or printed on a slip of paper, is generally pasted upon a corner of the
cover.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The book "was placed vertically on the shelf, and in every respect
resembled a Western book---except that every other page was blank. To
overcome this handicap tabs were often placed at the fore-edge,
precisely as in some Western books, or as in a card-index"
(Hummel).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-556}

::: calibre5
:::

## [WRAPPERS FOR SCROLLS ([Fig. IX---9](#calibre_link-219){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [top, right-hand side]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#wrappers-for-scrolls-fig.-ix9-top-right-hand-side .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In a similar, but not identical, manner to the Graeco-Roman roll, the
more valuable Chinese scrolls had their opening ends protected, as
Chinese paintings still are, by the]{.style_} [piao,]{.style_1} [which
was an extension of silk gauze or brocade, and a ribbon with an ivory
clasp. "The scrolls comprising one work were arranged in pyramids of
five or ten, and were encased in a wrapper,]{.style_} [chih,]{.style_1}
[made of brocade or bamboo screening. To make a pyramid complete, ten
scrolls were needed, and this was usually the number of the scrolls
contained in a wrapper. Such a wrapper, dated A.D. 742, is preserved in
Japan, others were found in the Caves of the Thousand Buddhas" (Hummel).
The ancient Chinese cataloguers, in describing books, recorded not only
the number of scrolls, but also the number of wrappers.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-557}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE WRITING-BRUSH AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF WRITING]{.style_2} {#the-writing-brush-and-the-development-of-writing .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The invention of the]{.style_} [pi,]{.style_1} [the writing-brush or
pencil, made of hair, was undoubtedly due to the increased popularity of
the Chinese literary hand as well as to the use of silk as a writing
material. According to Fan Yeh's history of the Later Han Dynasty (fifth
century of the Christian Era), "In ancient times writing was generally
on bamboo or on pieces of silk, which were then called]{.style_}
[chih,]{.style_1} [but silk being expensive and bamboo heavy, these two
materials were not convenient." The invention of the writing-brush is
traditionally attributed to Mêng T'ien, a reputed builder of the Great
Wall who died about 210 B.C., but it is likely to have preceded him. It
may be assumed, however, that the]{.style_} [pi]{.style_1} [was invented
or already existed under the Ch'in Dynasty (221---207 B.C.). "Writing
implements were improved by superior brushes and better ink and the
wider use of silk in rolls." Indeed, "silk, both plain and embroidered
with grotesque animals and symbolic Chinese characters, was made not
only for domestic consumption but also for foreign trade"
(Goodrich).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[About twenty years ago, F. Bergmann (see p. 406) discovered a complete
and well-preserved writing-brush, 9 inches long; it probably belongs to
the period about the beginning of the Christian Era.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In addition to the]{.style_} [ta chuan,]{.style_1} [or "Great Seal"
characters, already in existence, about 220 B.C. the]{.style_} [hsiao
chuan,]{.style_1} [or "Small Seal" characters are said to have been
introduced by Li Ss and two other ministers of the first Ch'in emperor,
whereas its more cursive form, called]{.style_} [li shu]{.style_1} ["was
adopted to facilitate the drafting of documents relating to the
multitude of prisoners at that time" (W. P. Yetts). This]{.style_} [li
shu,]{.style_1} [or "Official Script", which is the prototype of the
various Chinese scripts employed for nearly two thousand years till the
present day, is the earliest Chinese literary or book hand. While
tradition attributes its invention to Ch'êng Miao, its origin "is more
likely the result of the development of the script employed for
administrative purposes of the centralized government" (Yetts) of that
time.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The writing-brush naturally influenced the formal evolution of the
script; thus, in the]{.style_} [li shu]{.style_1} [curves became
straight or nearly so, and the likeness of the signs to the original
pictorial ideographs in most cases disappeared. The fluid used for
writing was generally a dark varnish. A further development of the
external forms of the signs came with the invention of paper in A.D.
105.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-558}

::: calibre5
:::

::: calibre15
:::

## [BOOK DECORATION AND PAINTING]{.style_2} {#book-decoration-and-painting .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Not much can be said about early Chinese book illustration, because of
the scanty remains. Also the remains of actual paintings are not too
plentiful. It may, however, be argued that at least in the third century
(A.D.) there existed Chinese books containing paintings. It should be
borne in mind that the Chinese art of calligraphy---which, also being
done with brush, was an associated art of painting ---lent itself very
much to painting and drawing.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the second to fourth centuries there were famous Chinese
calligraphers, such as So Ching (239---303), the lady Wei Shuo
(272---349), and especially Wang Hsi-chih (321---79), who was "light as
floating cloud, vigorous as a startled dragon" (L. Giles), his style
being compared by Sun Kuo (who lived under the Han Dynasty) with "flocks
of queen-swans floating on their stately wings, or a frantic stampede
rushing off at terrific speed" (quoted from L. C. Goodrich). "Wang broke
with the past and he and his son, Wang Hsien-chih (344---88), set the
fashion that has lasted a millennium and a half" (Goodrich).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[More directly connected with our subject is the work of a great master
in painting, Ku K'ai-chih (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[.344 ---]{.style_}
[c]{.style_1}[.406). He was a civil servant, and had therefore the
opportunity to depict scenes of court life. The British Museum possesses
a copy (attributed to the T'ang period) of a roll by him
called]{.style_} [Admonitions of the Instructress of the
Palace]{.style_1}[, containing nine scenes of court life. While the
landscape is depicted in a rather primitive manner, "the figure drawing
seems to belong to the close of a tradition rather than its beginning;
and we may conjecture behind it the ruder, masculine style of Han
gradually subtilized and transformed in the direction of elegance and
charm" (L. Binyon).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Already in the fifth century A.D. there appeared a book (by Sun
Ch'ang-chih) dealing with painters and painting, and the canons of
painting were enunciated for the first time by Hsieh Ho (A.D. c. 500).
Under the T'ang Dynasty painting was specially practised by Taoists and
Buddhists. "Taoism, with its mystic other-worldly character and its love
of nature"---writes Goodrich---"gave special inspiration to painters and
poets"; but the greatest artist of this period was a Buddhist, Wu
Tao-hsüan (second half of the eighth century), "whose over three hundred
Buddhist frescoes and many drawings on silk (none of which survives) had
a profound influence on the world of his time. One of the minor arts,
printing textiles from wood blocks, also came into existence. The
earliest example extant is a blue print dating from the ninth century
and is in the British Museum" (Goodrich). However, the best Chinese
paintings that are now extant come from the period of the Sung Dynasty
(960---1279). The illustrated encyclopaedias have already been
mentioned.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The main centres of production were the religious houses, where
numerous books on silk rolls, and albums "modest in size but of
transcendant beauty" were produced. "Both Buddhism, particularly the
Ch'an meditative sect, and Taoism, with its love of nature and freedom,
contributed to awakening in the artistic mind a love for solitude
clothed in magnificent scenery." The pictures included landscapes (which
are unique in their kind), figures of people, saints and "arhats",
animals---real and imaginary---palaces and cottages, birds, fishes, and
insects, bamboos and flowers.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-559}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BLOCK PRINTING]{.style_2} {#block-printing .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The invention of paper naturally increased the output of books. At a
later period the Chinese discovered a way to repeat designs from a block
of wood,]{.style_} [i.e.]{.style_1} [block printing. The practice was
very simple; the artist carved the designs and the characters in relief
on wood, so that these designs and characters appeared raised; then they
inked them and pressed a sheet of paper on the face of the block. This
procedure could be repeated as many times as copies were required. Thus
the essential feature of printing was produced.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[How and when this printing was invented is not clear. The practice of
stamping pottery with seals appears in the ancient Near East in the
first millennium B.C., and the stamping of patterns on silk as a trade
mark may have been a very old Chinese practice. It has been pointed out
that the Chinese word for "printing" is]{.style_} [yin]{.style_1}[,
which indicates also a "seal". The step from the "seal" as a trade mark
to the wood-block "printing" of charms on silk or paper is not very
far.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Wood-blocks, known as]{.style_} [xylographica]{.style_1}[, containing
descriptive texts in addition to, or in substitution of, pictures, are
commonly considered to occupy a position between the single picture and
the book printed from movable types.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-560}

::: calibre5
:::

## [WOOD-BLOCK "BOOKS"]{.style_2} {#wood-block-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is commonly believed that the art of taking impressions on paper
from wooden blocks was practised, at least, in the sixth century A.D.,
but then it would seem to have been employed mainly for religious
pictures, tracts and charms. Later, however (in or before the tenth
century), the art of printing books from wood-blocks was quite common;
the Confucian Canon (see p. 396) was so printed in the tenth
century.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest Chinese wood-block "book" extant belongs to A.D.
[]{#calibre_link-561}868---[Fig.
IX---3](#calibre_link-222){.calibre9},]{.style_} [below]{.style_1}[, but
there is no doubt that wood-block printing was practised much earlier.
This is shown, for instance, by the Japanese records---Japan, in certain
cultural respects is a colony of China---attesting that the Empress Sh
toku (748---69) ordered a "million" Buddhist charms to be printed and
placed in miniature pagodas: many of them have survived ([Fig.
IX---3](#calibre_link-222){.calibre9},]{.style_} [above]{.style_1}[).
The oldest print extant is a "poster" of 594 from Toyung near T rf
n.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the seventh and eighth centuries (under the T'ang Dynasty, which, as
already indicated, was one of the greatest periods of Chinese
civilization), literature and art approached their highest level; Li Po,
one of the greatest poets of China, Han Yü, a Buddhist scholar and
statesman, Po Chu-I, a poet and governor, and many others are venerated
names in Chinese literature. Until A.D. 845, with few interruptions,
Buddhism flourished in China (see p. 387 ff.), and no doubt numerous
wood-block impressions were produced of little images of the Buddha and
of passages from Buddhist writings, paper being the material chiefly
used, but no specimens have survived. However, thousands of copies of
analogous images have been recovered in Eastern Turkestan; one roll, now
in the British Museum, contains nearly five hundred impressions from the
same stamp.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["It can be imagined what a boon the invention of printing must have
been to the Buddhist, seeing that it enabled him to accumulate merit on
a vast scale with comparatively little trouble or expense"
(Giles).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-562}

::: calibre5
:::

## [EARLIEST PRINTS AND PRINTERS]{.style_2} {#earliest-prints-and-printers .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The wood-block printed book of A.D. 868---referred to on p. 410---is a
Chinese version of the Buddhist]{.style_} [Vajracchedika]{.style_1}[,
or]{.style_} [Diamond S tra,]{.style_1} [now in the British Museum (see
[Fig. IX---3](#calibre_link-222){.calibre9}). It is a roll feet long and
about 1 foot wide, made up of seven sheets of paper pasted end to end,
six of them containing the text, the seventh shorter than the others,
containing a fine woodcut as a frontispiece, representing Sakyamuni
enthroned, surrounded by shaven monks and divinities, and addressing
himself to an aged disciple, Subh ti.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The exact date of the print is given in the colophon. "Reverently made
for universal free distribution by Wang Chieh on behalf of his parents
on the 15th of the fourth moon of the ninth year of Hsien-t'ung"
(corresponding to 11.5.868).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Be it emphasized, however, that "The first known printer, or rather
block-cutter, is really one Lei Yen-mei, whose name appears as the
"artificer" on a printed and hand-coloured prayer-sheet dated 947,
showing Kuan Yin with lotus and vase" []{#calibre_link-563}([Fig.
IX---2](#calibre_link-223){.calibre9}). "Two years later . . . Lei
Yen-mei is definitely accorded the title of Superintendent of
Block-engraving" (Giles).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-564}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MOVABLE TYPES]{.style_2} {#movable-types .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Movable types of baked clay are said to have been invented during the
period of Ch'ing-li (A.D. 1041---9) by Pi Shêng; others invented movable
types of tin, and some centuries later movable types were fashioned of
wood (Wang Chêng, 1314), copper, and lead, though they never ousted
block printing from favour, and most of China's great literary works
have been produced by block printing.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Experiments with movable types almost certainly go back to the period
of the beginning of printing in China. Indeed, according to Hummel, "the
thought of printing with movable type must have entered the minds of
craftsmen some two centuries" before Pi Shêng, "for on certain Buddhist
scrolls taken from the Tun-huang caves, \... there are rows of miniature
figures of the Buddha which were not struck off from one large block,
but from separate woodcuts wedged together, it would seem, in a frame,
like characters in a chase".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Hummel mentions a few early Chinese works printed with movable
characters: a literary collection, printed in 1057 from baked clay
types, a work (]{.style_}[Ti-hsüeh]{.style_1}[), printed in 1221, and
another work (]{.style_}[Mao-shih]{.style_1}[) printed about the same
time; the history of the district of Ching-tê (in the province of
Anhwei), printed in 1298 with a fount of 60,000 types. The Library of
Congress (Washington) possesses the following works printed with movable
type: the encyclopaedia]{.style_} [Chin-hsiu Wan-hua-ku ch'ien-hou
hsü-chi,]{.style_1} [printed in 1494, and the work]{.style_} [Jung-chai
hsü-pi,]{.style_1} [printed in 1495, two encyclopaedias of the sixteenth
century]{.style_} [(I-wu hui-yüan,]{.style_1} [1536; and]{.style_}
[T'ai-p'ing yü-lan,]{.style_1} [100 volumes, 1572), and
others.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The main reason why printing with movable types could not succeed in
China, whereas it could have in Korea or Japan (see pp. 419 ff., 425),
lies in the Chinese script (see]{.style_} [The Alphabet,
passim]{.style_1}[) ; the main reason for the complexity of Chinese
writing lies in the Chinese language. Indeed, thousands and thousands of
separate characters would have been necessary; thus, printing from
wood-blocks was much less expensive and much more practical. As
illustrating the dimensions of the problem, it will suffice to mention
that the famous Chinese encyclopaedia,]{.style_} [T'u shu chi
chêng,]{.style_1} [consisting of 6,000 volumes, completed in 1726,
involved the casting of 250,000 copper movable types for printing. How
much simpler is the casting of modern types for alphabetic
scripts!]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The influence of Chinese art on Persian-Arabic book illumination will
be dealt with in the book on]{.style_} [Illumination and
Binding.]{.style_1}

[]{#calibre_link-565}

::: calibre5
:::

## [NON-CHINESE PEOPLES OF CHINA]{.style_2} {#non-chinese-peoples-of-china .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The scripts and books of non-Chinese peoples of China have been dealt
with in]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp. 141---8, and pp.
184---5. See here [Fig. IX---5](#calibre_link-220){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[c]{.style_1}[, and 8, reproducing specimens of books of some of these
peoples.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-566}

::: calibre5
:::

## [CAVES OF THE THOUSAND BUDDHAS]{.style_2} {#caves-of-the-thousand-buddhas .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Before leaving China, it may be worth describing briefly one of the
most important, though less known, discoveries in the history of "the
book". In Eastern Turkestan, not far from the border of the province of
Kansu, on the ancient route of the silk trade between China and the
West, there lies the Tun-huang oasis. The famous Ch'ien-fo-tung, or
"Caves of the Thousand Buddhas"---repeatedly referred to in this
chapter---are situated in a barren valley some nine miles to the south
of the centre of Tun-huang.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Hundreds of cave-temples are here cut into the face of a cliff. Here
was the home of a colony of religious cave dwellers, founded apparently
by Buddhists in A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 366; the Buddhist priest
Lo-tsun is said to have begun the construction of these caves---Mo-kao
grottos, as they were then called; but the earliest examples preserved
belong to the fifth century A.D.; there are, in fact, votive
inscriptions from A.D. 450 to 1100; nothing, however, is known of the
earliest caves.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Since about 1900 rumours were current of a chamber piled high with
books in the form of rolls, hidden behind a brick wall in the rear of an
early fresco which was being restored. These rumours induced Stein to
visit the place. The circumstances of its discovery read like a fairy
tale.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-567}

::: calibre5
:::

## [NUMEROUS PRECIOUS MANUSCRIPTS RECOVERED ([Figs. IX---2](#calibre_link-223){.calibre13}---3)]{.style_2} {#numerous-precious-manuscripts-recovered-figs.-ix23 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

["Heaped up in layers, but without any order, there appeared in the dim
light of the priest's little lamp a solid mass of manuscript bundles
rising to a height of nearly 10 feet, and filling, as subsequent
measurements showed, close on 500 cubic feet." "The total hoard must
have comprised something like 13,500 paper rolls, each about a foot in
width and averaging 15 to 20 feet in length (many are much longer, and
one in the British Museum actually measures over go feet), besides a
very large number of fragments and some hundreds of booklets; also large
bundles of paintings on silk and cotton. Most of the texts were in
Chinese . . . though there were numerous manuscripts in other languages,
such as Sanskrit, Sogdian, Brahmi and Tibetan\.... These manuscripts,
covering a period of six hundred years, would appear to have been
brought together for safety from various monasteries in the
neighbourhood, and to have lain, hidden and forgotten, for just about
nine hundred years more" (Giles).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A great part of this treasure was acquired by Stein for the British
Museum, a part was bought by P. Pelliot for the National Library, at
Paris, and nearly all the rest were removed to Peking. Indeed, some
8,000 scrolls are now preserved in the National Library of the Chinese
capital. Some of the manuscripts are in Japan, and a few in private
hands or in minor collections. Dr. Hu Shih has recently presented to the
Library of Congress a Chinese manuscript, discovered in the Caves in
1900. This manuscript, a scroll 29 feet long and inches wide, is still
mounted on the original wooden lacquered roller. It is attributed to the
sixth century A.D., and it comprises the first and second books
of]{.style_} [Ta Pan Nieh P'an Ching,]{.style_1} [which is the Chinese
version of the Indian]{.style_} [Mah parinirv a s tra,]{.style_1}
[translated by the Indian priest Dharmaraksa, in the years A.D.
414---21.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Dr. L. Giles, who has prepared a catalogue of the material preserved in
the British Museum, points out that the manuscripts number 8,080, of
which 6,794 are Buddhist, 258 Taoist, and 1,028 secular or
non-religious, including Confucian classics, bilingual manuscripts (Br
hmi, Uighur, Tibetan, Sanskrit, Khotanese, Sogdian, Kök Turki),
historical and topographical works, epics and poetry, didactic poems and
fiction. In addition, there are two Manichaean rolls and twenty printed
documents.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Some of the rolls are lavishly illustrated with coloured drawings. At
the end of some of the texts there is a "tailpiece" or "colophon", which
contains the name of the person who caused the copy to be made, "his
pious intention in so doing, and in many cases an exact date" (Giles).
The earliest date given is 10.1.406: [Fig.
IX---2](#calibre_link-223){.calibre9},]{.style_} [left]{.style_1}[. Dr.
Giles points out that as many as 380 separate pieces are carefully
dated: six belong to the fifth century A.D., forty-four to the sixth
century, and 160 to the tenth. The different kinds of paper employed and
the styles of handwriting help to assign nearly all the manuscripts to
particular periods. Most precious is the book
(]{.style_}[Ch]{.style_1}[. stands for Ch'ien-fo-tung)]{.style_} [Ch.
ciii, 0014,]{.style_1} [discussed on p.411. It is the earliest preserved
book in print: [Fig. IX---3](#calibre_link-222){.calibre9}. It is now in
the British Museum.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Extremely important material is also to be found in the]{.style_}
[Collection Pelliot]{.style_1} [of the National Library, at Paris. About
half of the manuscripts are in Chinese, and the rest in Tibetan,
Sogdian, Uighur, Kuchean, and Khotanese languages. A great part of the
Chinese manuscripts are Buddhist text, including some of special
historical interest. There are also many Taoist rolls and other
non-Buddhist religious texts such as Nestorian and Manichaean.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-568}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PAPER]{.style_2} {#paper .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

["The paper of even the carliest rolls is of wonderfully good quality.
The oldest of all was made from the inner bark of a species of mulberry
(]{.style_}[Broussonetia papyrifera]{.style_1}[), and is of a brownish
buff colour, tough and rather thick. The surface and sizing are both
good. Other varieties of paper in the fifth century were made from
China-grass (ramie), or from that and mulberry bark mixed. One of them
has a smooth, glossy surface of a very pale cream colour, and is also
tough, though somewhat less thick. Characteristic of the sixth century
is a thin crisp paper sometimes stained a rich golden-yellow. After the
disastrous rebellion of An Lu-shan in the eighth century a rapid
deterioration sets in, and thenceforward most of the papers are very
coarse and flabby, drab in colour, and difficult to write on"
(Giles.)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to Hummel, the generally yellowish colour of these scrolls is
due not to their age, but to the fact that they were impregnated with an
insecticidal substance, called]{.style_} [huang-nieh]{.style_1} [(taken
from the Amoor Cork Tree or]{.style_} [Phellodendron
amurense]{.style_1}[), which had a toxic effect; by an edict of A.D. 674
its use was made compulsory, at least for certain types of
documents.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Sec also pp. 345 f. and 362 ff.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-569}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BIBLIOGRAPHY]{.style_2} {#bibliography-9 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In addition to Bibliography quoted in]{.style_} [The
Alphabet]{.style_1}[, pp. 118---19, sec:]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[L. Giles,]{.style_} [An Alphabetical Index to the Chinese
Encyclopedia]{.style_1}[, London, 1911.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[S. Coupling,]{.style_} [The Encyclopaedia Sinica]{.style_1}[, London,
1917.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. W. Hummel,]{.style_} [The Development of the Book in
China,]{.style_1} [in "JOURN. OF THE AMER. OR. SOC.", 1941 ;]{.style_}
[Movable Type Printing in China]{.style_1}[, in "THE LIBR. OF CONGR.
QUART. JOURN., etc.", 1944, and other articles.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[L. C. Goodrich,]{.style_} [A Short History of the Chinese
People,]{.style_1} [New York, 1943.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Nagasawa Kikuya,]{.style_} [Shina gakujutsu bungeishi,]{.style_1}
[transl. into German,]{.style_} [Geschichte d. chines.
Liter.,]{.style_1} [Peking, 1945.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. Simon,]{.style_} [A Beginners' Chinese-English
Dictionary]{.style_1}[, London, 1947.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. Eberhard,]{.style_} [A History of China]{.style_1}[, London,
1950.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. Maspero,]{.style_} [Les Religions chinoises]{.style_1}[, Paris,
1950.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Teng Ss -yü and K. Biggerstaff,]{.style_} [An Annotated
Bibliography,]{.style_1} [etc., Rev. ed., Cambridge (Mass.),
1950.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. H. Philips,]{.style_} [Handbook of Oriental History]{.style_1}[,
London, 1951.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-570}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Korean Books]{.style_2} {#korean-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[(For the form of Korean books see [Fig.
IX---9](#calibre_link-219){.calibre9})]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Korean speech is quite different from Chinese, but the Koreans were
under Chinese cultural and political influence for many centuries
(probably from the first century B.C. onwards), and therefore it is
natural that they should have adopted the Chinese script and Chinese
methods of writing books. Local tradition attributes the introduction of
the Chinese characters into Korea to Wan-shin (third century A.D.). For
many centuries the Koreans employed only Chinese characters, although
their pronunciation was entirely different from that in China. Moreover,
as one might expect, the present-day Korean language contains many words
borrowed from Chinese, especially those employed in literary essays by
the higher social classes.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Chinese influence, which was dimmed during the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries A.D., rose again with the overthrowing of the
Mongolian Dynasty in China and the advent of a new dynastic system in
Korea in 1392.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[TRIUMPH OF CONFUCIANISM]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Various reforms introduced in the late fourteenth century were based
mainly on Chinese culture. Confucianism, replacing Buddhism (which had
been introduced, it would seem, as early as A.D. 372), was established
as the state religion. Bitter strife developed between the Confucianists
and the Buddhists; in the end, after a violent reaction against the
latter, especially in the early sixteenth century, Confucianism
triumphed, at least amongst the upper classes, although Buddhism
continued to keep some hold amongst the lower classes.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-571}

::: calibre5
:::

::: calibre15
:::

## [GOVERNMENT BOOK DEPARTMENT]{.style_2} {#government-book-department .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Amongst the various reforms of 1392, we find record of the
establishment of a central department of books, among whose
responsibilities were "the casting of type and the printing of books".
According to McMurtrie, "there are records that printing with movable
types had been known in Korea as far back as the first half of the
thirteenth century, and the activities at the close of the fourteenth
century should perhaps be regarded as a revival of a method of printing
which had fallen into disuse. In this revival, however, the types to be
used were made of metal". Printing must have been introduced into Korea
by the Buddhists, and the reform referred to must have been a sort of
change-over from "private enterprise" to "nationalization".]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-572}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MOVABLE COPPER TYPES]{.style_2} {#movable-copper-types .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Korean king Ta-jong (1401---19) was a great reformer and was the
first to conceive and carry out the idea of movable copper types. In
1403, within a few months, several hundred thousand types were cast of
bronze; this, be it noted, occurred forty-seven years before the first
printing from movable types was known in Europe.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The interest shown by the Korean Government in the art of printing is
best evidenced by the fact that, between 1403 and 1544, as many as
eleven royal decrees were issued concerning the casting of new founts of
type.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The following earliest Korean movable type prints are possessed by the
Library of Congress:]{.style_} [Chin-ss l ,]{.style_1} [four volumes,
printed in 1519;]{.style_}
[Hsin]{.style_1}[-]{.style_}[ching]{.style_1}[, two volumes, printed
from cast metal type in 1566, with a commentary (]{.style_}[Hsin-ching
fa-hui]{.style_1}[) printed in 1603. "Thereafter movable type prints
were produced in Korea in great numbers, too many, in fact, to be listed
here" (Hummel).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-573}

::: calibre5
:::

## [GOLDEN AGE OF KOREAN LITERATURE]{.style_2} {#golden-age-of-korean-literature .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[That, indeed, was the Golden Age of Korea's literary production.
Buddhist monks imported numerous Sanskrit and Tibetan Buddhist books,
while Confucian]{.style_} [literati]{.style_1} [imported large numbers
of Chinese Confucian books. A great number of Korean books were written
and printed, and some fifteenth-century]{.style_} [incunabula]{.style_1}
[have been preserved in Korean and Japanese monasteries. McMurtrie
quotes an enthusiastic chronicler of 1422 as having written: "There will
be no book left unprinted, and no man who does not learn. Literature and
religion will make daily progress, and the cause of morality must gain
enormously. The T'ang and Han rulers, who considered the first duty of
the sovereign to be finance and war, are not to be mentioned in the same
day with the sovereign to whom this work is due."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[There is poignancy in the situation reported 528 years later by a
representative of Western civilization; he wrote: "One of the blessings
of this war is the Korean education system. Not because it educates
Koreans, but because its schools provide us with such excellent warm
billets. I have never been so school conscious in my life as
here.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["When you arrive, dusty, frozen, tired and hungry in some town at
nightfall you do not look for the hotel, but the nearest school where
you are sure to find someone, like my friend Corporal Eric Jackson, with
a fire made of blackboards and school desks.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["Jackson used to drive a truck in Doncaster, but now he is an Army
cook, and what he does not know about the combustible qualities of
school furniture is nobody's business.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["Natural history must figure high in the Korean curriculum because
every school is richly endowed with stuffed birds and mounted skeletons.
These now provide us with much innocent light relief . . ." (B.
Wickstead,]{.style_} [Daily Express,]{.style_1} [4.12.1950).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-574}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE KOREAN ALPHABET]{.style_2} {#the-korean-alphabet .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The invention of the Korean movable copper types increased still more
the difficulties of using the cumbersome ideographic characters of
Chinese origin. It is thus not surprising that under the new king
Set-jong (1419-51) a new, simplified, Korean script, called]{.style_}
[Ön-mun,]{.style_1} [was devised, which became the only native alphabet
of the Far East.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[There was, indeed, an earlier attempt at an indigenous Korean script: a
Korean scholar, Syöl Chong (A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 680---90),
invented a syllabary, called Nitok (]{.style_}[li-tu,
ni-do]{.style_1}[), of thirty-six signs, based on Chinese characters,
perhaps owing something to Indian scripts; little, however, is known of
this earlier development.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Ön-mun, whose origin is still a matter of dispute (]{.style_}[see
The Alphabet]{.style_1}[, pp. 442---6), was for many centuries regarded
with contempt by the higher social classes. May we thus assume that the
new script was of Buddhist origin---hence, the contempt of the
Confucian]{.style_} [literati]{.style_1}[?]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000047.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-224}

[Fig. IX--6 (Left) The earliest extant work by a Japanese: Commentary on
a Buddhist s tra written, in Chisese, by Shotoku Taishi (or Prince
Shotoku's Commentary; (right) earliest extant Japanese manuscript, of
which both the date and the name of the writer are known: Diary by
Fujiwara Michinaga (961-1095), written partly in pure Japanese, in kana
script (in the illustration, on the right), and partly in Chinese
characters, in pseudo Sino-Japanese style. The portion here reproduced
gives the date 6.2.1004 A.D. according to the lunar calendar.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, all official writing and books of instruction continued to be
printed in Chinese characters; purely Korean literature was reserved for
women and the "illiterate". Indeed, although types were actually cast
for the Ön-mun alphabet, only one book printed from this type, in 1434,
has been recorded.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Since the beginning of the twentieth century, the desire for a pure
Chinese education has practically vanished, and Ön-mun has received much
attention, especially after education had been completely re-organized.
Nowadays (]{.style_}[i.e.]{.style_1} [at least, before the 1950 war) it
is generally used in schools, newspapers, popular literature and daily
requirements.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-575}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PROBLEM OF INVENTION OF ALPHABETIC PRINTING]{.style_2} {#problem-of-invention-of-alphabetic-printing .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is remarkable how close the Koreans came to the invention of
printing with single-letter movable types, cast from matrices. They
employed paper, they perfected printing from movable types, and they
invented an alphabet: all these three things being the prime necessities
of alphabetic printing.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Korean wood-cuts, like the Chinese and the Japanese, were far
better in drawing and execution than early European wood-cuts. Most of
the blocks were made of soft wood (not box), and were cut with a short
knife. The process was probably the same as that employed in Europe: the
drawings were made on thin paper and stuck downwards on the blocks, then
the knife was carefully run along the edges of the various lines,
cutting outwards, the interlinear spaces being "grooved out" by a chisel
and hammer. The wood-cuts were always in outline, thickened here and
there.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Not only had the Koreans printing with copper movable types, but they
developed a primitive type mould or method of casting types. "Their
types were cast in sand, with wooden types used as dies in forming the
sand matrix, as is recorded by Song Hyon, writing at the end of the
fifteenth century" (McMurtrie).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[What obstacles hindered the Koreans from developing the practice of
printing with single-letter types? It may be surmised that the main
obstacle arose from the difficulty inherent in Korean writing. If the
Ön-mun alphabet were the only Korean script it is highly probable that
the Koreans, of all the peoples in the world, would have been the true
inventors of the modern art of printing. But, whether because of the
opposition of the higher classes to Ön-mun, or because the Koreans were
unable to get rid of the cumbersome Chinese characters, the fact is that
the Koreans not only stopped half-way, but---because printing from
wood-blocks was cheaper and more practical for their Chinese
script---they went back on their attempt to print with movable
types.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to the late Prof. Haloun, the importance of the Koreans
should not be over-estimated, as they have never been original in any
field of culture.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000048.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. IX--7]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Books of non-Chinese peoples of China, I. (Above) The first page of a
Moso manuscript; (below) Lo-lo printed book, edited by Prince
Len.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-576}

## [Japanese Books ([Figs. IX---3](#calibre_link-222){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [above]{.style_2}[, 6 and 9)]{.style_2} {#japanese-books-figs.-ix3-above-6-and-9 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The beginnings of Chinese influence upon Japan lie in the same
obscurity as the rest of early Japanese history. The earliest trade and
cultural relations between China and the Japanese islands may be dated
in the last centuries B.C., but the introduction of Chinese writing into
Japan would seem to have taken place somewhere in the third or fourth
century A.D. It was hardly employed actively before the fifth century,
and it remained for some centuries a monopoly of circles of]{.style_}
[literati]{.style_1}[, many of whom were of Chinese or rather Korean
origin.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000049.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. IX--8]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Books of non-Chinese peoples of China, II. (Above) Lo-lo book in
vertical script; (below) portion of a Chinese-Hsi-hsia
glossary.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[CHINESE-KOREAN INFLUENCES]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Indeed, most Chinese influences, according to the accepted tradition,
reached Japan by way of Korea. According to tradition, too, in the third
century A.D. Japan sent envoys to Korea in search of men of learning.
They brought back one Onin or Wang Jên, who taught the Japanese Chinese
writing, introduced them in the culture of his nation, and was later
deified. Another tradition attributes the introduction of Chinese
writing into Japan to two Korean scholars, Ajiki and Wani, the tutors of
a Japanese crown prince of the fifth century A.D.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[BUDDHIST INFLUENCES]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The introduction of Buddhism, about the middle of the sixth century
(A.D. 552, according to tradition), the direct and rather frequent
contacts with China of the T'ang dynasty during the seventh to ninth
centuries, and the steadily growing number of immigrant Chinese scholars
and Buddhist monks, resulted both in the enormous increase of study of
the Chinese language and script, and in the cultural development which
characterizes the periods of Nara (710---83) and Hei.an, now Ky to
(794---1185). Art and literature flourished, and the necessity arose for
the translation of Chinese works into Japanese, and for the adaptation
of Chinese writing to the Japanese language. Buddhism took deep root,
and one of the ways by which the devout Buddhist acquired merit was by
the ceaseless repetition, orally or in writing, of passages from the
Buddhist scriptures.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-577}

::: calibre5
:::

## [EARLIEST BOOKS OF JAPAN []{#calibre_link-578 .calibre14}([Fig. IX--6](#calibre_link-224){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#earliest-books-of-japan-fig.-ix6 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The two earliest Japanese books are in the nature of ancient histories,
the]{.style_}
[Ko]{.style_1}[-]{.style_}[ji]{.style_1}[-]{.style_}[ki]{.style_1}
[("Record of Ancient Matters"), of A.D. 712, and]{.style_}
[Ni-hon-sho.ki]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [Ni-hon-gi]{.style_1}
[("Chronicles of Japan"), A.D. 720. They show how difficult it is to
write books in a non-literary language, which has no script of its own.
While the]{.style_} [Nihongi]{.style_1} [is written entirely in
Chinese---if we except a few passages (especially poems) transliterated
phonetically by means of Chinese characters---in the]{.style_}
[Kojiki]{.style_1} [we find Chinese symbols (conventionally chosen)
written with Chinese syntax, though the symbols are to be read with
Japanese sounds.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest Japanese purely literary work is the]{.style_} [Many
sh]{.style_1} [, or "Collection of the Myriad Leaves", an anthology of
the ancient poems, published A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 760. For
some centuries, most of the literature was published in Chinese, but
certain diacritic signs were added (especially in Buddhist religious
works), of which some enabled the readers to change the syntax according
to the requirements of the Japanese language, and others suggested the
addition of grammatical terminations and other complements.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000050.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-219}

[[Fig. IX---9](#calibre_link-225){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Various forms of books in the Far East.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is possible that the beginning of Japanese printing and of the
employment of paper in Japan was contemporary with the earliest Japanese
literary activity. It is known that in Europe the art of printing with
movable metal types was preceded by the printing of single pictures from
wood-blocks. There---as has been indicated on p. 410---we have already
the essential feature of printing: the wood-block is inked and thus
allows of the taking of a great number of impressions.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-579}

::: calibre5
:::

## [PRINTING FROM WOOD-BLOCKS]{.style_2} {#printing-from-wood-blocks .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The "million" Buddhist charms ordered by the Japanese Empress Sh toku
to be printed from wood-blocks on paper (see p. 410) are not only the
oldest extant specimens made in Japan, but are also the earliest known
specimens of printing.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[On the whole, however, neither the literary activity nor the book
production of Japan were original; bearing in mind the strong Chinese
influence already noted, they may be considered as a simple reflection
of the cultural achievement of China under the T'ang dynasty. It is,
indeed, not unlikely that the practice of printing from wood-cuts on
paper, of which we have Japanese evidence for A.D. 769, goes back to a
practice established much earlier in China.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Interestingly enough, printing with movable types was not very
fashionable in Japan. According to McMurtrie, "The first book printed in
Japan with movable types was dated 1596, but this method of printing
came to an abrupt end in 1629."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In point of fact, printing from wood-blocks was, on the whole, much
more practical and less expensive, for, as may be imagined, separate
types for the tens of thousands of Japanese,]{.style_} [i.e]{.style_1}[.
Chinese, ideograms meant far greater expenditure of time and labour in
the work of composition. Printing from movable types, indeed, is in
certain respect even more complicated in the case of Japanese than of
Chinese: see]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp. 169---74, where
also the various Japanese scripts are dealt with.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-580}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Pre-Columbian Central America and Mexico]{.style_2} {#pre-columbian-central-america-and-mexico .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The book production of the pre-Columbian American peoples will not be
discussed at length, as it is not connected with the history of our
modern book. On the other hand, a history of the Hand-produced Book must
mention these independent achievements of civilization.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-581}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MAYA BOOKS ([Figs. II---8](#calibre_link-66){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [a---c,]{.style_2} [and IX---10---12)]{.style_2} {#maya-books-figs.-ii8-ac-and-ix1012 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The dates of the preserved Maya manuscripts are still uncertain; they
seem to belong to the later Maya period, preceding by a few centuries
the European conquest, whereas the]{.style_} [stelae]{.style_1} [(see
Chapter II) seem to belong to an earlier period (perhaps, the first half
of the first millennium A.D.).]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000051.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-67}

[[Fig. IX---10](#calibre_link-226){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Paris (infra red photo of p. 4. the best preserved page of the
manuscript). Represents events connected with the Maya katun
(twenty-year period) 11 Aha'i. (Explanation by J. Eric S.
Thompson.)]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000052.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-228}

[Fig. IX---11]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Dresden. (Above) Portion of divinatory almanac (4 Ahau, 12 Lamat,
7 Cib, 2 Kan, 10 Eb, 5 Ahau, 13 Lamat, South. God B, fire god. maize
god, drought) ; (below) complete divinatory, almanac with the four world
directional colours : red, white, black, and yellow, and glyphs of
various offerings to be made to the gods. (Explanation by J. Eric S.
Thompson.)]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000053.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-229}

[Fig. IX--12.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Tro-Cortesiano. a, page 72 (page 38 of Codex Cortesiano). b, page
36 (page 21 of Codex Tro), showing New Year ceremonies for the Kan
years, and including the unusual feature of a man walking on stilts and
also a man sowing; c, page 48 (page 9 of Codex Tro), showing an
armadillo in a dead-fall trap and a deer caught in anoose trap, and also
the scorpion god. Each picture illustrates a divinatory almanac,
presumably for hunters (Explanation by L. Eric Thompson).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to Diego de Landa---to whom we owe not only the destruction
of Maya manuscripts, but also what we know of Maya civilization,
including part of our limited knowledge of Maya writing---the Mayas of
Yucatan had a High Priest whom they called Ahkin May, or Ahaucan May,
meaning the Priest May, or High Priest May. He provided books for the
priests of the towns; they in turn not only attended to the service of
the temples, but also taught sciences and writing books on these
sciences, which were the reckoning of the years, months and days; the
festivals and ceremonies; the administration of their sacraments; the
omens of the days; their methods of divination and prophecies;
historical events and antiquities ; remedies for sicknesses; as well as
the art of reading and writing by characters and by pictures
illustrating these writings. "Some of the principal lords," wrote Landa,
"were learned in these sciences, from interest, and for the greater
esteem they enjoyed thereby; yet, they did not make use of them in
public."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It must be assumed, therefore, that the priesthood had stores of books,
or libraries, containing the history and the accumulated learning of the
race. J. E. S. Thompson has pointed out that according to Spanish (and
hispanicized Maya) writers, the Maya manuscripts dealt with historical
records, lives of outstanding people, prophecies or divination,
information on the planets, songs in metre, ceremonies, the order of
sacrifices to their gods, and their calendars. "We can be reasonably
sure that, like the peoples of central Mexico, the Maya had also
hieroglyphic documents covering distribution and ownership of land,
tribute lists, dynasties and mythology" (Thompson). However, the three
surviving manuscripts seem to deal mainly with calendar and astronomical
matters, as well as with ritual, ceremonies, and divination.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The books were painted in various colours: blue, dark blue, bluish
green, violet, red, light and dark yellow, brown, pink, black, and
intermediate shades. The manuscripts were written on sheets of deerskin,
or, more often, on a single long strip of "paper", made from the fibre,
or the roots, or the inner bark of the wild fig tree, which in ancient
Mexico was called]{.style_} [amatl,]{.style_1} [the same term also being
applied to the "paper" and the books. Similar paper is still produced by
some natives of Mexico: see [Fig.
IX--13](#calibre_link-42){.calibre9}.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Amatl]{.style_1} [gave the Spanish word]{.style_} [amate,]{.style_1}
[and some Spanish writers called also the Maya books (and
glyphs)]{.style_} [analte]{.style_1}[(h), or]{.style_}
[amales]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [anares.]{.style_1} ["The Yucatec word
for 'paper' or a book is]{.style_} [huun,]{.style_1} [and 'to read', or
rather 'to count a book' is]{.style_} [xochun"]{.style_1}
[(Thompson).]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000054.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-42}

[[Fig. IX--13](#calibre_link-227){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Indigenous "paper" in modern Mexico. (Above) Its manufacture in San
Pablito (Sierra Norte de Puebla, Mexico); (right) a sheet of xalámatl
"paper" and a bundle of twelve sheets as sold on the market of San
Pablito.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[While the height of the sheet varied between inches and nearly i foot,
its length---as we have already seen---measured as much as nearly 20
feet, in the case of the]{.style_} [Codex Madrid,]{.style_1} [and feet
in the case of the]{.style_} [Dresden Codex.]{.style_1} [According to
Landa, the Mayas wrote their books on a long sheet which was folded and
then enclosed between two boards finely ornamented. Indeed, the
preserved codices show that the book was folded concertina-wise to
produce "pages" or "leaves", about to inches wide. The paper, according
to Landa, was made from the roots of a tree, it was given a white finish
and was excellent for writing upon. The Maya codices extant show that
Landa's description is correct. Indeed, the smooth white surface was
covered with a fine lime sizing.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The writing, with some exception, was on both sides of the sheet. The
text runs from left to right through the whole length of the]{.style_}
[recto]{.style_1} [(the pagination being a modern procedure for
convenience of reference), and is followed by the verso, with its text
to be read from left to right, also through the whole length, thus,
the]{.style_} [verso]{.style_1} [of the first "page" or fold, is the
last "page" or fold of the codex.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to a leading Americanist, W. Gates, when the Maya writer set
out to produce a manuscript, he measured off the desired width of the
folds or pages, and made the actual folds. Next he outlined each
separate page with red lines. The contents of "the book" were divided
into chapters. By far the greater part of these chapters were arranged
in a succession of]{.style_} [tzolkins]{.style_1} [(the]{.style_}
[tzolkin]{.style_1} [being the count of 260 days), used as a ritual
divinatory book of days. The]{.style_} [tzolkins]{.style_1} [were
divided into four, five or ten equal parts, of sixty-five, fifty-two,
twenty-six days; the fifty-two-day division being commonest. Each of
the]{.style_} [tzolkin]{.style_1} [subdivisions
(]{.style_}[e.g]{.style_1}[. of fifty-two days) was again irregularly
subdivided into minor sections, each headed by a black and a red
numeral, the former being the counter of the passing days, the red the
numeral of the day reached.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The "pages" of the chapters were subdivided into two, three or four
horizontal bands, marked by red lines. The widths of these bands were
adjusted to the requirement of the subject dealt with. The writer, then,
did not think in terms of "pages", as we do, but wrote straight across
these horizontal divisions, to the end of the section or chapter, and
then back to the next lower horizontal band; at times, even a glyph, or
figure, is half on one "page", half on the next. The ruling, breaking of
text, consecutive march of pictures, and the glyph successions, enable
us to reconstruct the text as a continuous strip and as a consecutive
whole. In the]{.style_} [Codex Paris]{.style_1} [(see p. 436 f.),
however, there are no]{.style_} [tzolkins.]{.style_1}

[]{#calibre_link-582}

::: calibre5
:::

## [AZTEC BOOKS (Fig·. 11-8,]{.style_2} [d,]{.style_2} [and IX---14---17)]{.style_2} {#aztec-books-fig.-11-8-d-and-ix1417 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The "Aztec" books, like the Maya ones, were written on coarse cloth
made from the fibre of the]{.style_} [agave americana]{.style_1} [or on
a long sheet of]{.style_} [amatl]{.style_1} [paper of an average width
of 6 or 7 inches, but of different lengths. As in the Maya manuscripts,
the sheet was folded up concertina fashion to form leaves. The surface
of the sheet was covered with a very thin coating of white varnish to
receive the text, which was generally painted on both sides in a wide
range of colours (red, yellow, blue, green, purple, brown, orange, black
and white; some of them in more than one shade). The colours were
outlined in black, but they were crude, and the pictures were without
artistic merit. They were obviously merely utilitarian.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The sheet was fastened to what may be called the binding of the codex,
which was of fine, thin wood, covered with brilliant varnish. Each cover
measured nearly the same as the "leaves"; the binding had no back. One
pre-conquest manuscript is bound with covers of wood with jade
inlay.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-583}

::: calibre5
:::

## [DESTRUCTION OF PRE-COLUMBIAN BOOKS]{.style_2} {#destruction-of-pre-columbian-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[As a result of Christian intolerance, very few documents written by
American pre-Columbian natives have survived. Diego de Landa
(1524---79), the second bishop of Yucatan, who seems to have been
responsible for the wholesale destruction of Maya manuscripts, and other
worthy ecclesiastical authorities who were much concerned with "the
salvation of souls", which could not have been achieved with the
existence of the "devilish" picture-books, did their job thoroughly. The
bishop himself wrote, "we found a great number of books . . . and since
they contained nothing but superstitions and falsehoods of the devil, we
burned them all, which they took most grievously, and which gave them
great pain".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Maya manuscripts were, indeed, considered and "quite rightly, to be an
integral part of the old Maya paganism\.... From sixteenth-century
Spanish writers we learn that sometimes codices were buried with Maya
priests\.... Some were probably destroyed by the Maya, themselves
because their existence endangered the souls of their owners if these
were Christians; their bodies, if at heart they remained heathens.
Others must have fallen victims to neglect and to the ravages of time"
(Thompson).]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000055.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-230}

[Fig. IX---14]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a. Portion of Codex Zouche (Nuttall) (British Museum): b, page of the
pre-Columbian Codex Colombino (National Anthropological Museum,
Mexico).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000057.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. IX---15]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Page from the Mexican manuscript Historia Tolteca-Chichimeca, showing
the arrival of the Toltecs at Tlachiualtepec: Iexicouatl, a, and
Quetzalteueyeac, b, at Tlachiualtepec, c, the seat of Aquiach-Amapane,
e.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000058.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. IX---16]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Post-Conquest Codex Fernandez Leal (National Anthropological Museum,
Mexico), shows a volador; the frame on which the fliers sit---owing to
ignorance ot perspective---is shown vertical instead of horizontal.
(Explanation by Dr. Bodil Christensen).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-584}

## [PRESERVED CODICES]{.style_2} {#preserved-codices .calibre12}

[]{#calibre_link-585}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MAYA CODICES ([Figs. IX---10](#calibre_link-67){.calibre13}---12)]{.style_2} {#maya-codices-figs.-ix1012 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[As a result of this work, although a large number of Maya manuscripts
were in existence at the time of the Conquest, only three have
survived---by accident---their preservation being due to fortunate
circumstances. Thus, we have now the beautiful]{.style_} [Codex
Dresden,]{.style_1} [the]{.style_} [Codex Madrid]{.style_1} [and
the]{.style_} [Codex Paris:]{.style_1} [they are so called from the
collections in which they are preserved.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The first of them, which is the finest, is assigned to the twelfth
century A.D., and is preserved in the State Library, at Dresden, having
been acquired in 1739 at Vienna, where it may have been sent by Emperor
Charles V. It measures feet by inches, and is folded into thirty-nine
"leaves", four of which are written and painted on the]{.style_}
[recto]{.style_1} [only. It contains divinatory, astronomical,
mythological, and other matters. See []{#calibre_link-586}also [Fig.
IX---11](#calibre_link-228){.calibre9}.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000059.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-231}

[Fig. IX--17]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[a, Portion of Codex Boturini, showing the migrations of the Aztecs. b,
The Ten Commandments in an Aztec Catechism.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The]{.style_} [Codex Paris,]{.style_1} [also known as]{.style_} [Codex
Perez]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [Codex Peresianus]{.style_1} [([Fig.
IX---10](#calibre_link-67){.calibre9}), was "discovered" in 1859 in the
now National Library, at Paris. It is probably only a fragment,
measuring about 4 feet 9 inches by inches, and is folded into eleven
"leaves", all written on both sides. It apparently contains divinatory,
ceremonial, and ritual matter, and perhaps also historical records. In
Thompson's opinion, it is of a slightly later date than the]{.style_}
[Codex Dresden.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The]{.style_} [Codex Madrid]{.style_1} []{#calibre_link-587}[([Fig.
IX---12](#calibre_link-229){.calibre9}) is also known as]{.style_}
[Codex Tro-Cortes]{.style_1} [(in Spanish,]{.style_} [Códice
Tro-Cortesiano),]{.style_1} [because it was formerly divided into two
parts; one of them, known as]{.style_} [Codex Tro,]{.style_1} [in 1866
was found by the Abbé Brasseur de Bourbourg in the possession of the
palaeographer Juan de Tro y Ortolano---by coincidence, a descendant of
Hernando Cortés; the second part, known as]{.style_} [Codex
Cortes,]{.style_1} [was recovered in Spain in 1875, and was acquired by
the Spanish Government. The Americanist Léon de Rosny recognized that
the two parts belong together. The whole manuscript, now preserved in
the American Museum, at Madrid, is nearly 20 feet long and about inches
wide. It is folded into fifty-six "leaves", and inscribed and painted on
both sides. It appears to have served purely as a book of divination,
and belongs to a much later period than the other two codices.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-588}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MEXICAN CODICES []{#calibre_link-589 .calibre14}([Figs. IX---14](#calibre_link-230){.calibre13}---17)]{.style_2} {#mexican-codices-figs.-ix1417 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[With regard to the Mexican manuscripts, the situation is slightly
better. Although masses of pre-Columbian manuscripts are known to have
been burned by Spanish priests, about fifteen of the pre-conquest
Mexican codices have survived; five are in England, four in Italy, two
in France, one each in the U.S.A., Mexico and Austria. There are also a
great number of Mexican Christian manuscripts written by Spanish priests
or by natives under Spanish domination.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The "Aztec" manuscripts extant have been divided by some scholars into
four groups: (1) Aztec proper; (2) Xicalanca (northern Oaxaca) ; (3)
Mixtec (central Oaxaca) ; and (4) Zapotec, Cuicateco, Mazateco, Mixe and
Chinanteco (Oaxaca and Chiapas). A clear distinction, however, cannot be
made as yet.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The greater part of the codices extant is devoted to divinations,
rituals and astrology; a few are concerned primarily with genealogies
and the sequences of political events, being in fact a kind of history.
The few pre-conquest codices extant were written mainly by the native
priests, amongst whose duties was that of keeping records of ceremonies
appropriate to the various religious festivals, of tributes due to the
king and to the temples, of legal trials, of historical events, and so
on. The post-Conquest manuscripts deal with historical and religious
matters, such as the Catholic catechism []{#calibre_link-590}([Fig.
IX---17](#calibre_link-231){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[b]{.style_1}[).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-591}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BIBLIOGRAPHY]{.style_2} {#bibliography-10 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In addition to works quoted in]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [pp.
134---5, see J. E. S. Thompson,]{.style_} [Maya Hieroglyphic
Writing,]{.style_1} [Washington, D.C., 1950.]{.style_}
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: {#calibre_link-232 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-16}

::: calibre7
:::

### [CHAPTER X]{.style_2} {#chapter-x .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

### [ANGLO-CELTIC CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE MEDIEVAL BOOK]{.style_2} {#anglo-celtic-contributions-to-the-development-of-the-medieval-book .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

[EARLIER chapters of the present book have been concerned with the
Middle Ages and in this last chapter we may summarize the conditions
prevailing in Europe during this period. It has already been emphasized
that it is extremely difficult or impossible to determine the exact
origin of certain important events. Historians have adopted conventional
terms and dates on the assumption that the cultured laymen who employ
them know that all ages overlap, and so do important events and their
causes. For instance, the traditional division of history into Antiquity
and Middle Ages (preceding the Modern Age) is of no significance for the
history of medicine or science; "in mathematical astronomy ancient
methods prevailed until Newton" (Neugebauer).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE MIDDLE AGES]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[With this proviso we may generalize about certain conditions and
events. In the Middle Ages, and especially in the "Dark Ages"---a term
also applied on occasion to this period, but more particularly to its
first half---the once civilized Graeco-Roman Europe was battered, first
from the north and the north-east by barbarian Teutonic tribes, then
from the south and the east by Arabs and other Moslems, then from the
west and the north-west by Northmen. Thousands upon thousands of poor,
tired human beings, who shared their food and lodgings with the animals
of the fields, sometimes themselves occupying the stables, worked for
the benefit of a few privileged ones, and lived and died without hope.
No wonder superstition universally prevailed, and intolerance and
fanaticism, under the fair names of religion and chivalry, produced more
and more massacres or expulsions of Moslems and Jews. All too often the
hope was plunder, a hope usually realized by the subsequent grabbing of
the property of the "infidels" and "heretics".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[At the same time the few cultured people, scattered here and there,
were much more internationally minded---so to say---than are people
today. They belonged to an international republic of culture which knew
no national, linguistic, or political boundaries. Latin was the
international language of culture and science. The Universities of
Salerno, Bologna, Paris, Oxford, Salamanca, Padua, Prague, Cracow, and a
few others were truly cosmopolitan. Great men, such as St. Augustine,
St. Jerome, St. Patrick, St. Benedict, St. Columba, the Venerable Bede,
Alcuin of York, Thomas Aquinas, Dante, Chaucer, Giotto, Petrarca,
Boccaccio, Froissart, Thomas a Kempis, St. Dominic. St. Francis of
Assisi, St. Isidore of Seville, St. Beatus de Liebana, made
contributions of enduring value in the international fields of religion
and theology, philosophy, literature and art, rather than in any
particular national branch of culture.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[BIBLE VERSIONS INTO "VULGAR" LANGUAGES]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, although the monks and clergy learned Latin, and although a
knowledge of Latin was the most essential ingredient in an educated
man's culture, it was never the language of the common people.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Church was ever quick to realize that if the Bible came at all to
the common man, it must come to him in the "vulgar" tongue, not in the
learned language of the few cultured individuals. Some concern was even
felt for the great mass of illiterates (this concern being one of the
main causes of development of illumination---see the forthcoming book
on]{.style_} [Illumination and Binding]{.style_1}[). When Benedict
Biscop---the Northumbrian monk who founded the monasteries of St. Peter
at Wearmouth or Monkwearmouth (674) and of St. Paul at Jarrow (682),
which soon became the most important seats of learning and book
production in England---came back from his repeated visits to Rome, he
brought with him a number of carefully selected paintings of educational
value, "setting forth the Christian story in an understandable form,
whether the beholder could read or no". Thus, for instance, "at Jarrow
there was a set of types and antitypes in which scenes from the Old and
the New Testament were juxtaposed, such as Isaac bearing the wood for
his sacrifice and Christ carrying the cross" (Kendrick).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to Bede (]{.style_}[Hist. Eccles]{.style_1}[., i, 30), Pope
Gregory the Great outlined to Mellitus the following policy: "Keep the
old temples, and turn them into churches after having destroyed the
idols they contain. Keep the old festivals and allow the people to kill
oxen as usual, but dedicate the feast to the Holy Martyrs whose relics
are in the church." Thanks to this happy compromise between the pagan
customs and the new faith, there were few violent disturbances, few
martyrs and persecutions. And because of this policy of compromise,
almost from earliest times, there were churchmen and missionaries whose
care it was to see that the common people---whether by reading it for
themselves if they were able (which was seldom the case) or by hearing
it read to them---should have at least the more important parts of the
Bible accessible to them in their own language. At a later stage, the
Church provided for the translation of the whole Bible into this
"vulgar" language.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ENGLAND AND IRELAND]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This fact concerns particularly the islands of Great Britain and
Ireland. Indeed, these two great islands were the first western European
countries in which books were written in the "native" language. The
Germans followed suit (in the ninth and tenth centuries A.D.), whereas
peoples speaking Romance languages (i.e. languages derived from
Latin)---Italians, French, Provençals, Catalans, Castilians, and
others---did not yet realize that Latin was to them a foreign language
(this being considered as the literary language of their own speech):
thus, their literature in "vulgar" language began a few centuries
later.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-592}

::: calibre5
:::

## [The Irish "Book"]{.style_2} {#the-irish-book .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The most interesting European medieval books are the "early Irish
Manuscripts, which stand at the head of a long and glorious line
stretching chronologically from the seventh century of our era to the
fifteenth" (G. Burford Rawlings). And the British expert on the medieval
manuscripts, F. Madan, has pointed out, "that in the seventh century,
when our earliest existing Irish manuscripts were written, we find not
only a style of writing (or indeed two: see]{.style_} [The
Alphabet]{.style_1}[, p. 546) distinctive, national and of a high type
of excellence, but also a school of illumination which, in the combined
lines of mechanical acuracy and intricacy, in fertile invention of form
and figure and of striking arrangements of colour, has never been
surpassed. And this is in the seventh century---the nadir of the rest of
Europe". See also the forthcoming book on]{.style_} [Illumination and
Binding]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[How did it come about that in Ireland---a country so remote from the
capital of Christianity and from all active cultural influences of the
time---the first really great development in medieval book production
took place, in the seventh and eighth centuries A.D.?]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[IRELAND BEFORE ST. PATRICK]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Ireland occupies a unique place in the history of culture: it had never
been invaded by the Romans, and its relations with the Latin world
consisted in peaceful and friendly trade connections with the provinces
of Gaul and Britain; and, what is even more important, it was the only
land in western Europe that escaped the invasions and destructions of
the Germanic tribes. Some scholars even maintained that in the fifth
century A.D., during the Gothic and Frankish invasions of Gaul, many
learned people fled from that country and found a place of refuge in
Ireland. They brought with them not only Christianity, but also a
certain devotion to the ancient literatures of Greece and Rome, and thus
founded a new centre of learning.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[While not many scholars accept this theory, Prof. MacNeill mentions
evidence of the high degree of Christian learning that was displayed in
Ireland possibly as early as St. Patrick's time. It is provided in a
letter on the Paschal controversy written by the Irishman St. Columbanus
or Columban within the years 595 to 600. Writing about the noted
Aquitanian scholar Victorius, who flourished in the middle fifth century
A.D., Columban adds: "Victorius was regarded with indulgence, not to say
contempt, by our masters and by the ancient Irish
philosophers."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, the best authorities on Irish history maintain that already,
before St. Patrick's mission to Ireland, there were in the island not
only individual Christians, but also small Christian communities. This
is also implied in St. Patrick's]{.style_} [Confessio]{.style_1} [and in
St. Prosper's]{.style_} [Chronicle,]{.style_1} [under the year
431.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It has already been pointed out that while the vigour of Christianity
in Italy, Gaul, and Spain was exhausted in a bare struggle for life
against the northern barbarians, Ireland, which remained unscourged by
invaders, drew from its conversion an energy such as it has never known
since. The spread of Christianity was accompanied by a rapid progress in
letters and arts. The scientific and Biblical knowledge which fled from
the Continent took refuge in famous schools and made Durrow (in the
province of Leinster) and Armagh, in some sense, universities of the
West.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The vigour of the new Christian life was soon too strong to brook
confinement within the bounds of Ireland itself. Irish Christianity
flung itself with a fiery zeal into the battle with the mass of Germanic
heathenism which was rolling in upon the west European Christian world.
Nearer home, Irish missionaries laboured among the Picts of the
Highlands, and the Germanic Frisians of the northern seas.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[St. Columba, after founding monastic houses in Ireland---at Derry on
Lough Foyle, and at Durrow---founded soon after the middle of the sixth
century the monastery of Iona (one of the islands of the Inner Hebrides
off the coast of Mull, in Argyllshire, Scotland), from which he
journeyed to Scotland and converted the Picts. It was Columba who
brought the arts of writing and decorating manuscripts, from his native
Ireland to Iona. Another Irish missionary, with a similar name, Columban
(already referred to) founded monasteries in Burgundy, Italy and
Switzerland. The monastery, town and canton of St. Gall still
commemorate in their name another Irish missionary. For a time it seemed
as if Celtic Christianity was to mould the destinies of the Roman
Church.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[BLENDING OF THE OLD CULTURE WITH CHRISTIAN CIVILIZATION]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Although Ireland's conversion did not begin with the Apostle of
Ireland, St. Patrick (389?---461), and although he did not live to
complete it, the foundations which he established proved solid and
lasting. Not only did he lead the mission which spread Christianity in
Ireland, but in so doing he opened up that country to the wider cultural
influences of the Christian world. And yet, professed paganism continued
to exist in Ireland for at least a century after St. Patrick's
death.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[By that time (second half of the sixth century A.D.), a blending of the
old native culture and the newly introduced Christian learning had taken
place. Indeed, the Druidic tradition, not as yet completely dead, had
surrounded learning with a certain supernatural halo. "The Druid,
according to the most probable etymology of the word, was the 'very
knowing one'; he was the adept, the knowledgeable man in all matters in
which the life of this world came into contact with that of the other"
(R. A. S. Macalister). The newly introduced religion therefore faced
this dilemma: should it continue to cultivate a literature, the
atmosphere of which was altogether pagan, or should it discountenance
it, thereby putting itself into a position of educational and cultural
inferiority to the pagan Druids?]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Apparently Irish Church leaders found a temporary refuge in the
"half-way house", as we can see, for instance, from the fact that in
privileges as well as in character the Irish saints enter into the
druidic heritage. "With the acceptance of Christianity," write Gould and
Fisher, "the saints simply occupied the shells left vacant by the druids
who had disappeared." Even St. Columba, the founder of the great
monasteries of Durrow and Iona, and of many smaller ones, the virtual
founder of the Church of Scotland, the man who perhaps created the Irish
script (see p. 470), "had not advanced very far out of the darkness
which surrounded him, and . . . his own mind was shadowed by a very real
belief in many of the superstitions of his age" (Duke). Thus, "
'conversion' was a mere transference of allegiance from one magic power
(or group of powers) to another, believed to be more powerful"
(Crawford). This blending of two traditions brought forth an almost new
nation, with a character and an individuality that gave it distinction
in that and subsequent ages.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Alexander Bertrand sought to trace a connection between the Irish
monastic establishments and the preceding druidic colleges; the late
Prof. R. A. S. Macalister, although affirming that there is nothing
druidic in the institution of Christian monasticism]{.style_} [per
se,]{.style_1} [suggested that most, if not all, of the various monastic
establishments scattered over Celtic Ireland, were situated in places
which had already possessed sanctity of some sort in pre-Christian
times.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It has already been mentioned that among the Irish and British
Christians, scholars lived and worked in circumstances different from
those of their Continental brethren. The latter employed Latin as their
universal language, while in Ireland and Britain the vernaculars were
the current speech: Latin was practically unknown in Ireland, and even
in Romanized Britain was a sorry and ungrammatical veneer.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Ireland was a notable exception in early Christian Europe; "Irish kings
already maintained literati (]{.style_}[filed]{.style_1}[) amongst their
followers, and thus were not dependent on the missionary priest for
advice or knowledge in affairs other than spiritual" (Kenny). This
opinion contrasts with the recent theory, propounded by eminent
scholars, such as Clapham, Nordenfalk, and especially Masai, which
considers the flourishing Irish culture of the eighth and ninth
centuries as a derivation from Northumbria. According to Clapham, for
instance, "We must . . . conclude that Hiberno-Saxon art was in origin
in no sense Irish but that the Irish perhaps welded its component parts
into one style; that this welding probably took place in Northumbria in
the second half of the 7th century, and that it was transmitted thence
to Ireland and from Ireland over half Europe."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Masai, who has published an excellent work on this subject, is about to
publish the]{.style_} [Introduction]{.style_1} [to the archaeological
edition of the]{.style_} [Regula Magistri]{.style_1} [(manuscripts
preserved in Paris, by some scholars assigned to A.D. c. 600, and
containing the most important monastic legislation) which will appear as
Vol. 2 of the "Publications of Scriptorium", and will be edited by DomH.
Vanderhoven. In Masai's opinion, the research on the Italian manuscripts
of the late sixth century confirms the chronology already suggested by
him. Miniature, or rather ornamented lettering (as well, indeed, as
learning and culture), was transmitted by Italy to Gaul about the middle
of the seventh century, and reached Great Britain (directly, not through
Gaul) slightly later. While this theory would explain the]{.style_}
[origin]{.style_1} [of Northumbrian and Irish illumination (the latter
being considered by Masai as derivative from the former), the perfection
of this art---argues Masai---was mainly due to the transposition of the
design from the art of jewellery to the art of decorating books. On the
other hand, some leading authorities in this field, such as Geneviève
Micheli and Françoise Henry, still hold the traditional view that the
Irish of the sixth and the seventh centuries were masters of book hands
and book illumination, and brought their arts to their missionary
colonies in Northumbria and on the Continent. In Mile Henry's opinion,
the origins of Irish illumination go back to the early seventh century
or even to the sixth century A.D. This book decoration is based on Irish
art of the pagan period, though, as early as from the fifth century A.D.
onwards, it was influenced by Christian Continental and, especially,
Coptic art. The problem of origin of Insular book illumination will be
dealt with in greater detail in the book on]{.style_} [Illumination and
Binding.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The poor view of Irish learning, culture and art in the sixth to eighth
centuries---which is held by eminent scholars such as Esposito,
Cappuyns, and Masai---is opposed by authorities such as MacNeill, who
maintains that "the laws, the local histories and genealogies, the
heroic legends, of the Irish Nation, were copiously recorded in writing
within a period covering portions of the sixth, seventh and eighth
centuries" (see also p. 448 f.). Even as recently as 1950, G. E. Powell
has suggested that the range of the Irish native learning "reveals in
its very existence and organization, an oral scholastic tradition which
can only have sprung from ancient sources in the Celtic homelands".
Furthermore, Powell accepts D. A. Binchy's analysis-in "PROCEEDINGS OF
THE BRITISH ACADEMY", 1943---of the nature of the early Irish laws,
their pre-Christian embodiment, and old Celtic origins.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Another authority, Bieler, remarks that "Bede himself admits (iii, 27)
that in his time many Englishmen went to Ireland for 'sacred reading',
thus implying that his Irish contemporaries had at least some reputation
as theologians". Bieler also points out that Continental writers of the
seventh and eighth centuries are quite positive about Irish learning,
and that "it is unthinkable that the Irish script could have spread over
so large areas had it not been for the intellectual superiority of those
who brought it".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The leading palaeographer, E. A. Lowe, after having discussed the
differences between Ireland and the Continent "in nearly everything that
pertained to the art of producing a book"---manufacture of parchment,
making of quires, ruling, punctuation, abbreviations, spelling, and so
on---writes as follows. "If there are all these differences it is
because, during the dark centuries which followed the break-up of the
Roman empire, Ireland, undisturbed by war, was able to work out
traditions of her own unaffected by the main currents of Latin
civilization."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Incidentally, it may be noted that traditions---such as the tradition
regarding the position of Irish culture and art in the sixth-and
seventh-century Christian Europe---which go against the main stream
(which would be, for instance, Rome - western Europe - England -
Ireland) are more likely to be genuine than traditions which follow the
general pattern.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[IRISH CIVILIZATION OF THE SEVENTH AND EIGHTH CENTURIES]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[While according to some scholars the Irish civilization of the seventh
and eighth centuries---as already pointed out---stands out clearly from
what are called the Dark Ages, nevertheless, because of uncertainty with
regard to dates, no scholar has been able to determine the actual scope
of Irish learning. MacNeill indicated the importance of the preservation
of Latin literature in manuscripts copied by Irish scribes, and of Latin
authors quoted in ancient Irish books, as well as the singular knowledge
of Greek possessed by Irish scholars and their disciples of other
nationalities in the period of Charlemagne.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Irish missionaries brought their writing not only to the
Anglo-Saxons, but also to such main centres of European monastic
culture, as Luxeuil, Echternach, St. Gall, Bobbio, where this script was
known as]{.style_} [littera scottica, litterae tunsae]{.style_1}
[or]{.style_} [scriptura saxonica]{.style_1}[. The Irish system of
abbreviations influenced the development of all the medieval
abbreviations.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Luxeuil, in Burgundy, was the first great monastery founded by St.
Columban in Gaul (c. 590). The monastery of Bobbio (now in the province
of Pavia, Lombardy, Italy) was founded by St. Columban in 614; St. Gall
was also founded by him in the early seventh century; Peronne, or
Perrona Scottorum (founded over the tomb of St. Fursa), Corbie, St.
Riquier, and some other French monasteries, were either Irish
foundations, or had close relations with Ireland; some had Irish abbots;
the later Benedictine monasteries of Fulda (in Hesse) and Reichenau (on
an island on Lake Constance), which together with St. Gall were the main
centres of Christian culture in Germany in the early Middle Ages, were
also strongly influenced by the cultural activity of the Irish
monks.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The influence of Irish book production on the culture of Britain and of
the Continent was thus paramount, though, according to the theory of F.
Masai and others, it was England---that is, Northumbria ---which
influenced Irish book production, and not]{.style_} [vice
versa.]{.style_1}

[]{#calibre_link-593}

::: calibre5
:::

## [CELTIC LANGUAGES]{.style_2} {#celtic-languages .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Celtic branch of the Indo-European linguistic family is commonly
divided into two sub-branches, the Q group (also known as Gadhelic or
Gaelic) and the P group (or Cymric or Brittonic). Indeed, the main
difference between the two sub-branches is the fact that in Q-Celtic the
original Indo-European guttural combined with a w-sound (like]{.style_}
[kw]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [qu]{.style_1}[) remained for a certain
period (in Oghamic inscriptions)]{.style_} [kw]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[qu,]{.style_1} [and came gradually to be]{.style_} [c]{.style_1} [with
the sound]{.style_} [k,]{.style_1} [whereas in P-Celtic it changed
into]{.style_} [p]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [pw.]{.style_1} [Q-Celtic
includes Irish, Manx, and Gaelic of the Highlands of Scotland, while
P-Celtic embraces Welsh, the extinct Cornish, and the Breton or
Armorican in Brittany.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-594}

::: calibre5
:::

## [EARLY IRISH LITERATURE]{.style_2} {#early-irish-literature .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest extant documents written in Old Irish date from the eighth
century A.D., and are mostly glosses and explanations of books used in
Irish church schools. According to MacNeill, the oldest known piece
(running to one page of print) is, or was until recently, in a copy
of]{.style_} [Homilies]{.style_1} [preserved in Cambrai, and is ascribed
by him to the seventh century. In his opinion, however, a chronicle of
the world, written in continuation of the chronicle of Eusebius, Jerome,
and Prosper, and embodying a skeleton of Irish history, was written in
Ireland in the last years of the sixth century and in the first decade
of the seventh. "What survives of it with relation to Ireland is the
oldest known history of Ireland." However, the Cambrai fragment appears
to have been composed between the years 763 and 790.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Some scholars consider the]{.style_} [Wuerzburg Codex]{.style_1} [the
earliest surviving manuscript containing Irish glosses. The codex is not
earlier than A.D. 700, and may even belong to the ninth
century.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Two Gaelic poems are in a codex at Milan; four quatrains are written on
the margin of a copy of Priscian at St. Gall ; there are a few lines in
the]{.style_} [Codex Boernerianus]{.style_1} [of Dresden; five short
Gaelic poems or fragments are in a codex at St. Paul in Carinthia; and a
few poems are in a manuscript at Klosterneuburg. Other manuscripts,
containing Irish material, are preserved in Berne, Carlsruhc, Laon,
Leyden, Nancy, Paris, the Vatican Library, St. Gall, Turin, and Vienna.
They belong to the period between the ninth and the eleventh
centuries.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the three important books, the]{.style_} [Antiphonary of
Bangor,]{.style_1} [written before 691, the]{.style_} [Liber
hymnorum,]{.style_1} [transcribed in the second half of the eleventh
century, and the]{.style_} [Lebor Brecc,]{.style_1} [transcribed before
1411, there are preserved early litanies, invocations, and poems of
adoration, "which bear more directly upon the work of the Christian
preacher, and indicate much literary merit as well as deep religious
feeling". There is also a rich hagiographical and purely devotional
literature, as well as imaginative religious literature in prose and
verse---though such works belong to a relatively late date.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Early poems, or parts of poems, are attributed to Lugaid Lánfili (whom
the German scholar Meyer dates in the sixth century), or to Colmán mac
Lénéni, edited by the leading scholar Thurneysen. The most remarkable of
these early poems is the famous]{.style_} [Amra Choluim
Chille,]{.style_1} [preserved in the]{.style_} [Liber
hymnorum,]{.style_1} [which is said to have been composed by Dallán
Forgaill in honour of St. Columcille, or St. Columba (late sixth
century). It has been suggested that the rhythmical texts in the great
legal composition known as]{.style_} [Senchas Már]{.style_1} [may also
go back to such an early date.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Before that time, however, apparently a certain body of Irish heroic
literature existed in writing, and consequently this literature seems to
have already begun in the sixth century A.D. During the sixth century a
blending of the old Irish heathen lore and learned tradition with the
new Christian learning was probably taking place, the native school of
poets, originally druids, becoming Christian and adopting the apparatus
of Christian learning. In the]{.style_} [Vitae Sanctorum
Hiberniae]{.style_1} []{#calibre_link-234}[([Fig.
X---1](#calibre_link-233){.calibre9}), or]{.style_} [Lives of the Saints
of Ireland,]{.style_1} [we find references to the Christian colleges,
but little is known of the preceding bardic schools which---we may
assume---were formed round a chosen bardic poet followed from place to
place by his disciples.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000060.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-233}

[[Fig. X---1](#calibre_link-234){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Vitae Sanctorum Hibernide (Trinity College Library, Dublin, B. 2, 7,
fol. 9).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Nevertheless, a good deal of specifically heathen practice and teaching
was preserved, more or less covertly, among the secular poets of
Ireland, for centuries after St. Columba's activity. The]{.style_}
[Lives of the Saints of Ireland,]{.style_1} [which indeed are centuries
later than the saints referred to, and therefore historically nearly
worthless, preserve "large lumps of pagan material": a saint such as
Find-Chua, son of Find-Lug, can with unalloyed relief be restored by
Christianity to the paganism where he belongs. The]{.style_} [Lebor na
Huidre]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [Book of the Dun Cow]{.style_1}
[]{#calibre_link-236}[(see [Fig.
X---2](#calibre_link-235){.calibre9},]{.style_} [b]{.style_1}[, and p.
453), written in Clonmacnoise about the year 1100, is the earliest
preserved version of the ancient epic tale]{.style_} [Táin Bó
Cúalnge,]{.style_1} [and the earliest secular work extant.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[At any rate, writing in the Irish language appears to have become very
common in the seventh century, but while the secular school of]{.style_}
[literati]{.style_1} [considered this language a "choice language" (as
we know from an early grammar of Irish, partly attributed to the seventh
century), the Irish religious scholars belittled its value (so, for
instance, did Adamnán, early eighth century). "Why is God said to regard
a man who reads Gaelic as uncivilized?" asks a glosser of]{.style_} [The
Scholar's Primer.]{.style_1} [This depreciation of Irish by Christian
scholars is probably one of the reasons for the monastic failure in
vernacular]{.style_} [creative]{.style_1} [literature.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The monks were the successors of the druids on the religious side; they
revolutionized learning not only from the religious, but also from the
linguistic standpoint. The Bible became the basis of their schools; the
Psalms, in Latin, became a standard textbook; but, in addition, Latin
became their scholarly language, taking the place of the druidic "secret
tongue". What the monks did write in Irish, was destined for the common
people, and consisted of compilation, copying and translation.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, Irish literature did not die. The hereditary bards, attached
to the courts and to the noble houses, and especially the]{.style_}
[ollamhs]{.style_1} [or chief bards, were in a sense literary inheritors
of the druidic bards. "They likewise instructed pupils in their art, and
classified their attainments by an elaborate system of graduation, not
unlike the degrees of a university." In the seventh century new metrical
forms in Irish poetry, based mainly on Latin hymns, made their
appearance, and afterwards developed into a varied and elaborate system
of metrics, but the Christian bards were not bookmen, at least not
primarily: they depended on memory rather than on books. Some of their
poems and sagas (such as stories of courtships, battles, cattle raids),
or romances (the]{.style_} [Cycle of Tuatha De Danann]{.style_1}[), the
Cycles of Finn Nac Cumhail, Ossian, and Oscar, the]{.style_} [Red Branch
Cycle]{.style_1}[, and others) have come down to us in later
compilations or revisions.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Whereas the traditional classification of the earliest Irish prose
literature---epic and romance---was according to types (such as love
stories, courtships, banquets, cave stories, cattle raids, invasions,
battles, destructions, travel stories, adventures), nowadays it is based
on cycles or great leading periods. Three main cycles can be
distinguished: the Mythological---the mass of sagas carried over from
pre-historical pagan times, the Heroic cycles (of the period immediately
before, and the early centuries of, the Christian era)---also known as
the Ulster and the Fenian cycles, and the Historical.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The best known, and most perfectly preserved, is the already
discussed]{.style_} [Elegy]{.style_1} [on St. Columba, apparently
written by Dallán Forgaill soon after the saint's death (597). "It is a
typical example of its kind; in form a sort of anticipation of
the]{.style_} [vers libres]{.style_1} [of modern affectation, with no
regular metre, unrhymed . . ." (Macalister). It is full of peculiar
words, often artificially modified. The form is rendered even more
obscure by enormously long annotations interspersed through the text.
See also p. 448.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-595}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BEST PERIODS OF IRISH LITERATURE]{.style_2} {#best-periods-of-irish-literature .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The seventh and eighth centuries, the eleventh and twelfth, and the
fourteenth to eighteenth centuries are the best periods of Irish
literature. Generally speaking, however, it can be said that the
Christian bards left parchment and ink to the monks, and it is, indeed,
to the products of monastic scriptoria that we are indebted for most of
what we know of early Irish literature. The late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries saw a revival of Irish literature.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-596}

::: calibre5
:::

## [IRISH MANUSCRIPTS]{.style_2} {#irish-manuscripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[There are probably as many as two thousand Irish manuscripts now in
existence, but the majority were written in the eighteenth and the
nineteenth centuries, and many are mere transcripts of earlier
manuscripts and have no independent value. Of the total number, more
than thirteen hundred manuscripts are in the Royal Irish Academy, of
which some sixty (out of a hundred which have survived) are important. A
smaller number (about 150), but of relatively greater importance, is the
superb collection of Trinity College Library, at Dublin, and that of the
British Museum, containing over 200. Other important collections are in
the Vatican Library, at St. Gall, in Oxford, Cambridge, Paris, Brussels,
and in a few other great libraries. It may be noticed that a few Celtic
Latin codices belonging to the ninth or the tenth century---such as
the]{.style_} [Book of Armagh]{.style_1} [(see p. 466),]{.style_} [the
Book of Dimma]{.style_1} [(p. 468), the]{.style_} [Stowe
Missal]{.style_1} [(p. 468), the]{.style_} [Gospel of
Maeielbrid]{.style_1} [(p. 469), the]{.style_} [Psalter of
Southampton]{.style_1} [(now at Cambridge), the]{.style_} [Irish
Canons]{.style_1} [(at Cambridge), the Ambrosian]{.style_} [Cod. C. 301
inf]{.style_1}[. (p. 469), also contain Irish material, though in some
instances this consists of no more than a few lines.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000061.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-235}

[[Fig. X---2](#calibre_link-236){.calibre9} a]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Book of Dimma (Trinity College Library, Dublin, MS. No. 59; A. 4.
23).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000062.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. X-2 b]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Lebor na Huidre or the Book of the Dun Cow (Royal Irish Academy,
Dublin).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Three codices are of special interest on account of their relatively
early date and the importance of their contents:]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(1) The]{.style_} [Book of the Dun Cow]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[Lebor na
Huidre,]{.style_1} [known by the symbol]{.style_} [LU]{.style_1}[), now
preserved in the Royal Irish Academy in Dublin; this was written at
Clonmacnois before 1106, and is thus the oldest book written wholly in
the Irish language which has come down to us. Tradition assigns it to
St. Ciarán, the founder of Clonmacnois, who was supposed to have written
it on the hide of his favourite dun-coloured cow, which (while alive)
had supplied him and others with an abundance of milk while he remained
at the school of St. Finnian.]{.style_} [LU]{.style_1} [is fragmentary
and contains many interpolations, but it is our earliest written source
for many of the Irish heroic sagas, particularly for the great saga of
the]{.style_} [Táin bó Cúalnge]{.style_1}[, or the Cattle-Raid of
Cooley, which is the central saga of the Ulster cycle. [Fig.
X---2](#calibre_link-235){.calibre9}]{.style_} [b]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(2) Next in importance comes the]{.style_} [Book of Leinster]{.style_1}
[(]{.style_}[Lebor Laigen,]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [LL]{.style_1}[),
written some fifty years later (before 1160), and now preserved in
Trinity College, Dublin. It contains history, genealogy, poetry, and is
rich in saga; indeed, it contains the fullest account of the]{.style_}
[Táin bó []{#calibre_link-238}Cúalnge.]{.style_1} [[Fig.
X---3](#calibre_link-237){.calibre9}
(]{.style_}[below]{.style_1}[).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(3)]{.style_} [Cod. Rawlinson B]{.style_1} [502 (or]{.style_}
[Rawl]{.style_1}[.) of the Bodleian Library, at Oxford, contains twelve
leaves written in the eleventh century in which the]{.style_} [Annals of
Tigernach]{.style_1} [are recorded, and seventy leaves written in the
twelfth century which are devoted to historical matter, law
tracts,]{.style_} [dinnshenchas]{.style_1} [or "history of places"
(collection of legends in prose and verse, purporting to be a history of
the place), a copy of]{.style_} [Saltair na Rann,]{.style_1} [and the
famous glossary of Cormac mac Cuilennáin (who died in 908).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000063.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-237}

[[Fig. X---3](#calibre_link-238){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) The Book of Ballymote (Royal Irish Academy, MS. 23. P. 12);
(below) the Book of Leinster (Trinity College Library, Dublin, H. 2.
18).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Four other codices belong to the "seven great books of Ireland"; they
are compilations similar in content to the]{.style_} [Book of
Leinster]{.style_1}[, a compendium of medieval lore, legend, history,
genealogy, topography. All the four are great vellums, closely
associated in place and time, all written in the late fourteenth or
early fifteenth century, and all in the west of Ireland:]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(1)]{.style_} [The Book of Ballymote]{.style_1} [(or]{.style_}
[BB]{.style_1}[), now preserved in the Royal Irish Academy
(]{.style_}[23.P.12]{.style_1}[), was written at Ballymote in Co. Sligo,
in the house of Tomaltach Og Mac Donnchadha Lord of Corann when
Tairdelbach Og Mac Aedha O Conchubhair was King,]{.style_}
[c]{.style_1}[. 1400. [Fig. X---3](#calibre_link-237){.calibre9}
(]{.style_}[above]{.style_1}[).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(2) The]{.style_} [Great Book of Lecan]{.style_1} [(or]{.style_}
[Lec]{.style_1}[.) received its name from the place Lecan (Irish,
Leacán) or Lecan Mic Firbhisigh, where it was compiled. This Lecan is
situated in the parish of Kilglass in the north-west portion of Co.
Sligo. The book was written, or at least begun, before 1417.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(3) The]{.style_} [Yellow Book of Lecan]{.style_1} [(or]{.style_}
[YBL]{.style_1}[), preserved in Trinity College, Dublin, written in the
early fourteenth century, preserves an almost complete version of
the]{.style_} [Táin bó Cúalnge.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(4) The]{.style_} [Book of Hy Many,]{.style_1} [written in the
fourteenth century, and now in the Royal Irish Academy, largely contains
historical material and has many texts in common with the other
manuscripts of this series.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Three other folios should be mentioned: (1) the]{.style_} [Speckled
Book of Mac Egan]{.style_1} [(the]{.style_} [Lebor Brecc]{.style_1}
[or]{.style_} [LB]{.style_1}[), written in the late fourteenth century,
and now in the Royal Irish Academy; it contains important sacred texts;
(2) the]{.style_} [Book of Fermoy]{.style_1} [(or]{.style_}
[F]{.style_1}[), written in the fifteenth century, and preserved in the
same collection; and (3) the]{.style_} [Book of Lismore]{.style_1}[,
written in the fifteenth century, and preserved in the collection of the
Duke of Devonshire.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Geoffrey Keating---whose]{.style_} [History of Ireland,]{.style_1}
[written]{.style_} [c.]{.style_1} [1640, was the last important work in
western Europe to circulate in manuscript ---was the Irish Herodotus or
Thucydides, Livy or Caesar. The precious historical composition known as
the]{.style_} [Chronicon Scotorum]{.style_1} [is preserved in a copy
written c. 1650 by Duald Mac Firbis; its original belonged to the
twelfth century, and dealt with events up to 1135. The]{.style_} [Annals
of the Kingdom of Ireland by the Four Masters,]{.style_1} [known
as]{.style_} [The Four Masters,]{.style_1} [written by Michael O'Cleary
and three other scholars, was begun in 1632 and completed in
1636.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-597}

::: calibre5
:::

## [LATIN CODICES IN "IRISH" SCRIPT]{.style_2} {#latin-codices-in-irish-script .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[There were two main Irish scripts---see]{.style_} [The
Alphabet,]{.style_1} [p. 546---one being the semi-uncial, known as the
Irish majuscule, employed from the seventh to the thirteenth centuries.
The best representatives of this script are the]{.style_} [Book of
Durrow]{.style_1} [and the]{.style_} [Book of Kells.]{.style_1}

[]{#calibre_link-598}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MAJUSCULE MANUSCRIPTS]{.style_2} {#majuscule-manuscripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Book of Durrow]{.style_1} []{#calibre_link-241}[([Fig.
X---4](#calibre_link-239){.calibre9}) is named after the Columban
monastery of Durrow (near Tullamore, Co. Offaly), where it is known to
have been kept. It is also called]{.style_} [Codex
Durmachensis]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [Durmach]{.style_1}[. About the
middle of the seventeenth century it was presented by Bishop Henry
Jones, Vice-Chancellor, to Trinity College, Dublin, where it is now
preserved (No. 57;]{.style_} [A.4.5]{.style_1}[). It contains the
Gospels, in Latin, in the Vulgate version, partly contaminated by the
Irish text (see p. 458). There are 248 leaves measuring x inches. The
manuscript contains beautiful illuminations; these will be dealt with in
the book on]{.style_} [Illumination and Binding]{.style_1}[. The place
of its origin is uncertain; some authorities---such as Mile
Henry---consider it as Irish, others (Burkitt, Zimmermann, Lowe, Mynors,
Bieler) as Northumbrian. A note in the book states that it was formerly
kept in a silver case (the inscription on which recorded that it was
made for the book by Flann, son of Malachy, King of Ireland, who died in
A.D. 916). The date of the codex implied in its colophon has been
rejected by the palaeographers (the colophon assigns the manuscript to
St. Columba), and various other dates have been suggested: c. 650
(Kendrick), the second half of the seventh century (Henry), a date
between 664 and 675 (Oakeshott), late seventh or early eighth century
(Lowe, Zimmermann, Bieler) ;]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 675 being its
most likely date.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Book of Kells]{.style_1} []{#calibre_link-243}[([Fig.
X---5](#calibre_link-240){.calibre9}), also known as]{.style_} [Codex
Cenannensis]{.style_1} [and quoted as (codex) Q, is called in
Irish]{.style_} [Soiscela mor Choluim Chille]{.style_1}[, "The Great
Gospel of Columcille (=Columba)". It is one of the finest books that has
ever been produced. Tradition has it that the unerring lines of its
ornamentation---in one space of about inch square may be counted, with a
magnifying glass, 158 interlacements ---should have been traced by
angels. The illumination of this stupendous work will be discussed in
the volume on]{.style_} [Illumination and Binding.]{.style_1} [Here it
will suffice to quote from A. A. Luce a few of its distinctive features,
"the noble script, the generous margins, the ample spacing, the huge
initial letters at the opening of each gospel, the single-column text,
the mere magnitude of the ornament, the ocean of colour and the forest
of ornate capitals (more than two thousand one hundred of them), the
large number of pages devoted to ornament, the sustained beauty and
dignity of the six hundred 'ordinary pages'." The book contains 339
leaves, measuring 13 × 10 inches, and there are seventeen lines to the
page (eighteen in the last portion).]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000064.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-239}

[[Fig. X---4](#calibre_link-241){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Book of Durrow (Trinity College Library, Dublin, MS. No. 57, A. 4.
5. fol. 78 verso).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The codex contains the Four Gospels in Latin, with the usual subsidiary
matter; the text is the Irish recension of the Vulgate version, "that is
to say a Vulgate text, much contaminated by inferior readings of
uncertain origin", though "it does often side with the best manuscripts"
(Burkitt). Although the contents "are, roughly, the same" as in
the]{.style_} [Lindisfarne Gospels]{.style_1} [(see p. 501 ff.), "they
are arranged on different plans . . .]{.style_} [Kells]{.style_1}
[assembled all the standard preliminaries \... and prefixed
them]{.style_} [en bloc]{.style_1} [to the sacred text, without
troubling much about their internal order; \... the architect
of]{.style_} [Kells]{.style_1} [. . . puts the stress on the unity of
the Gospel" (Luce). On pages left blank by the original scribe are
written sundry deeds in Irish (they date to the eleventh and the twelfth
centuries).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The book is probably of A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 800. It was kept
throughout the Middle Ages in the monastery of Cenannus or Kells (on the
River Blackwater, in Co. Meath, thirty-eight miles north-west from
Dublin), founded in the sixth century by St. Columba. According to some
scholars, however, the codex was brought to Kells from Iona (see p. 443)
when its monks deserted the island and retired to Kells. However, Mile
Henry remarks that at that period the monastery of Iona was as Irish as
that of Kells. The codex belonged to Archbishop James Ussher, better
known as Usher, and with its library passed (in 1661) to Trinity
College, Dublin.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-599}

::: calibre5
:::

## [EARLIER MAJUSCULE CODICES]{.style_2} {#earlier-majuscule-codices .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest extant manuscript written in a round Insular majuscule is
the]{.style_} [Cathach of St. Columcille]{.style_1} [(or]{.style_}
[]{#calibre_link-244}[Columba]{.style_1}[)---[Fig.
X--6](#calibre_link-242){.calibre9},]{.style_} [left]{.style_1}[---now
preserved in the library of the Royal Irish Academy. It is traditionally
attributed to St. Columba (521---97), and although traditional
attributions of books to famous saints are very common, according to
Lowe the early date implied in this instance (latter half of the sixth
century) is palaeographically possible. Adamnán, St. Columba's
biographer and abbot of the Iona monastery, stated that Columba was
frequently occupied in copying sacred texts. The]{.style_} [Cathach of
St. Columba]{.style_1} [contains fifty-eight folios, and is a
fragmentary "Gallican Psalter". Its ornamentation "consists in initials,
drawn in outline with the pen, and surrounded by red dots" (Bieler).
The]{.style_} [Cathach]{.style_1} [was preserved in a cumhdach or shrine
(see]{.style_} [Illumination and Binding]{.style_1}[), which was made
between 1062 and 1098. It was carried into battle (hence the
name]{.style_} [Cathach]{.style_1}[, "battler") to ensure victory. If
carried three times right-wise round an army by a pure cleric, a safe
and victorious return was ensured. Adamnán, already referred to, says
that Columba's power to ensure victory for one side and defeat for the
other continued after his death. Irish refugees took the]{.style_}
[Cathach]{.style_1}[, enshrined in its cumhdach, to France where it was
until 1802. In 1813 it was opened and the]{.style_} [Cathach]{.style_1}
[was discovered. It belonged to the family O'Donnell, and in 1842 Sir
Richard O'Donnell deposited it in the Royal Irish Academy. The cumhdach
is preserved in the National Museum, at Dublin.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000065.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-240}

[[Fig. X---5](#calibre_link-243){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Book of Kells, folio 176 verso (Trinity College Library,
Dublin).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000066.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-242}

[[Fig. X--6](#calibre_link-244){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

[(Left) The Cathach of St. Columba; (right) Codex Usserianus Primus;
fol. 150 recto.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Usserianus Primus]{.style_1}[, quoted as]{.style_}
[r]{.style_1}[¹---[Fig. X--6](#calibre_link-242){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[right]{.style_1}[---is preserved in Trinity College, Dublin (No.
55;]{.style_} [A.4.15]{.style_1}[). Only the remains of about 180 folios
are extant; they measure inches, and contain an Old Latin (pre-Jerome)
version of the Gospels, the order being St. Matthew, St. John, St. Luke,
and St. Mark. Both]{.style_} [r]{.style_1}[¹ and]{.style_}
[r]{.style_1}[² (see below) belonged to Archbishop Usher, and with his
library passed in 1661 to Trinity College of Dublin: hence, the
names]{.style_} [Codex Usserianus Primus]{.style_1} [and]{.style_}
[Alter]{.style_1}[. The writing of]{.style_} [Codex Usserianus
Primus]{.style_1} ["shows a very early type of Irish script combined
with some Italian elements" (Henry).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to Lowe]{.style_} [Codex r]{.style_1}[¹ was probably written
in Bobbio in the early seventh century. Two manuscripts written in
Bobbio, and now preserved in the Ambrosian Library, at
Milan---]{.style_}[Cod]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}
[C]{.style_1}[.26.]{.style_} [sup.]{.style_1} [and]{.style_}
[Cod]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [D]{.style_1}[.23.]{.style_}
[sup]{.style_1}[. ([Fig. X---7](#calibre_link-158){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[below]{.style_1}[)---are in a closely allied script. Another Bobbio
manuscript, preserved in the Ambrosiana
(]{.style_}[Cod]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [S.]{.style_1}[45]{.style_}[.
sup.:]{.style_1} [[Fig. X---7](#calibre_link-158){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[above]{.style_1}[), containing St. Jerome's]{.style_} [Commentaries on
Isaia,]{.style_1} [is an interesting palimpsest (see pp. 215---23). The
earlier text is a copy of the Gothic Bible of Wulfilas (see p. 290),
while the]{.style_} [Commentaries]{.style_1} [are in semi-uncial showing
"here and there, some traces of Irish influence; p. 44 is written in
Irish characters" (Henry). An inscription on p. 2 of the manuscript (see
[Fig. X---7](#calibre_link-158){.calibre9})---L B DE ARCA DOMNO
ATALANI---refers to Atalanus, St. Colomban's successor as abbot of
Bobbio (615---22). In Bieler's opinion,]{.style_} [Codex Usserianus
Primus]{.style_1}[, and Ambrosian]{.style_} [C.26]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}
[sup.]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [D.23. sup.]{.style_1} [are "written in
a seventh-century insular majuscule, verging on minuscule\.... Although
the half-uncial of the Bobbio triad has apparently not descended from
that of Cathach, both scripts have more in common than has either of
them with the Durrow-type. . . . Different again, but more in the style
of the Cathach, is the leaf from an Isidore codex saec. VII med. of
which fragments have been found in the covers of Sangallensis 267 and
150 by P. A. Dold and Dr. B. Bischoff. . . . The script of this fragment
is an Irish majuscule with some semi-cursive elements\.... The
provenance . . . is unknown, but the archaic character of the script
seems to exclude St. Gall. The manuscript might have come from
Ireland."]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000068.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-158}

[[Fig. X--7](#calibre_link-245){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Codex Ambrosianus S.45. sup. (Ambrosian Library, Milan);
palimpsest---lower script: Wulfilas, translation of the Bible into
Gothic; upper script: St. Jerome, Commentary on Isaiah, written in
half-uncials slowing Irish influence; (below) Codex Ambrosianus D.23.
sup. (Ambrosian Library, Milan): Orosius, Christian Universal History,
written in Irish majuscules.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000069.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-247}

[Fig. X---8]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Book of Armagh (Triniy College Library, Dublin, No. 52; fol. 49
verso).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-600}

## [LATER MAJUSCULE MANUSCRIPTS]{.style_2} {#later-majuscule-manuscripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The manuscript of the]{.style_} [Domhnach Airgid]{.style_1}
[(see]{.style_} [Illumination and Binding]{.style_1}[)---Fig.
X---9a---preserved in the Royal Irish Academy since 1847 (No. 24.
Q.]{.style_}[23]{.style_1}[), consists of fragments of thirty-nine
sheets written in Irish majuscule of the eighth or ninth century. The
celebrated shrine known as]{.style_} [Domhnach Airgid,]{.style_1} [in
which this manuscript was preserved, was opened about 1832.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Examples of the majuscule are]{.style_} [Codex Ceaddae]{.style_1} [(L)
or]{.style_} [St. Chad Gospels]{.style_1} [(see also p. 471
[]{#calibre_link-251}and [Fig. X---12](#calibre_link-246){.calibre9}),
of the eighth century and, now preserved in the Cathedral Library, at
Lichfield, and]{.style_} [Codex Usserianus Alter]{.style_1}[, quoted as
(codex)]{.style_} [r]{.style_1}[², also known as]{.style_} [Garland of
Howth]{.style_1} [(having been found on the island Ireland's Eye, near
Howth): it is preserved in Trinity College, Dublin (No. 56;]{.style_}
[A.4.6]{.style_1}[); it consists of eighty-six folios measuring x 7
inches, and contains the Four Gospels in Latin, partly of pre-Jerome
version; it is attributed to the eighth or ninth century. Another
important codex is St. Gall manuscript]{.style_}
[No]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [1395]{.style_1}[. Finally, mention must be
made of the]{.style_} [Mac Regol Gospels]{.style_1}[, also known as
the]{.style_} [Rushworth Gospels]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [Codex
Rushworthianus]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[R]{.style_1}[) (preserved in the
Bodleian Library, at Oxford,]{.style_} [Auct.D.2.19,]{.style_1} [No.
3946), which can be dated with certainty as they were written and
illuminated by Bishop Mac Regol, abbot of Birr (Co. Offaly) who died in
822.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000070.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. X--9a]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Manuscript of the Domhnach Airgid (Royal Irish Academy, Dublin, Q.23),
showing Luke, i, 6---9, ii, 30---32.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[On the whole, the Irish semi-uncial or majuscule seems to have
predominated in the codices]{.style_} [de luxe]{.style_1} [until the
early ninth century, but it was not adopted for the more ordinary
purposes of literature or the requirements of daily
intercourse.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-601}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MINUSCULE MANUSCRIPTS]{.style_2} {#minuscule-manuscripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The second Irish script was the minuscule, a pointed hand, which
flourished in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, when the shape of its
letters became rigid and fixed: it remained unchanged in subsequent
centuries and is still employed in printing. This hand appears in some
of the pages of the]{.style_} [Book of Kells;]{.style_1} [it is,
however, best represented by the]{.style_} [Book of Armagh]{.style_1}
[]{#calibre_link-602}[([Fig. X--8](#calibre_link-247){.calibre9}), which
is also known as]{.style_} [Liber Armachanus]{.style_1} [or
the]{.style_} [Armagh Gospels]{.style_1} [or the]{.style_} [Gwynn
Manuscript]{.style_1}[, or else]{.style_} [Codex Dublinensis,]{.style_1}
[and is preserved in Trinity College, Dublin (No. 52 ; 221 leaves,
measuring x inches) ; formerly it was assigned to St. Patrick, but it is
now known that it was written by Ferdomnach, of Armagh, from the
dictation of Torbach, abbot of Armagh in 807---8. The book contains the
New Testament in Latin, with (amongst other matter) the]{.style_}
[Lives]{.style_1} [of St. Patrick and St. Martin of Tours, and
the]{.style_} [Confession]{.style_1} [of St. Patrick, also in Latin; it
also has four pages of glosses, which "comprise the most copious
specimens of Old-Irish prose yet discovered" (E. J. Gwynn). It has been
suggested that the]{.style_} [Life]{.style_1} [of St. Martin (by
Sulpicius Severus) was copied from a book which reached Ireland before
460.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000071.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. X---9b]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Stowe Missal (Royal Irish Academy, Dublin, Ashburnham Collection,
Stowe MS., D. 2. 3; fol. 34 recto).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000072.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-248}

[Fig. X---10 a]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Bangor Antiphonary (Ambrosian Library, Milan, C. 5. inf.; fol. 13
verso).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest extant manuscript written in Irish minuscule is
the]{.style_} [Bangor Antiphonary]{.style_1}
[]{#calibre_link-603}[([Fig.
X---10](#calibre_link-248){.calibre9}]{.style_} [a]{.style_1} [). It is
a collection of religious hymns and poems, two of which connect this
codex with the monastery of Bangor (N. Ireland) and date it]{.style_}
[ante]{.style_1} [680---91. The codex was brought to Bobbio by Irish
missionaries, and with other Bobbio manuscripts it was transferred to
the Ambrosian Library, at Milan, where it is now preserved
(]{.style_}[Cod]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [C.]{.style_1} [5.]{.style_}
[inf.]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[.]{.style_1} [Slightly later is
the]{.style_} [Book of Mulling]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[Moling,]{.style_1} [also known as]{.style_} [St]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}
[Mulling's Gospels]{.style_1} [([Fig.
X---10](#calibre_link-248){.calibre9}]{.style_} [b]{.style_1}[). It was
preserved in a cumhdach (see]{.style_} [Illumination and
Binding]{.style_1}[) ; it contains the Four Gospels in Latin, partly
from pre-Jerome version. It is preserved in Trinity College, Dublin (No.
60;]{.style_} [A.1.15]{.style_1}[; there are eighty-four folios
measuring 6 × 5 inches). It also contains an Office of Communion of the
Sick, a liturgical fragment and other matter. At the end of]{.style_}
[St. John]{.style_1} [it bears a subscription (\[ \]]{.style_}[omen
scriptoris Mulling dicitur]{.style_1}[), which suggests that it was
written in the late seventh century (St. Moling, the founder of
Tech-Moling, died in 697). It was written probably at Tech-Moling (now
St. Mullins), Co. Carlow. On the last page there is a curious circular
device with Irish words. The]{.style_} [Dorbbéne Codex]{.style_1}[, now
preserved in Schaffhausen, Switzerland (]{.style_}[Codex
Gen]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [1]{.style_1}[)---Fig. X---15]{.style_}
[a]{.style_1}[---can be dated to the early eighth century: it contains a
copy of Adamnán,]{.style_} [Life of St. Columba]{.style_1}[. Another
manuscript of which we know the name of the scribe (Cadmug)---and
therefore it can be dated to the eighth century---is preserved in Fulda
(near Cassel, Germany),]{.style_} [Cod]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [Bonif.
3]{.style_1}[; it is a Gospel-book. For the]{.style_} [Dorbbéne
Codex]{.style_1} [see p. 482 f.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000073.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. X-10 b]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Book of Mulling (Trinity College Library, Dublin, MS. No. 60; A. 1.
15; fol. 30).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[More famous is the]{.style_} [Book of Dimma]{.style_1} [([Fig.
X---2](#calibre_link-235){.calibre9}]{.style_} [a]{.style_1}[), now
preserved with its cumhdach (see]{.style_} [Illumination and
Binding]{.style_1}[) in Trinity College, Dublin (No. 59;]{.style_}
[A.4.23]{.style_1}[) ; of the original seventy-six leaves, two have
disappeared; the leaves measure inches. The codex contains the Four
Gospels in Latin, of which the first three, with few exceptions, are the
work of the same scribe written partly in a carefully formed round hand,
and partly in a rapid cursive hand, while the]{.style_} [Gospel of St.
John]{.style_1} [is written by another scribe mainly employing a neat
uniform minuscule book hand. At the end of each Gospel there is a
colophon, in which the scribe who calls himself Dimma Mace Nathi
beseeches the reader's prayers on its completion. Dr. R. I. Best has
proved that these colophons are a pious fraud perpetrated at some time
in the tenth to eleventh century, in order to identify this copy of the
Gospels with the one said to have been miraculously written by one
Dimma, in forty days, for St. Cronan, the founder of Roscrea, who died
about 619. (Hence, the name]{.style_} [Book of Dimma]{.style_1} [and the
alleged date, early seventh century.) "The volume, which can safely be
assigned to the end of the eighth century, has accordingly no claim to
be called the]{.style_} [Book of Dimma,]{.style_1} [but rather the Book
of Roscrea", from the name of the abbey of Roscrea (Co. Tipperary),
where it has apparently been written.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Two codices belong to the late eighth or early ninth century. They are
the]{.style_} [Stowe Missal]{.style_1} [(Fig. X---9]{.style_}
[b]{.style_1}[) and]{.style_} [Cod]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [C.]{.style_1}
[301.]{.style_} [inf.]{.style_1} [of the Ambrosian Library, at Milan.
The former, now preserved in the Royal Irish Academy (Ashburnham
Collection; Stowe MS.,]{.style_}
[D.2.3]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[,]{.style_1} [consisting of sixty-seven
folios which contain a Vulgate text with Old Latin mixture, has been
attributed to St. Tigernach, the founder of Clones, who died in 550; it
is now dated to 792---812, and is assigned to the monastery of Tallaght;
the anchorite Maeldithruib seems to have removed the codex to
Terryglass; in the twelfth century it was transferred to the important
monastery of Lorrha (in Ormond, Co. Tipperary), where it remained until
the Dissolution.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In 1883 it was purchased by the British Government from the Earl of
Ashburnham, and was deposited in the Royal Irish Academy.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Ambrosian]{.style_} [Cod. C]{.style_1}[. 301.]{.style_}
[inf]{.style_1}[., containing a]{.style_} [Commentary on the
Psalms]{.style_1} [(with glosses in Old Irish), was written by a scribe
Diarmait in the late eighth or ninth century, either in Bangor or in
Leinster (this theory has been suggested by Lowe). Later examples of the
Irish minuscule are the]{.style_} [Mac Durnan Gospels]{.style_1}[,
preserved in Lambeth Palace, London, assigned to the ninth century and
attributed to Armagh (it belonged to Mac Durnan, who died in 927, but
"there is no indication that he was the scribe who wrote it": Bieler),
and the]{.style_} [Maelbrighte Gospels]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [Gospels
of Maielbrid,]{.style_1} [written in 1138 and preserved in the British
Museum.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-604}

::: calibre5
:::

## [LATER DEVELOPMENT OF THE IRISH MINUSCULE]{.style_2} {#later-development-of-the-irish-minuscule .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Dr. Bieler distinguishes the history of the later Irish script into
three main periods: a period of formation (eleventh and twelfth
centuries), a period of standardization (thirteenth to sixteenth
centuries), and a period of fossilization (from the seventeenth century
onwards); "during the nineteenth century a revival of the classical
Irish script of the 14th and 15th century was attempted by certain
Gaelic scholars".]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-605}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ORIGIN OF IRISH WRITING]{.style_2} {#origin-of-irish-writing .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The origin of the Irish scripts is still an open problem. In F. Masai's
opinion, there was only one Irish script, the pointed minuscule. The
majuscule or semi-uncial, the script of the great Gospel-books of the
eighth century, beginning with the]{.style_} [Book of Durrow,]{.style_1}
[is to be attributed to England; its prototype may have been (1) either
an Italian semi-uncial of the sixth or seventh century (i.e. of the
period of St. Augustine of Canterbury), in which some letters have
changed under the influence of the Irish script of the "Scottish"
missionaries of the seventh century; or else (2) an Irish script of the
seventh century changed under the influence of Italian models which
arrived in Northumbria at that period. The]{.style_} [Bangor
Antiphonary]{.style_1} [(see p. 466 f. and [Fig.
X---10](#calibre_link-248){.calibre9}]{.style_} [a]{.style_1}[), in
Masai's opinion, may represent the common ancestor of the two Insular
scripts, but it was not before the ninth century---when the]{.style_}
[Mac Regol Book]{.style_1} [was written---that the "English" semi-uncial
under the influence of Northumbria was adopted for Irish
manuscripts.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Masai's theory is a revolutionary one. The theory hitherto commonly
held, as expressed by a leading authority in this field, was as follows:
We do not know exactly when the Irish scripts came into being or what
were their precise progenitors; the Irish majuscule was mainly based on
a Roman semi-uncial untouched by Roman cursive but with considerable
uncial admixture; of the two distinct Irish types, the majuscule must be
older than the minuscule: the latter may be derived from the former, but
not]{.style_} [vice versa.]{.style_1} [More recently, Lowe
authoritatively suggested that the Italian fifth-century quarter-uncial,
as shown in manuscripts of Naples,]{.style_} [Lat]{.style_1}[. 2
(]{.style_}[Vind]{.style_1}[. 16), Turin,]{.style_}
[G.v.]{.style_1}[4]{.style_}[,]{.style_1} [and ex-Royal Library (of the
Italian King),]{.style_} [Varia]{.style_1} [186]{.style_}
[bis]{.style_1}[, must have had considerable influence on the formation
of the Irish minuscule. Bieler accepting this theory suggests that an
early uncial, as shown in three manuscripts, which come from Bobbio, but
"almost certainly were in Ireland at some time", and apparently are of
African origin---may have influenced the creation of the Irish
majuscule. Of the three manuscripts---all of the fourth or fifth century
A.D.---two contain works of Cyprian: one is preserved in the Vatican.
(]{.style_}[Vat]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [Lat. 10959]{.style_1}[), Turin
(National Library,]{.style_}
[F]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}[iv]{.style_1}[.27]{.style_}[)]{.style_1}[, and
Milan (Ambrosian Library,]{.style_} [D]{.style_1}[. 519.]{.style_}
[inf.]{.style_1}[) ; the other in Turin, (National Library,]{.style_}
[G.v.37]{.style_1}[) ; and the third is]{.style_} [Codex
Bobiensis,]{.style_1} [quoted k, which "is said to have been the pocket
gospel book of St. Columbanus" ; moreover, Cyprian "is the sole
ecclesiastical writer whose works echo in those of Patrick".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Bieler is probably right in suggesting that for the origin of the Irish
script we have to look in the great monastic foundations of the sixth
century, and that this script is not a direct continuation, even in a
modified form, of any one of the ancient book hands, but an original
creation. Its "inventors" naturally worked on existing material, but
they selected freely elements from various scripts and created with
these a new system. If this theory is right, as it probably is, then the
main fault of other theories is that they do not take sufficient account
of the part consciously played by the inventive power of individuals in
the formation of new alphabets (see, for instance,]{.style_} [The
Alphabet]{.style_1}[, pp. 322, 487, and]{.style_}
[passim]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[.]{.style_1} [Who was the inventor of the
Irish script? One can only guess, and "a tempting guess would be St.
Columba" (Bieler). However, "Irish majuscule and minuscule are both
eclectic types purposely devised for the literary needs and ambitions of
Irish monasticism. With it, they spread over Europe, but only in few
continental centres were they maintained beyond the first
generation."]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-606}

::: calibre5
:::

::: calibre15
:::

## [IRISH INFLUENCE ON ENGLISH BOOK PRODUCTION]{.style_2} {#irish-influence-on-english-book-production .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

["Willibrord, Aldhelm, Bede, sit at the feet of Celtic masters," writes
our leading palaeographer. "These facts are in our histories. But they
are also writ large on the face of our manuscripts\.... The oldest
manuscripts of England are so like the Irish as to seem identical. This
fact speaks volumes. To realize the fundamental character of England's
indebtedness to Ireland in educational matters in the early period, we
need only consider these simple facts: the manuscripts read and copied
during the four centuries of Roman occupation \... must have been in
'capitalis rustica', or in uncials\.... For all that, Rome's example was
not strong enough to counteract the nearer influence of the Celtic
teachers. For the predominant script of England, that which became her
national script, is the script she learned from Ireland and not from
Rome" (E. A. Lowe).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-607}

::: calibre5
:::

::: calibre15
:::

## [Welsh Book Production]{.style_2} {#welsh-book-production .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest period of Welsh literature is that of]{.style_}
[Cynfeirdd,]{.style_1} [or early poets, the great age of bardic
literature, associated with the celebrated names of Aneirin (the reputed
author of the great poem]{.style_} [Gododdin]{.style_1}[: his name has
been identified by some scholars with the Roman name Honorinus),
Taliesin, Myrddin, and Llywarch Hen, and with other names---not so well
known---such as Kian, Tal-haearn, Meugant, and Kywryd. This first
literary awakening began in the sixth century A.D., and continued
(though with considerably less creative and imaginative production) for
two or three centuries, until the results of the Norse invasions put an
end to it.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Only poetry attributed to Aneirin and Taliesin has survived. The other
names are more or less legendary.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[EARLIEST WELSH GLOSSES]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Although many of the preserved Welsh literary productions---both in
verse and in prose---contain elements partly attributed even to the
sixth century A.D., the earliest Welsh glosses and written literature
appear only in manuscripts of the ninth to the eleventh centuries. The
oldest of these glosses are in the]{.style_} [Liber Commonei]{.style_1}
[and in the]{.style_} [Gospels of St. Chad]{.style_1} [(see p.
[]{#calibre_link-250}464). [Figs. X---11](#calibre_link-249){.calibre9}
and 12.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The]{.style_} [Liber Commonei,]{.style_1} [written by a son of
Commoneus in a Welsh variety of the Hiberno-Saxon minuscules, is
assigned to A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 820 and was considered by
Henry Bradshaw as "the patriarch of all Welsh books known". It is "a
medley of useful knowledge", containing a portion from the Old Testament
in Latin and Greek written in Roman character, a Runic alphabet, a
calendrical piece, etc.; there are Latin glosses, a few Welsh glosses,
and several notes in mixed Latin and Welsh. The portion shown in [Fig.
X---11](#calibre_link-249){.calibre9} contains notes on several kinds of
measures of quantity and weight. The book is part]{.style_}
[C]{.style_1} [of a manuscript containing four parts, of which]{.style_}
[A]{.style_1} [comes from Brittany and contains Latin and Breton glosses
of the ninth and tenth centuries, and]{.style_} [D]{.style_1} [was
written in Wales in the second half of the ninth century.]{.style_} [A,
C]{.style_1}[, and]{.style_} [D]{.style_1} [seem to have been
transmitted from Wales to Glastonbury in the time of St. Dunstan, and
were owned by him.]{.style_} [B]{.style_1} [was written in Glastonbury
and added to the volume in the eleventh century.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000074.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-249}

[[Fig. X---11](#calibre_link-250){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Liber Commonei (Bodleian Library, Oxford, MS. Auct. F. IV 32, fol.
32).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000075.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-246}

[[Fig. X---12](#calibre_link-251){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex Ceaddae or St. Chad Gospels, quoted as L (Cathedral Library,
Lichfield) ; comes probably from a Welsh centre; was at Llandaff already
in the eighth century. Contains eighth-ninth century entries in Welsh
minuscules, as well as entries in Anglo-Saxon and Caroline minuscules of
the tenth century.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[On the whole, as in the case of many other peoples, sagas in verse and
prose had been floating among the Welsh for centuries, but it was only
during the twelfth century that there became evident a desire to have
these collected and written down, with relevant modifications and
accretions from every succeeding age.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The advent of new rulers ushered in a new remarkable intellectual
awakening: it was the period of the]{.style_} [Gogynfeirdd,]{.style_1}
[or the medieval poets, the court poets of the Norman period, chief
among whom were Gwalchmai, the son of Meilyr, Prince Owain Kyveiliog,
and Prince Howel ab Owain Gwynedd. According to Thomas Stephens no less
than seventy-nine bards flourished between 1080 and 1400. Tradition
assigns to this period the institution of bardic meetings, the
precursors of the modern]{.style_} [Eisteddfod, i.e.]{.style_1}
["assembly, sitting". "The first assembly of this kind of which we have
some knowledge was held in Cardigan Castle in 1176 under the patronage
of the Lord Rhys" (I. C. Peate).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Mabinogion]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the twelfth century written form was first given to the great eleven
tales in prose, or the romances, known as the]{.style_}
[Mabinogion.]{.style_1} [This cycle of romance may be distinguished in
three groups: The original]{.style_} [Mabinogion]{.style_1} [consisted
of four tales (Pwyll, Prince of Dyfed ; Branwen, Daughter of Llyr;
Manawyddan, Son of Llyr ; and Math, Son of Mathonwy) ; later the other
two groups were added, one consisting of three stories (Llud and
Llevelys ; Culhwch and Olwen ; and the Dream of Rhonabwy), and the other
containing four romances (the]{.style_} [Lady of the
Fountain;]{.style_1} [Peredur, Son of Evrawc; Geraint, Son of Erbin ;
and Maxen Wledig). The importance of the]{.style_}
[Mabinogion]{.style_1} [may be realized from J. C. Morrice's statement
that "without the Mabinogion, not only Welsh literature, but the
literature of Europe would be decidedly the poorer".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Some of the stories seem to refer to the period of Roman settlements in
Britain; some appear to be Irish in origin, or "mixed romances",
containing elements of Irish mythology and of the Arthurian legend; and
some deal with the "deeds" of King Arthur.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000076.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-252}

[Fig. X---13]{.style_1}

[The Black Book of Carmarthen (Wynne Collection, Peniarth), fol. 18
verso and 19 recto.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Four Ancient Books of Wales]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[To a slightly later period belong the earliest preserved manuscripts of
Welsh book production,]{.style_} [The Four Ancient Books of
Wales.]{.style_1} [These are: (1) The]{.style_} [Black Book of
Carmarthen]{.style_1}[---it is so called because it belonged originally
to the "black Canons" of the priory of Carmarthen. The manuscript,
consisting of fifty-four leaves of vellum, in small quarto, with
illuminated capitals, is in four different handwritings (discounting the
later glosses), all attributed to the twelfth century A.D. This
manuscript is in a private collection, at Peniarth.
[]{#calibre_link-608}See [Fig.
X---13](#calibre_link-252){.calibre9}.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(2) The]{.style_} [Book of Aneirin]{.style_1}[: this contains, amongst
other poems, the oldest preserved copy of Aneirin's]{.style_}
[Gododdin.]{.style_1} [This thirteenth-century manuscript, consisting of
nineteen leaves in small quarto, is in two different handwritings, and
is characterized by the fact that the initial letters of the stanzas are
coloured alternately red and green. This codex is in a private
collection at Middle Hill.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(3) The]{.style_} [Book of Taliesin,]{.style_1} [an early
fourteenth-century manuscript consisting of thirty-eight folios,
formerly belonging to the same private collection. It contains the poems
of various bards of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, who loved
the protecting shelter of a great name of the early period. Indeed, of
the seventy-seven poems attributed to Taliesin, only twelve seem to
belong to the sixth century, and eight are doubtful.
[]{#calibre_link-254}See [Fig.
X---14](#calibre_link-253){.calibre9}.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(4) The]{.style_} [Red Book of Hergest]{.style_1}[, preserved in Jesus
College, Oxford. This is supposed to have been written at Hergest Court,
a seat of the Vaughans, near Knighton, Radnorshire; it has a magnificent
binding (of much later date than the manuscript) in red morocco with
steel clasps: hence its name. It is a folio volume of 360 leaves written
in double columns in three different handwritings, and is a collection
of poems and stories in prose, some of them relating to King Arthur and
the early British kings. It was begun in or before 1318 and was finished
in 1454. Many poems of this book refer to the cycle of Llywarch Hen. The
stories in prose belong to the]{.style_} [Mabinogion.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Ancient Laws]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Of the other books produced in Wales,]{.style_} [The Ancient Laws and
Institutions]{.style_1} [deserve special mention. The oldest,
the]{.style_} [Laws of Howel Dda]{.style_1} [---king of South Wales in
the first half of the tenth century---is of the greatest historical
interest. These books throw great light on the life and customs of the
people and their rulers.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000077.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-253}

[[Fig. X---14](#calibre_link-254){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Book of Taliesin (National Library of Wales, Peniarth MS.
2).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Arthurian Romance]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Even more important is the part played by Welsh writers in the creation
of the Arthurian romance, which had a paramount influence on European
medieval literature. It illustrates, in a striking manner, how small
beginnings gradually evolve into great semi-legendary tales. The early
English historian Gildas writing in the year A.D. 560 a Latin treatise
on the early history of the country, mentions the military achievements
of a Cornish chief with a following in Wales. Another historian,
Nennius, who was a pupil of Elbod, bishop of Bangor, and is the
traditional author of the]{.style_} [Historia Britonum]{.style_1}[,
written in the early ninth century, first mentions Arthur by name, and
gives the names of twelve great battles which Arthur fought, finishing
up with the battle at Mons Badon, where---he states---960 men fell to
Arthur's sword.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Nennius's story is vastly amplified by Geoffrey of Monmouth or Gruffud
Arthur, archdeacon of Monmouth, who]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 1150 wrote
(or copied)]{.style_} [Historia Regum Britanniae]{.style_1}[. This
became the main foundation of all Arthurian legend. Robert
Wace's]{.style_} [Brut d'Angleterre]{.style_1}
[(]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 1165) is a translation of
Geoffrey's]{.style_} [Historia,]{.style_1} [but an interesting detail
was added, the celebrated Round Table. Layamon in his great
poem]{.style_} [Brut]{.style_1} [(containing 32,250 lines)---which is
the earliest great poem written in the English language after the Norman
Conquest---is considerably indebted to Geoffrey. (Of the two preserved
copies of Layamon's]{.style_} [Brut,]{.style_1} [both being in the
British Museum, the earlier is attributed to a not later date than
1205.)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is interesting to note that up to this point the Arthurian romance
is purely pagan and is rich in magic, in stories of giants and dwarfs,
and similar material. Apparently,]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 1210 Walter
Map introduced Christian elements, and from that time onwards, on the
Continent and in England, Arthur became the ideal of the true Christian
knight. The importance of the Arthurian romance in the history of
European literature has been emphasized by many historians. Here it will
suffice to quote Prof. Magnus Maclean. "The influence of these talcs
upon the literature, the taste, the social life of the whole of Western
Europe has been immense, and they are still as fresh and enchanting to
the intelligent reader as any Arabian Night's Entertainment."
Furthermore, with regard to its influence on English literature, Maclean
writes: "Though the different branches of the Celtic people had been
producing a literature from the sixth century, that literature does not
seem to have affected English authorship, until in the Middle Ages it
created the captivating Arthurian romances. Then, like the other
Continental literatures, the English for the first time fell under the
sway of the Celtic imagination."]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-609}

::: calibre5
:::

::: calibre15
:::

## [Scottish Gaelic Book Production]{.style_2} {#scottish-gaelic-book-production .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Amid the darkness which enshrouds the early civilization of the
Scottish Gael, the great St. Columba (521-97) stands out with relative
clearness. Tradition is probably correct in ascribing to him the largest
share in the great work of civilization accomplished by the missionaries
who brought Christian teaching to the heathen tribes of Alba. When
Columba first took possession for Christ of the little island of
Hy---which under the name of Iona (see p. 443) achieved fame in the
Christian world---he founded upon it a monastery which furnished the
atmosphere most suitable for raising a literature; this soon took root
and began to grow.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Hy or Iona became more than a religious retreat and a centre of
learning. Every main settlement which the saint and his disciples
founded, as from Iona they pushed their Christian conquests---whether in
the bigger islands of the Hebrides or in the Pictish mainland
country---consisted of a monastery for a body of clerics, from which
they might disperse themselves in circuits among the surrounding tribes,
returning to their home for shelter and mutual support. One of these
monastic settlements was that of Deer, in Buchan, a district of
Aberdeenshire, which projecting into the North Sea, forms the most
easterly point of Scotland; and the legend in the]{.style_} [Book of
Deer]{.style_1} [preserves in traditional detail the circumstances which
marked the origin of this important establishment.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Thus, as for Ireland and Wales, it is possible to place the beginnings
of the literature of the Scottish Gael in the sixth century A.D., but
very little is known of these beginnings. The paucity of early Scottish
Gaelic manuscripts has been partly explained by Magnus Maclean, a
leading authority in this field.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(1) Prior to the Norse invasions, Ireland and Scotland had a common
language and literature; there was constant coming and going between the
two countries, and no clean-cut distinction can be made between them.
The Norse invasions made a profound change; for two centuries the
kindred realms were kept apart, and never again was the original unity
restored. During the period of disjunction, both language and literature
began to develop on different lines, and when the general conditions
became settled, the language and literature of the two countries were
sufficiently distinct to be considered separate entities. The]{.style_}
[Book of Deer]{.style_1} [is the first monument of this departure in
Scotland, whereas the]{.style_} [Book of the Dun Cow]{.style_1} [(see p.
453) and]{.style_} [Liber hymnorum]{.style_1} [(p. 448) are the earliest
of the new period in Ireland.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[DESTRUCTION OF EARLY SCOTTISH BOOKS]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(2) Maclean suggests that not only in the Irish, but also in the
Scottish monasteries "many men were arising within their sacred walls
who had a genuine love and taste for writing---a love so great that they
were not merely content with copying books, composing poems, or writing
history, but they embellished them in a way which has excited the
admiration of modern times". This statement is probably exaggerated at
least in relation to Scotland, but there can be no doubt that also in
the Scottish monasteries books were produced in early times. The
marauding Norsemen saw to it that these books should not come down to
us. The description of the havoc brought by the Vikings reminds us of
the Gothic destructions in the Roman Empire, of the Mongol plunderings
in Asia and eastern Europe, of the "Vandalism" in Spain and North
Africa. In 794 "the marauding Norsemen emerged in the Western Isles,
which from this time till the middle of the thirteenth century were
destined to be favourite haunts and special theatres of their
operations. They quickly found and sacked defenceless Iona, and for
years took spoils of the sea between that Island and Erin \... in 802
they revisited Iona and burned its sacred buildings to the ground.
Returning four years later, they put the whole community to the sword
\... the freebooters made another swift and dire descent upon the island
in 825."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000079.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. X---15a]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Copy of Adamnán, Vita Columbae, known as the Dorbbéne Codex
(Schaffhausen, on the Rhine, Switzerland ; MS. Gen. 1, fol.
43).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

["Once more, on Christmas eve in 986, the famous monastery of Hy, ever
rising on its own ashes, was attacked and destroyed by the successors of
these old Danes, and this time the abbot and fifteen monks were put to a
violent death. From Orkney and Shetland, and the coasts of Caithness and
the Hebrides the hardy Norsemen swooped down upon Eastern Scotland as
well as upon the English and Irish seaboards, until at length they made
themselves masters of a great part of the country" (Maclean). The havoc
was so great that the pleading "From the fury of the Northmen, good
Lord, deliver us!" was introduced into the Litany. The author of
the]{.style_} [Wars of the Gael with the Gaill]{.style_1}
[(]{.style_}[i.e.]{.style_1} [the Norsemen), a copy of which is
preserved in the]{.style_} [Book of Leinster]{.style_1}
[(written]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 1150; see p. 453 f.), writes "In a
word, even if there existed a hundred sharp, ready, cool, never-resting
brazen tongues in each head, and a hundred garrullous, loud, unceasing
voices for each tongue, they could not recount nor narrate nor enumerate
nor tell what all the Gael suffered in common, both men and women, laity
and clergy, old and young, noble and ignoble, of hardship and of injury,
and of oppression in every house from these valiant, wrathful, foreign,
purely pagan people."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000080.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. X-15 b]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Book of Deer (University Library, Cambridge, I.i.b.32 ; fol.
85).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Monasteries and other centres of culture were favourite objects of
attacks. "It was not allowed," wrote the historian Keating, "to give
instruction in letters\.... No scholars, no clerics, no books, no holy
relics were left in church or monastery through dread of them. Neither
bard nor philosopher nor musician pursued his wonted profession in the
land." And the]{.style_} [Wars of the Gael with the Gaill,]{.style_1}
[after having described the endurance of the few remaining scholars,
mentions that "their writings and their books in every church and in
every sanctuary where they were, were burnt and thrown into water by the
plunderers from beginning to end (of the Viking invasion)". Maclean
therefore concludes---perhaps with some exaggeration---"Countless
numbers of the illuminated books of the men of Erin and Alba thus
perished."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[(3) Two other results of the Norse invasions may be mentioned. First,
when the condition of life became such that men could no longer
cultivate the arts, the production of books became more and more rare or
even non-existent. Second, numerous monks and missionaries fled to the
Continent with such books and manuscripts as they could save from the
violence and destruction of the invaders. In consequence, there followed
a long period of sterility in Scottish Gaelic literature and book
production.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The "Life of St. Columba"]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[In Magnus Maclean's opinion, the Schaffhausen copy of
Adamnán's]{.style_} [Vita Columbae]{.style_1}[---Fig. X---15]{.style_}
[a]{.style_1}[---is the oldest Scottish book in existence. It is an
interesting manuscript of sixty-eight leaves (measuring about 11 × 9
inches), in a very early binding, which is perhaps the original one. The
sides of the binding are of beechwood (greatly worm-eaten) covered with
calfskin; the front would seem to have been formerly secured by clasps;
the sewing of the back is very rude and rather curious. The text is in
Latin in double columns. There are numerous capital letters; some of
them are of great size and adorned with red and yellow paint. There are
three handwritings, of which two seem to be the work of the same scribe,
the third being that of later corrections in spelling.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This codex is one of the few Celtic manuscripts, which give us the name
of the scribe and may be dated with relative precision. The colophon, at
the end of the manuscript, says: "I beseech those who wish to transcribe
these books, yea, rather, I adjure them by Christ, the judge of the
world, after they have them diligently transcribed, carefully to compare
and correct their copies with that from which they have copied them, and
also to subjoin here this adjuration: 'Whoever readeth these books on
the virtues of St. Columba, let him pray to the Lord for me Dorbene that
after death I may possess eternal life'." This Dorbbéne was probably the
man bearing this name who was abbot-elect of Iona in 713, but died that
same year before assuming office. Adamnán, the author of this work, was
the ninth abbot of Iona, who died in 704. The]{.style_} [Dorbbéne
Codex]{.style_1} [is reproduced in Fig. X---15]{.style_} [a]{.style_1}[;
see also p. 468.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[As a matter of fact, this codex can hardly be considered a Scottish
Gaelic production. Iona was, indeed, an Irish Gaelic colony. Early in
(he fifth century, a small kingdom had been founded in Argyll by
settlers from Ireland; their "descendants had always kept in touch with
their Irish kinsmen, and throughout the sixth century their kings seem
to have regarded the king of Ulster as their lord. Under Aedan mac
Gabrain, who became their king in 574, they suddenly appear as a
formidable people" (F. M. Stenton), but in the seventh century their
influence declines, and "their importance in the history of the time
rests on their possession of the sanctuary of Iona".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Book of Deer]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is generally assumed that the earliest manuscript containing
Scottish Gaelic glosses is the]{.style_} [Book of Deer]{.style_1}
[(University Library, Cambridge,]{.style_}
[I]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}[i]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}[b]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}[32]{.style_1}[).
Fig. X---15]{.style_} [b]{.style_1}[. The codex is of small but rather
wide octavo form of eighty-six leaves. It contains, in Latin,]{.style_}
[St]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [John]{.style_1} [and portions of the other
three Gospels in the "Irish" text which ---as already said---mainly
corresponds with the Vulgate, but preserves also occasional readings
from earlier versions; this codex appears to be a careless transcript of
a corrupt text. Included also in Latin is a fragment of an Office for
the Visitation of the sick, a copy of the Apostles' Creed, and of a
charter of King David I to the clerics of Deer. The glosses in Gaelic
are the interesting legend recording the foundation of the monastery,
the colophon, and copies of grants made to the monastery of Deer: they
are written on blank pages or in the margins. The ornamented capital
letters and the illuminations will be dealt with in the forthcoming book
on]{.style_} [Illumination and Binding]{.style_1}[. The]{.style_} [Book
of Deer]{.style_1} [is generally assigned to the ninth century, while
the six Gaelic glosses may be dated from the late tenth or early
eleventh century to the middle of the twelfth century. In the opinion of
leading authorities the]{.style_} [Book of Deer]{.style_1}[, whose early
connections with the monastery of Deer seem to be unquestionable, may
have been written by a native scribe of Alba.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Other Books]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest manuscript written entirely in Scottish Gaelic is the
codex known as]{.style_} [The Book of the Dean of Lismore]{.style_1}[:
it is so called because it is generally held that Sir James Macgregor,
at that time Dean of Lismore in Argyllshire, and his brother Duncan were
its compilers. The manuscript, preserved in the National Library,
Edinburgh, consists of 311 folios in quarto, and is a collection of
Gaelic poetry taken down from oral recitation in the years 1512 to 1526.
The poems, composed by about sixty-six poets, vary from less than ten
lines to a hundred lines; on the whole there are about 11,000 lines, 800
of them in the early style, known as Ossianic. The manuscript is written
in the current Roman hand of the period, and the spelling is phonetic.
The]{.style_} [Book of Clanranald]{.style_1} [(of which two manuscripts
are extant, known as the]{.style_} [Black]{.style_1} [and the]{.style_}
[Red]{.style_1}[), and the]{.style_} [Book of Fernaig]{.style_1}[---both
of the seventeenth century---are the only ones of the Scottish Gaelic
literature prior to the eighteenth century which deserve
mention.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-610}

::: calibre5
:::

::: calibre15
:::

## [Anglo-Saxon Book Production]{.style_2} {#anglo-saxon-book-production .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Lord Macaulay remarked that Britain received only a faint tincture of
Roman arts and letters. Of the western provinces which obeyed the
Caesars she was the last that was conquered, and the first that was
flung away\.... No writer of British birth is reckoned among the masters
of Latian poetry and eloquence. It is not probable that the islanders
were at any time generally familiar with the tongue of their Italian
rulers. From the Atlantic to the vicinity of the Rhine the Latin has,
during many centuries, been predominant. It drove out the Celtic; it was
not driven out by the Teutonic\.... In our island the Latin appears
never to have superseded the old Gaelic speech, and could not stand its
ground against the German\.... The scanty and superficial civilization
which the Britons had derived from their southern masters was effaced by
the calamities of the fifth century.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ROMAN BRITAIN]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Another great historian of the last century, J. R. Green, wrote: "In
Britain alone Rome died into a vague tradition of the past. The whole
organization of government and society disappeared with the people who
used it\.... Its law, its literature, its manners, its faith, went with
it. The new England was a heathen country."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Even more important, from the point of view of the subject here dealt
with, is the following statement by Prof. E. A. Lowe: "Whereas Roman
walls, Roman inscriptions, camps, villas, mosaics, coins, pottery, are
to be seen in plenty, there is not a single manuscript or scrap of
manuscript which may with any semblance of justice be ascribed to the
pre-Saxon period."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[CULTURAL HISTORY OF EARLY ENGLAND]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Modern research and historical criticism have done much for early
English culture and learning. Not long ago, the subject might have been
regarded as a tangled web of fact and fiction. Inquirers found it hard
to thread their way through the unsifted mass of materials, to
distinguish the true from the fabulous, authentic history from myth and
legend. English civilization has a fascinating history, going back for
over fourteen hundred years. The records available here and there, from
which the development can be traced, carry us back to the first half of
the sixth century A.D., to St. Aidan, in the north, and St. Augustine,
in the south. From the time Christianity was introduced by these men,
English civilization has a history, which---although with some
exceptions---is continuous and verifiable.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The cultural history of pagan England, however, is still enshrouded in
mystery. We know from later records that there existed sagas and poems,
but they were probably based on oral tradition. We may assume,
therefore, that there was no native book production before the seventh
century of the Christian era.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In that century, England suddenly became one of the main centres of
Christian culture. At its zenith, it "influenced the whole development
of letters and learning in western Europe\.... There is nothing in
European history closely parallel to this sudden development of a
civilization by one of the most primitive peoples established within the
ancient Roman Empire\.... The comparative security . . . permitted the
cultivation of learning at many different centres, the creation of
libraries, the multiplication of books, and a certain amount of
intercourse between scholars" (F. M. Stenton).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This awakening was due mainly to two streams of influence, one coming
from Irish missionaries, the other from Roman emissaries. The two
movements, at first independent of each other, and later going on side
by side, were at times mutually helpful and conjoined, but also at
times---though on the whole only for a short period---they seemed
mutually hostile. Although both the Irish and the Roman learning were
based on classical scholarship, they present quite distinct features. In
Sir F. M. Stenton's opinion, the main Irish influences are: (1) the
curiously involved and artificial Latin style, which in its extreme form
approximates to a secret language of the learned; (2) the Irish
scripts---although English scribes of the seventh and eighth centuries
produced masterpieces, such as the]{.style_} [Codex Amiatinus]{.style_1}
[(see p. 501 f.), written in superb continental writing, for all except
the most solemn purposes they normally used one or other of the Irish
scripts: the result is that it is sometimes impossible to distinguish
the products of English and Irish]{.style_} [scriptoria]{.style_1} [on
palaeographical evidence alone; (3) in the penitential system of the
early English Church, there was a strong Irish element. On the other
hand, Stenton remarks that it is very difficult to distinguish between
the Irish and continental strains in the substance of English learning.
There is, indeed, evidence that certain old Latin texts of the Bible,
"undoubtedly of Celtic origin", were used by English scholars of this
period, and apparently "Old English religious poets were familiar with a
large body of apocryphal literature, discountenanced by the Roman
church, but popular in Ireland". Notwithstanding this, Stenton believes
that the debt owed by early English scholarship to the Irish has often
been exaggerated.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[CONVERSION OF ENGLAND]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Pope Gregory the Great (590---604), considered it his task to
christianize Britain and is said to have formed a plan for buying
English youths to be given to God in the monasteries. In the year 597
St. Augustine, made Abbot by the Pope, landed with forty monks in the
Isle of Thanet, in Kent, and through the influence of Queen Bertha, a
devoted Christian, was received sympathetically by King Aethelbert, who
gave him a home at Canterbury, and who himself shortly afterwards was
converted to Christianity. In 601, Augustine received from the Pope the
pallium as Archbishop of Canterbury and Primate of Britain. His mission
extended the monastic system and encouraged the resort hither of foreign
monks. In 634, the Franco-Roman priest Birinus converted the West
Saxons. In 634-5, St. Aidan, a monk in the monastery of Iona, founded by
St. Columba, preached the Gospel in Northumbria, having his centre at
Lindisfarne, of which he became bishop.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Indeed, when Oswiu became king of Northumbria, he sent to the monastery
of Iona---where he had lived in exile as a youth---for a bishop, and in
634 a company of enthusiastic Irish monks, headed by St. Aidan, settled
in Lindisfarne.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Lindisfarne, also known as the Holy Island, is an island 3 miles long
and miles broad, off the coast of Northumberland, not far from royal
Bebbanburgh or Bamburgh or Bamborough. For a whole generation it
remained the only bishopric in Northumbria, and the main cultural
centre. Under Aidan's successors, Finan (651---60) and Colman, both
monks from Iona, a bitter controversy developed in the Northumbrian
Church between the adherents of Roman and of Irish customs (see also p.
493). The Roman party won at the Synod of Whitby (in 664) ; tradition
has it that the king declared that, as between St. Peter and St.
Columba, he would obey St. Peter who is in charge of the keys of heaven.
But Irish influence was not eliminated. Eata, a pupil of Aidan, was
abbot of the important monastery of Melrose, and later became bishop of
Lindisfarne. He was a teacher and friend of the greatest saint of
seventh-century Northumbria, Cuthbert, who "belongs to the world of
ancient Irish saints". Cuthbert was bishop of Lindisfarne from 684 till
he died in 687.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[By then, the centre of Northumbrian Christian culture passed to the
twin monasteries of Wearmouth and Jarrow (see p. 505). Lindisfarne
priory was destroyed in 893, and in 1093 its remaining materials were
used to build a Benedictine priory. Lindisfarne was ravaged several
times by the Danes, and the increasing importance of the see of Durham
caused it to be ultimately abandoned. "The Cathedral Church of Durham in
the Middle Ages"---writes the leading expert in this subject---"can have
had few more remarkable features than its wealth of books, or fragments
of books, surviving from the golden age of the early English Church---an
inheritance from the original foundations of Lindisfarne and the twin
monasteries of Jarrow and Monkwearmouth" (R. A. B. Mynors).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the second half of the seventh century, missionaries of Rome and of
Ireland proclaimed the Gospel of Christ all over England, the former
mainly in the south, the latter mainly in the north. "The effective
conversion of Northumbria was the work \... of a missionary enterprise
which had come to Lindisfarne from Iona, and to Iona from the Church in
Ireland. Upon this Celtic foundation built men like Wilfred and Benedict
Biscop, who were inspired by the traditions of the Continent \..."
(Mynors). Generally speaking, Christianity among the Anglo-Saxons was a
missionary undertaking, and it encouraged the foundation of organizing
centres. Later on, the abbeys partook rather of the nature of large
training colleges, where learning and book production were carried
on.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[At first, the missionaries did not need a Bible written in the native
language---the common people could neither read nor write, anyway; but
before long a version of the Bible or a portion of it became part and
parcel of English literature. Besides, wherever Christianity was
accepted, a system of worship was begun, which needed service-books in
the native language and other books without which the new faith would
not have prospered.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-611}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BEGINNINGS OF EARLY ENGLISH LITERATURE]{.style_2} {#beginnings-of-early-english-literature .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Space does not allow us to examine the roots of English literature in
the pre-Christian heroic poems of the early Teuton settlers, and even
less, the poems which may have been brought by them from their previous
home across the North Sea, and the tales of adventure and of mighty
deeds of mythical Germanic heroes in a period before the Anglo-Saxon
forefathers left their own country for Britain.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[These pre-Christian poems---they contain, indeed, so few traces of the
Christian faith that it seems quite unlikely that they were written by
authors who knew anything of Christianity---have been preserved in
relatively late copies; we may mention]{.style_} [Widsith]{.style_1}[,
an early English poem on the scop, or "The Traveller",]{.style_} [Deor's
Complaint,]{.style_1} [recorded in the]{.style_} [Exeter
Book,]{.style_1} [of A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 980,]{.style_} [The
Fight at Finn's Borough]{.style_1}[, but particularly]{.style_}
[Beowulf]{.style_1} []{#calibre_link-256}[([Fig.
X---16](#calibre_link-255){.calibre9}), which contains over 3,000 lines;
the spells form a literary group of their own, one of them
(]{.style_}[Wyrta]{.style_1}[) containing as many as sixty-three lines
of verse; another one, the Christian spell]{.style_}
[Bethlem]{.style_1}[, may go back to a heathen original. The unique copy
of]{.style_} [Beowulf]{.style_1} [([Fig.
X---16](#calibre_link-255){.calibre9}), preserved at the British Museum,
was written A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 1000 ; but it has been
suggested that this manuscript was transcribed from a copy written at
least 300 years earlier. Another precious Cotton manuscript in the
British Museum is the tenth-century copy of]{.style_}
[Heliand,]{.style_1} ["almost the only waif of the Old Saxon literature
that has survived" (Esdaile).]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000081.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-255}

[[Fig. X---16](#calibre_link-256){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Beowulf (British Museum, Cott. Vit. A.xv ; fol. 176 verso,
ll.2105---27).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[These poems have been preserved in West Saxon manuscripts of the tenth
century, just referred to, but they "contain many ancient forms of
words, which show that an Anglian original lies behind the existing
texts \... it seems clear that the poems took substantially their
present shape in a period which may be arbitrarily defined by the birth
of Bede in 672 and the final departure of Alcuin from England in 782"
(Stenton).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, there can hardly be any doubt that "the Christian learning of
the seventh-century schools was confronted by a heathen culture which
had already given rise to a literature\.... Most of the great stories
which had arrested the imagination of the Germanic world had received a
definite, though by no means stereotyped, form at their hands.
Reflection on life and its vicissitudes was already being expressed from
the heathen standpoint in verse to which there is no close parallel
elsewhere in Europe. To a strict churchman of the period this pagan
literature was intensely distasteful\.... The clergy became more
tolerant of this tradition as the danger of a heathen reaction died
away, and, indeed, played an essential part in its transmission. The
English poetry of the heathen age was first written down by Christian
clerks, and most of it only survives in texts which are affected by
Christian ideas and imagery" (Stenton).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It must be remembered that, as in the case of early Irish literature,
whereas the earliest preserved was chiefly occupied in Christian
devotional and sacred poetry, the heathen or half-heathen war songs of
the minstrels, attached to the courts and great houses, were destined to
die out unwritten (unless they chanced to be collected and edited, more
than probably with great changes, in later times), because the monks did
not transcribe them.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Caedmon and Cynewulf]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The first piece of true English literature which we can actually date
is a fragment of a religious epic, a Bible paraphrase, of Caedmon, a
poor brother in the abbey of Lady Hilda (the grand-niece to King Edwin;
she was abbess of a "double monastery" for both monks and nuns, from 657
to 680) at Streoneshalch (Whitby), North Riding, Yorkshire. Caedmon is
generally considered as the "father of English song". The only
trustworthy information about him is in Bede's]{.style_} [Ecclesiastical
History]{.style_1}[, iv. The hymn which Caedmon is said to have composed
in his dream is preserved in manuscripts of Bede's]{.style_}
[History]{.style_1}[, now in Cambridge and elsewhere. A manuscript,
containing a paraphrase of parts of the Bible, is preserved in the
Bodleian Library, Oxford (]{.style_}[Junius]{.style_1}[,]{.style_}
[xi]{.style_1}[) ; previously it was attributed to Caedmon: it is now
assigned to the "school of Caedmon".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Indeed, as most of the early English religious poetry which has
survived relates to subjects which according to Bede have been dealt
with in verse by Caedmon, a considerable portion of it has at one time
or another been attributed to him. It is agreed, however, by the leading
authorities in this field that the only verses which can be definitely
assigned to him, are the nine lines copied into the oldest
manuscripts---already referred to---of Bede's]{.style_} [Ecclesiastical
History]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, Caedmon's verses are definite evidence that already in the
seventh century the technique of the heroic epic was being applied to
Christian subjects. Judging from the archaic language in the preserved
West Saxon manuscripts of the late tenth century, and from other
evidence (such as the celebrated Northumbrian cross, of the late seventh
century, at Ruthwell, near Dumfries, in Scotland, containing part of the
poem on the Crucifixion from the]{.style_} [Dream of the
Rood]{.style_1}[), it may be assumed that the earliest English religious
poetry flourished in Northumbria from the late seventh century till the
middle of the ninth century. Some religious poetry has been assigned to
Mercia, where apparently in the early ninth century Cynewulf composed
his poems; they are partly preserved in the]{.style_} [Vercelli
Codex]{.style_1}[, of the late tenth century, which also contains a
complete text of]{.style_} [Dream of the Rood.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Sir F. M. Stenton---a leading authority on Anglo-Saxon England
---considers as the oldest piece of English historical writing now
extant, an anonymous life of St. Cuthbert. It was written at Lindisfarne
; it refers to Aldfrith, son of Oswiu, king of Northumbria (who reigned
from 685 till 704), as "Aldfrith, who now reigns peacefully".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The late seventh-century Northumbria may thus be referred to as the
starting point of English poetry and prose. Therefore, Sir F. M. Stenton
is probably right in his suggestion that King Aldfrith's influence on
the development of Northumbrian learning (and, we may add, of English
learning in general) was much greater than appears on the surface of
history, and that he stands with Alfred of Wessex among the few Old
English kings who combined skill in warfare with a desire for knowledge.
It can hardly be doubted that the king himself took an active part in
the cultivation of letters and learning, that he wrote Irish verse, and
that he was one of the most learned men in his kingdom.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Danish raids (since 835) and the invasion of the Danish armies
(since 865) destroyed the northern English civilization and interrupted
the current of Northumbrian Old English poetry.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000082.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-265}

[Fig. X---17a]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Maccabees, i; fragment of about half a leaf in a sixth-century uncial
hand (Durham Cathedral Library, B.iv.6; Mynors's list, No.
1).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-612}

::: calibre15
:::

## [EARLY ENGLISH BOOK PRODUCTION]{.style_2} {#early-english-book-production .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is known that, for about its first four centuries, English literary
production was not very original, although it was outstanding in
comparison with other "national" literatures. There were, however, two
fields in which England was hardly surpassed by any Christian country of
that period: writing and "illuminating" of books.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[At the same time as St. Columba founded the monastery of Iona ---and,
apparently, brought there, from Ireland, the art of writing
manuscripts---Christianity and books reached this country also from
another source, Rome. Roman Christianity spread mainly south of the
Wash, Irish Christianity mainly from the Wash to the Firth of Forth. The
Roman influence may also be seen in the fact that in the south, the
Runic inscriptions are very rare (see, for instance,]{.style_} [The
Alphabet,]{.style_1} [p. 509) ; indeed, the Runes (regarded as
heathenish relics) were superseded by the Roman alphabet.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Rome or Ireland? St. Peter or St. John? was now the practical question.
Rome won: the vexed question was settled in 664 at the Synod of Whitby
(see p. 487). The followers of the Irish Church acquiesced, or else
returned to Scotland; the English Church remained in close communion
with the Roman Church. But, as with most things in this great Island,
there was no clear-cut course of the settlement of this religious
controversy. Considerable mixture of the two streams of influence
continued to take place even when the Roman letters, arts, and
organization became predominant.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000083.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-257}

[Fig. X---17b]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Canterbury (or St. Augustine) Gospels from St. Augustine's, Canterbury,
now in Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, MS. 286).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

["At the Council of Whitby---writes Prof. Lowe---the conflict between
the Roman and the Celtic liturgy ended in a victory for Rome. The less
dramatic conflict, however, between the two scripts, ended in a victory
for the Celts."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The typically English amalgamation may be seen particularly in the
development of book production. Indeed, it is still held by many
scholars, despite the recent theory of Masai and others, that the great
Anglo-Irish school of writing and illuminating manuscripts of the
seventh and eighth centuries originated in Ireland and was carried by
Irish missionaries through Scotland into Northumbria.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[On the whole, Lowe's conclusion stated in 1935 seems to be still valid:
"It is nothing strange if, when Insular manuscripts of the late seventh
or early eighth century are in question, the palaeographer finds himself
unable to say whether they were written by an English or by an Irish
scribe, since at that period the English were still imitators, following
closely the methods of their Irish masters. We have good examples of
this in Cambridge, Corpus Christi College 197 (No. 125), and in the main
portion of Durham A.II.17 (No. 149), to mention but two." This statement
may be amplified by the following opinion expressed by another leading
palaeographer:]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["In the books before us we see the two streams of influence, Insular
and Continental, flowing on side by side. The Irish---then, as ever, a
law unto themselves---had developed, along with a typical Celtic style
of illumination, a kind of script completely unlike anything else . . .
we call it 'insular' majuscule or minuscule. The books brought back from
the Continent by Benedict Biscop would be for the most part in the clear
rounded hand . . . which we call 'uncial'. Both these styles of writing
were available as models to the Northumbrian scribes, and both they
carried on simultaneously without distinction" (Mynors).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[There is a fly-leaf at the end of the twelfth-century codex]{.style_}
[B.iv.]{.style_1}[6 of Durham Cathedral (No. 75 of the list given by
Mynors), containing part of]{.style_} [Maccabees]{.style_1}[, i, written
in a sixth-century uncial hand. In Lowe's opinion "the probability is
that the manuscript was written in Italy and constitutes one of the
excellent sixth-century Italian models which were available in
Northumbria". []{#calibre_link-613}See [Fig.
X---17](#calibre_link-257){.calibre9} a.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the opinion of another leading authority, "whatever may have been
the class or classes of manuscripts, which St. Augustine and the Roman
missionaries brought with them or imported into England, no national
form of handwriting was evolved from them. That these manuscripts were
written in uncials and half-uncials, or mixed characters, the ordinary
literary hand of Italy, may be assumed. But uncial writing was never
received with favour in these islands" (Thompson).]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000084.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-258}

[Fig. X--18]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Left) Moore Bede (University Library, Cambridge, Kk. v. 16); most
important copy of Bede's Historia Ecclesiastica Gentis Anglorum, written
A.D. c. 737, "presumably in the North of England or possibly in a
Continental centre with Northumbrian connections" (Lowe); (right)
Aldhelm, De Laudibus Virginum, "written probably on the Continent, in a
Germanie centre with South English connections" (Lowe); assigned to the
eighth or ninth century.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000085.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-259}

[Fig. X---19]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Martyrology of St. Willibrord (National Library, Paris, Lat.
10837; portion of fol. 3); (below) St. Gregory the Great, Liber
Pastoralis, translated by King Alfred (?) from Latin into Old English
(Bodleian Library, Oxford, MS. Hatton 20, portion of fol. 2), c.
890.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-614}

## [ANGLO-SAXON MANUSCRIPTS]{.style_2} {#anglo-saxon-manuscripts .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The relatively few Anglo-Saxon manuscripts of the eighth to the tenth
centuries which have been preserved are generally divided into three
groups: (i) Northumbrian, which is by far the most important; (2)
Mercian: and (3) South English, chiefly West Saxon. The Northumbrian
hands were nearer to the Irish than those of the other two groups, while
the Mercian and West Saxon hands were very similar.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[As in Ireland, there were in England two main styles of writing: (1)
the round hand or majuscule, the Insular Anglo-Saxon half-uncial, which
was used during the eighth and ninth centuries, mainly for books and
rarely for charters; (2) the pointed hand or minuscule, which was used
for both books and documents, but is chiefly seen in the latter. In the
course of the tenth century a marked change took place in the English
minuscule, chiefly under the influence of the French minuscule, and in
the eleventh century the minuscule hand became so changed---the letters
became larger and the strokes above and below the lines became longer
than before---that it cannot any longer be called a pointed
hand.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The relationship between the two hands has aptly been described by
Prof. E. A. Lowe. "It is clear that the two types of Insular script were
early in use, majuscule and minuscule\.... Majuscule came before
minuscule, not only in rank but also in time. The second may be derived
from the first, but not vice versa\.... The priority which they (the
Insular scribes) give to majuscule in the hierarchy of scripts is
conclusive. Whenever a fine liturgical book was required it was written
in majuscule, even though minuscule was known at the time. In writing a
minuscule text the headings and colophons, for which it was customary to
use an older and more dignified script, are in majuscule; in short,
Insular scribes invariably give majuscule the place of honour, and that
can only be because it is the older type."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to Sir E. M. Thompson, England borrowed the Irish pointed
minuscule hand, the resemblance between these two hands being very
close. Moreover, the Irish minuscule existed in the seventh century, "it
probably had been formed much earlier", and in Ireland "it must have
been the common form of handwriting in use among the educated. Once
introduced into Northern England, it rapidly spread through the country.
By the eighth century, it had been cast into a set form to serve as a
literary hand, of a fine ample type, such as seen in the copy of
Bede's]{.style_} [Ecclesiastical]{.style_1} [History" (Thompson),
reproduced []{#calibre_link-615}on [Fig.
X---18](#calibre_link-258){.calibre9}. An excellent specimen of the
South-English minuscule hand is given in [Fig.
X---18](#calibre_link-258){.calibre9}. The Anglo-Saxon minuscule spread
very early to the Continent, and particularly to the monastery of
Echternach (see p. 510 f.), founded in []{#calibre_link-616}698. [Fig.
X---19](#calibre_link-259){.calibre9},]{.style_} [above]{.style_1}[,
reproduces a portion from the earliest dated Anglo-Saxon codex, written
in minuscule hand: it was written in the monastery of Echternach between
A.D. 703 and 721.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000086.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-260}

[Fig. X---20]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Northumbrian uncial manuscript of the seventh or eighth century (Durham
Cathedral Library, A.ii.17; fol. 106).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000087.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-261}

[Fig. X---21]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Durham Rituale, early tenth century (Durham Cathedral Library,
A.iv.19; p. 100; Mynors's list, No. 12).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-617}

## [NORTHUMBRIAN CODICES WRITTEN IN MAJUSCULE]{.style_2} {#northumbrian-codices-written-in-majuscule .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Two important Northumbrian manuscripts clearly show the influence of
the Italian uncial hand. (1) The]{.style_} [Gospel of St.
John,]{.style_1} [preserved in Stonyhurst College, in Lancashire (at one
time it belonged to Durham Cathedral; later it was preserved in Liege).
It was "written in Northumbria in the late VIIth century in a very good,
small uncial hand" (Mynors). This codex contains ninety leaves,
measuring about 13.5 by 8.8 cm. It is neither illuminated nor otherwise
decorated, but it is covered with an exceptional binding; if the latter
is of the same date as the text (see the book on]{.style_} [Illumination
and Binding]{.style_1}[), it would be the oldest European book to have
survived in its original binding. (2) Part of codex]{.style_}
[A.ii]{.style_1}[.17 (leaves 103---11) of Durham Cathedral---No. 3 in
Mynors's list---is written "in large Northumbrian uncial of the late
VIIth or early VIIIth century". Its text "is exceedingly close to that
of the Lindisfarne Gospels" []{#calibre_link-618}(Mynors). [Fig.
X---20](#calibre_link-260){.calibre9}.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Other Northumbrian manuscripts, however, seem to show Irish influence.
Part of the Durham codex]{.style_} [A.ii]{.style_1}[.17 (leaves
2---102), containing the]{.style_} [Four Gospels]{.style_1}[, each
preceded by a summary and prologue, is in late seventh- or early
eighth-century writing, and was produced in a Northumbrian "great centre
of calligraphy in the direct line of Irish tradition, or else in Ireland
itself" (Lowe). Mynors assigns the text to the Irish family, sharing as
it does some peculiar readings with the]{.style_} [Mac Regol
Gospels]{.style_1} [(see p. 464) and the]{.style_} [Book of
Kells]{.style_1} [(see p. 456 ff.); the ornament is related to that of
the]{.style_} [Lindisfarne Gospels]{.style_1}[. The manuscript is now
incomplete; three lines from leaf 70 were presented (in 1700) by the
Dean and Chapter of Durham Cathedral to Samuel Pepys, and are now in
Pepys Library, Magdalen College, Cambridge
(]{.style_}[MS]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [2981]{.style_1}[, No. 19). The
ornament of this codex will be discussed in]{.style_} [Illumination and
Binding]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A fragmentary manuscript of Durham Cathedral (No. 6 in Mynors's list,
corresponding to]{.style_} [C.iii]{.style_1}[.20 with fly-leaves
of]{.style_} [A.ii]{.style_1}[.10 and]{.style_} [C.iii]{.style_1}[,13),
consisting of twelve leaves from a]{.style_} [Gospel]{.style_1}[, is
written in a large seventh- or eighth-century insular majuscule hand
with ornamental initials. "The text is of the Irish family \[of
manuscripts\], and it is possible that the volume when complete
contained not the Gospels only, but the whole New Testament"
(Mynors).]{.style_} [Codex A.ii.]{.style_1}[16 of Durham Cathedral (No.
7 in Mynors's list), containing the]{.style_} [Four Gospels]{.style_1}[,
is a copy written in "the VIIIth century and doubtless in Northumbria
\... in a text of Irish type". Three hands can be distinguished. Two
fly-leaves of Durham codex]{.style_} [C-iv]{.style_1}[.7 (Mynors's No.
10) are "very well and accurately written in an insular majuscule hand
of the VIIIth century, and a fragmentary leaf of the]{.style_} [Durham
Rituale]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[A.iv]{.style_1}[.19; Mynors's No. 12) is
in "an VIII/IXth-century Anglo-Saxon hand". For the beautiful]{.style_}
[Durham Rituale,]{.style_1} [containing Anglo-Saxon glosses,
[]{#calibre_link-619}see [Fig.
X---21](#calibre_link-261){.calibre9}.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Codex B.ii.30]{.style_1} [of Durham Cathedral (No. 9 in Mynors's list),
containing an abbreviated version of Cassiodorus,]{.style_} [Commentary
on the Psalms,]{.style_1} [is one of the most important manuscripts
produced in Northumbria. "An impressive book: the text is the work of at
least six expert scribes, and each of its three main divisions had a
full-page frontispiece, of which two survive." The writing, in excellent
"insular" style, dates this codex to the middle of the eighth
century.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-620}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE LINDISFARNE GOSPELS []{#calibre_link-264 .calibre14}([Fig. X---22](#calibre_link-262){.calibre13} []{#calibre_link-282 .calibre14}and [XI---4](#calibre_link-263){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [right]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#the-lindisfarne-gospels-fig.-x22-and-xi4-right .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The basis of the Masai theory, mentioned on p. 445 and]{.style_}
[passim]{.style_1}[, is the great and rightly celebrated]{.style_}
[Lindisfarne Gospels]{.style_1}[, already referred to. The tenth-century
author of the Saxon paraphrase of the Latin text, tells us in his
"post-scriptum" at the end of the volume that the book was written by
Eadfrith (bishop of Lindisfarne from 698 to 721), in honour of St.
Cuthbert; that it was covered and "made firm on the outside" by
Ethilwald (who was bishop from 724 to 740; he, thus, bound the book),
and that Billfrith the anchorite wrought in smith's work the ornaments
on its cover (]{.style_}[i.e]{.style_1}[. the book was probably encased
in a binding of precious metal set with jewels, which have long since
disappeared). However, there can be hardly any doubt that the book---a
fine specimen of Saxon calligraphy---was written shortly after St.
Cuthbert's death (A.D. 687),]{.style_} [i.e]{.style_1}[. not later than,
say, A.D. 700.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This precious book has had an interesting history: written in honour of
St. Cuthbert, it was preserved at Lindisfarne with the latter's body,
but in 875, in the flight before the Danish invasion, body and book were
carried away. For over a century, the book "rested" at
Chester-le-Street; then it was brought to the hill of Dunholm, where a
new church (the present Durham Cathedral) was built over Cuthbert's
body, and the book became the possession of the Dean and Chapter of
Durham, but was later returned to the monastery of Lindisfarne. At the
dissolution of the monasteries it was taken abroad and stripped of its
jewelled covers, but fortunately it was acquired by Sir Robert Cotton
for the famous Cotton Collection, and with this it passed into the
British Museum, where it is now preserved (]{.style_}[Cotton, Nero
D.iv]{.style_1}[). It is also known as]{.style_} [Codex
Lindisfarnensis]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [Durham Book]{.style_1}[, and
quoted as]{.style_} [Codex Υ]{.style_1}[. (Sometimes it was
called]{.style_} [St. Cuthbert Gospel]{.style_1}[.)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000088.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-262}

[[Fig. X---22](#calibre_link-264){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Lindisfarne Gospels (British Museum, Cott. Nero D.iv).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-621}

## [ENGLISH]{.style_2} [Versus]{.style_2} [IRISH]{.style_2} {#english-versus-irish .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the opinion of the present writer, the problem of the artistic
relationships of the Irish and English manuscripts is still open. The
fact that the earliest illuminated North English manuscripts extant may
be older than the Irish---if we agree that the]{.style_} [Book of
Durrow]{.style_1} [is Northumbrian---is of no great significance, as
preserved illuminated manuscripts of this period are very scarce indeed;
there is no doubt that there were illuminated Irish manuscripts in the
seventh century, but they have not come down to us.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[We can follow up the development of the Irish majuscule or semi-uncial
book hand, and it appears that the North English semi-uncial book hand
was at first nothing more than the Irish hand transplanted into new
soil, so that the former is scarcely to be distinguished from the
latter. There is the further fact that the ornamental designs of the
Irish manuscripts could have been copied from, or modelled on, the
designs of local works of art, otherwise the origin of these designs and
of those of the magnificent]{.style_} [Lindisfarne Gospels]{.style_1}
[(except for the representations of the human figures, which are
undoubtedly of continental origin), would be inexplicable if we took for
granted a Roman or continental origin, unless we assume at least
indirect Oriental influences.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[On the other hand, while Bieler credits the Irish---see p. 470
f.---with the creation of the Irish majuscule, which he tentatively
dates to the middle of the sixth century A.D., and of the minuscule,
placing its beginnings in the early seventh century---he thinks that the
majuscule reached its perfection in Northumbria round about 700; and
considering the]{.style_} [Book of Durrow]{.style_1} [(see p. 456) as
Northumbrian, he holds this codex and the]{.style_} [Lindisfarne
Gospels]{.style_1} [as the earliest specimens written in the type which
is now known as the "Insular majuscule". Furthermore, "throughout the
eighth century most of its pure representatives appear to be products of
Northumbria or of Continental centres with Northumbrian connections. It
was imitated, sometimes with a high degree of perfection, in other parts
of England as well as in Ireland; yet its most finished specimen,
the]{.style_} [Book of Kells,]{.style_1} [may, after all, have been
produced at Iona, about A.D. 800, thus testifying to a more direct
Northumbrian influence". See, however, p. 458. The problem is, at any
rate, very complicated.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[May we tentatively suggest a compromise solution and assume that the
style of the]{.style_} [Lindisfarne Gospels]{.style_1} [represents a
syncretism based on Irish and Roman-continental influences? Such a
suggestion would be in conformity with the internal evidence, as indeed
is shown by Sir Frederic Kenyon. The text of the]{.style_} [Lindisfarne
Gospels]{.style_1} [depends on Italian and not Irish texts. According to
Kenyon, the Irish text of the Scriptures "is a considerably contaminated
Vulgate, while the English texts are the best Vulgate texts extant. This
they owe to their direct descent from Italian manuscripts of the best
quality." See also pp. 471, 486, 494 and]{.style_} [passim.]{.style_1}

[]{#calibre_link-622}

::: calibre5
:::

## [CODEX AMIATINUS ([Fig. VII---5](#calibre_link-181){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#codex-amiatinus-fig.-vii5 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Kenyon's statement is mainly based on this celebrated manuscript, also
known as]{.style_} [Codex Am.]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [A,]{.style_1}
[which is now preserved in the Laurentian Library, Florence. It contains
1,030 leaves, measuring 20 inches x inches, written in Northumbrian
uncial, in two columns, of forty-four lines to the page. Experts
consider this manuscript as the best copy of the Vulgate that has come
down to us (see p. 284). It has been suggested that it represents
Cassiodorus's recension, which became the official text for his
monastery at Vivarium and for the whole of South Italy, and that it was
derived from a manuscript possessed by Eugippius, abbot of Lucullanum
(now the Castel dell'Uovo, at Naples), which MS. was believed in 558 to
have belonged to St. Jerome himself. Scholars agree that it was one of
the three Vulgate copies of the Bible which, according to Bede,
Ceolfrid, Benedict Biscop's successor as abbot, caused to be made,
probably at his twin monasteries of Jarrow and Monkwearmouth in the late
seventh or early eighth century, and to be copied from manuscripts
brought from Italy by Ceolfrid himself. In 716, the]{.style_}
[Amiatinus]{.style_1} [was chosen by the same Ceolfrid, who intended to
present it as a gift to Pope Gregory II, but died on his way to Rome. In
1585---90, the]{.style_} [Amiatinus]{.style_1} [was used in the revision
of the Vulgate by Pope Sixtus V (see p. 284). It was preserved in the
abbey of Monte Amiata (hence its name "Amiatinus"), in Tuscany, whence
it passed to the Laurentian Library of Florence.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["The two sister manuscripts which he (i.e. Ceolfrid) left behind him
were supposed to have perished long since, until the late Canon
Greenwell of Durham found a single leaf of one of them, serving as the
cover of an old book, in a shop in Newcastle-on-Tyne; he gave it in 1909
to the British Museum, where it is now Additional MS. 39999. Ten more
leaves, from the same volume, with fragments of an eleventh, which had
likewise been used to make wrappers for documents, came to light about
the same time among the muniments belonging to Lord Middleton; these
were acquired by the British Museum in 1937 for the sum of £1,000, and
are now MS. 45025" (Mynors).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The]{.style_} [Codex Amiatinus]{.style_1} [is thus an Anglo-Saxon
production, having been written by a native artist, though it is "almost
entirely Italian in style and shows no weakening whatsoever in the
direction of a barbaric Celtic or English ornamental apparatus \..."
(Kendrick). On the other hand, its most important miniature,
representing the Christ in Majesty (folio 796 b) is "crude and
unsophisticated" as compared with those in the St.]{.style_} [Augustine
Gospels]{.style_1} []{#calibre_link-623}[([Fig.
X---17](#calibre_link-265){.calibre9}]{.style_} [b]{.style_1}[), "though
the original the artist had before him must have been very close in
style to the pictures in the Corpus book" (Oakeshott): see]{.style_}
[Illumination and Binding.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[In Sir E. M. Thompson's opinion, however, the]{.style_} [Codex
Amiatinus]{.style_1} [and similar books "were the work of Italian
scribes who had been brought thither."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The text of the]{.style_} [Lindisfarne Gospels]{.style_1} [is
practically the same as that of the]{.style_} [Amiatinus.]{.style_1}
[Even more important is the fact that "before each Gospel is placed a
list of festivals on which lessons were read from that book; and,
strange as it may seem at first sight, it has been shown that these
festivals are unquestionably festivals of the Church of Naples"
(Kenyon). It has been therefore suggested that these tables of lessons
(and perhaps also the whole book) were copied from a manuscript brought
from Italy by Hadrian, abbot of a monastery near Naples, who accompanied
Theodore of Tarsus sent in 669 by Pope Vitalian to England to be
Archbishop of Canterbury.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[That the text possessed by Eugippius "should have been taken to
Northumbria and survived there is a strange historical accident, but
carries with it the rider that all books with real affinity to the
Gospel-text of A have a Northumbrian origin" (Burkitt). It should be
realized that the twin houses of Wearmouth and Jarrow, only about six
miles apart, were in the late seventh and early eighth centuries the
Christian intellectual centre of northern England (see p. 506) and the
most flourishing home of Christian scholarship in western Europe; in
this connection, it will suffice, once more, to mention the names of
Benedict Biscop and Ceolfrid.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-624}

::: calibre5
:::

## [EARLY ENGLISH SCHOLARS]{.style_2} {#early-english-scholars .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Theodore and Hadrian, Aldhelm, Bede, and Alcuin are considered the
great names of early English learning. "The ascendant phase of English
scholarship may end with Alcuin," but for another half century after his
death English religious houses showed a living interest in learning and
produced works remarkable in their accomplishment in the style of
writing.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[When in 668 Pope Vitalian, on the advice of Hadrian---the learned monk
of African origin, who has been referred to on p. 505---consecrated the
monk Theodore of Tarsus as archbishop of Canterbury, he hardly realized
that his nominee---though already a great scholar, philosopher and
theologian---would prove himself a great ecclesiastical statesman, and
was destined to give unity and organization to a church which at the
time was passing through a most critical period. Theodore, "the last
known pupil of the schools of Athens" (F. M. Stenton), was also an
outstanding scholar in classical lore.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Hadrian, who accompanied Theodore, remained with him in England, became
abbot of the monastery of St. Peter and St. Paul outside Canterbury, and
worked beside him as scholar and teacher---he taught at Canterbury for
nearly forty years. The school at Canterbury had a great reputation, and
included among other studies, Roman law, Greek and Latin. According to
Bede, in his time there were former pupils of Theodore and Hadrian to
whom Latin and Greek were as familiar as their own language, and one of
these pupils, the bishop of Rochester Tobias, was an excellent Greek
scholar. Thus, for the school of Canterbury a proficiency in classical
learning was claimed, "rivalled so far as is known, by no other learned
community north of the Alps" (F. M. Stenton).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[For Aldhelm see p. 508, for Bede p. 509 f., and for Alcuin p.512.
ff.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-625}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ABBOT BENEDICT BISCOP]{.style_2} {#abbot-benedict-biscop .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The twin monasteries of Wearmouth and Jarrow (see also p. 505), founded
by St. Benedict Biscop may be considered, in a certain sense, as one of
the earliest Universities, or the earliest, of England.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The historian F. M. Stenton, has rightly emphasized the fact that
Benedict's importance in the history of English learning is due to the
libraries which his knowledge of southern cities enabled him to bring
together at his monasteries. "When he died, in 689, he had brought into
being two neighbouring monasteries, governed as a single community,
which possessed an endowment in relics, religious ornaments, and books
unparalleled in England. Without this great library, it is doubtful
whether Bede---who was a member of the Jarrow community from the age of
seven till he died, at the age of sixty-three-would have acquired his
remarkable scholarship". Benedict had brought some beautiful books from
Rome: these books perhaps included the manuscript of the]{.style_} [Acts
of the Apostles]{.style_1} [in parallel columns of Greek and Latin,
which is known as the]{.style_} [Codex Laudianus]{.style_1}[---having
been presented by Archbishop Laud (who apparently acquired it in
Germany)---and is preserved in the Bodleian Library, at Oxford
(MS.]{.style_} [Laud. Gr. 35]{.style_1}[): see [Fig.
V---13](#calibre_link-152){.calibre9},]{.style_} [right.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000090.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-266}

[Fig. X---23]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Paris Psalter (National Library, Paris, Fonds Latin
8824).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-626}

## [ALDHELM ([Fig. X---18](#calibre_link-258){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [right]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#aldhelm-fig.-x18-right .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Athelmus, known as Ealdhelm or Aldhelm (c. 640---709), one of the first
English scholars, wrote treatises and verse in Latin and English.
Aldhelm (who later became the first bishop of Sherborne) was the most
illustrious pupil of the school of Canterbury. He was the virtual
founder and abbot of Malmesbury, and the most learned of West Saxon
abbots. His influence was very powerful in southern England; the
monasteries at Frome and Bradford on Avon were his foundations, and he
kept control of all his "houses" in his own hands. Even after he became
bishop of Sherborne, he was persuaded by his monks to continue the
direct supervision of these houses.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

["All the influences which contributed to the origins of English
learning, meet in the work of Aldhelm. His first teacher was the Irish
scholar Maildubh\.... The fame of Theodore's teaching drew him to
Canterbury\.... By birth he belonged to the West Saxon royal family, and
he was therefore familiar with a mass of floating tradition which later
writers were to shape into history" (F. M. Stenton). As a man of
learning and of culture he is the most representative personality of his
age, and his writings influenced English and continental scholarship for
more than a century. He was affected, however, by the influence of the
curiously involved and artificial Latin style, which early Irish
scholars had developed in their isolation.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[His longest works are a poem,]{.style_} [De Laudibus
Virginum,]{.style_1} [dedicated to "Ad maximam abbatissimam", and a
prose discourse,]{.style_} [De Laudibus Virginitatis,]{.style_1}
[dedicated to Hildelith, abbess of Barking, and nine of her nuns. He
also wrote learned epistles and poems. "Aldhelm was beyond comparison
the most learned and ingenious western scholar of the late seventh
century."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Some scholars attributed to Aldhelm a version of the Psalms and
considered him as the first translator of a part of the Bible into
English. It is uncertain whether any portion of his original English
works has come down to us. An Anglo-Saxon translation of the Psalms,
partly in prose (fifty Psalms) and partly in verse, which is preserved
in a manuscript at the National Library, Paris (]{.style_}[Fonds Latin
8824]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[,]{.style_1} [commonly known as
the]{.style_} [Paris []{#calibre_link-627}Psalter---]{.style_1}[[Fig.
X---23](#calibre_link-266){.calibre9}---is still held in some
encyclopaedias and textbooks to be Aldhelm's version. This theory has
been proved baseless, both by H. Bartlett, in 1896, and, especially, by
A. S. Cook (]{.style_}[Biblical Quotations in Old English Prose
Writers]{.style_1}[, London and New York, 1898 and 1903). See also p.
515.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-628}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BEDE ([Fig. X---18](#calibre_link-258){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [left]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#bede-fig.-x18-left .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Venerable Bede (or Beda or Baeda),]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[.
673---735, the great historian of the early English Church, and "the
teacher of all the Middle Ages" (Wattenbach), wrote many important works
in Latin, the most important and best known being]{.style_} [Historia
Ecclesiastica Gentis Anglorum]{.style_1} [("Church History of the
English People"); his other works include the]{.style_} [History of the
Abbots]{.style_1} [of his own monasteries,]{.style_} [De Ratione
Temporum, De Metrica Arte,]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [De Natura
Rerum.]{.style_1} [The manuscripts extant---one of which, copied only
two years after Bede's death, is now in the University Library of
Cambridge---preserve for us the text of the priceless]{.style_}
[Ecclesiastical History]{.style_1} [([Fig.
X---18](#calibre_link-258){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[left]{.style_1}[).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This work, which was completed in 731, and which King Ceolwulf of
Northumbria read and critized in draft, "is the response of a great
scholar to a great opportunity . . . the quality which makes his work
great is not his scholarship, nor the faculty of narrative which he
shared with many contemporaries, but his astonishing power of
co-ordinating the fragments of information which came to him through
tradition, the relation of friends, or documentary evidence. In an age
when little was attempted beyond the registration of fact, he had
reached the conception of history. It is in virtue of this conception
that the]{.style_} [Historia Ecclesiastica]{.style_1} [still lives after
twelve hundred years" (Stenton).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Bede lived in the famous Benedictine monastery of Jarrow, which was in
close touch with Rome, and was a pupil of Abbot Benedict Biscop. He gave
himself to a life of study and writing, and had thoroughly imbibed the
spirit of the southern culture. M. L. W. Laistner has proved that what
is now known as]{.style_} [Codex Laudianus---]{.style_1} [already
referred to on p. 507; see also [Fig.
V---13](#calibre_link-152){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[right]{.style_1}[---was used by Bede in writing his commentary on
the]{.style_} [Acts.]{.style_1} [As to the problem of distinguishing the
books attributed to Bede from those which belonged to him, Prof. R. A.
B. Mynors reached the conclusion, that three of the Durham manuscripts
(Nos. 7---9 of his list), which were thought in the fourteenth century
to have been written in Bede's hand, differ so much among themselves
that the traditional belief cannot be accepted; "and we must suppose
that when the monks of Durham in the later Middle Ages saw what we call
an 'insular' script with its air of venerable antiquity, it seemed to
them that it must be the work of the master".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, these three codices are not in a continental but in an
"insular" hand. They are (see p. 501), Durham]{.style_} [Codex A. ii
16]{.style_1} [Cassiodorus,]{.style_} [Commentary on the
Psalms]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[Codex B. ii 30]{.style_1}[), and
the]{.style_} [Pauline Epistles,]{.style_1} [preserved in Trinity
College, at Cambridge (]{.style_}[MS. B. 10.5]{.style_1}[)
and---apparently---in the British Museum (]{.style_}[Cotton. Vitellius,
C]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}[viii]{.style_1}[, leaves 85---90).
The]{.style_} [Pauline Epistles,]{.style_1} [also known as]{.style_}
[Codex S]{.style_1} [of the Vulgate New Testament, have interlinear
glosses in Anglo-Saxon hand. The manuscript is "in an irregular hand of
the first half of the VIIIth century" (Mynors); it was "written in
England, probably by an Irish scribe" (Lowe).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In medieval Durham there were, however, other survivals of Bede's
period besides those that have come down to us; for instance, "a second
copy of the Pauline Epistles 'in the hand of Bede' \... and 'the book of
St. Boisil, master of St. Cuthbert', kept among the relics in the
Cathedral, was probably another; but these are lost beyond recall"
(Mynors).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Scholars agree that Bede may be considered the "father" of English
learning and English history. While all his main works, which obviously
were intended primarily for scholars, were written in Latin, it is not
always remembered that this great man was one of the first who wrote in
English.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[We know, indeed, that Bede tried his hand at regular English prose.
Following the general rules of the Church, he took care that parts of
the Holy Scriptures might be faithfully delivered to the common people
in their native speech. He translated the first essentials of the
Christian faith, the Creed and the Lord's Prayer, and in the last days
of his life he was engaged on the translation of]{.style_} [St. John's
Gospel:]{.style_1} [the story of its completion has been beautifully
described by one of his disciples. Unfortunately, no remains or trace
have come down to us of this and the other translations, but a five-line
vernacular poem, known as the "Death Song", has survived. It is
preserved in the]{.style_} [Epistola Cuthberti de Obitu
Bedae,]{.style_1} [which is extant in a ninth-century manuscript of St.
Gall (MS. No. 254).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Such are the meagre beginnings of English prose.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-629}

::: calibre5
:::

## [SPREAD OF ANGLO-CHRISTIAN CULTURE]{.style_2} {#spread-of-anglo-christian-culture .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Already in the seventh century, but particularly in the eighth, English
Christian culture and learning spread to the Continent. It will suffice
to mention a few names. In 677, the Northumbrian monk, St. Wilfrid, laid
the foundation of the Christian Church in Frisia, and St. Willibrord,
who in 695 was invested with the metropolitan pallium, was the real
founder of the Frisian Church; he died in 739 in the monastery of
Echternach---one of the many monasteries and churches he had
founded---which was one of the greatest centres of Anglo-Saxon culture
and book production ([Fig.
X---19](#calibre_link-259){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[above]{.style_1}[).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Even more important was the activity of the monk Wynfrith, a West
Saxon, who is known as St. Boniface. In 722 he was consecrated bishop to
the Germans, and in 732 he was invested with an archbishop's pallium by
Pope Gregory III. He organized the German Church, adopted the church of
Mainz as his cathedral, established various bishoprics (appointing
Englishmen as bishops or assistant bishops), founded many churches,
including the great abbey of Fulda, which became the greatest centre of
German Christian learning, and thus "made possible the Carolingian
renaissance of the next generation".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Under Carloman and Pippin, Charlemagne's father, Boniface became the
leading authority in the Frankish Church. "As a direct result of his
policy, English learning rapidly came to extend beyond the monasteries
newly founded by English missionaries to older houses like St. Gall and
Reichenau \..." (F. M. Stenton). His letters and the letters of his
correspondents which have been preserved, show that the level of English
eighth-century learning and culture was very high.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Not only Augustine and Jerome, but also pagan poets like Virgil were
read. "Most of the writers belonged to southern England, and their
literacy proves the high quality of the education which could be
obtained in Kentish or West Saxon monasteries in the age of Bede." Lull,
Boniface's successor as archbishop of Mainz, St. Willibald, his brother
St. Wynbald, their sister St. Waldburg, and St. Willehad, who became the
bishop of Bremen, are a few of the other "great evangelists who made the
eighth century the heroic age of the Anglo-Saxon church"
(Stenton).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-630}

::: calibre5
:::

## [FROM BEDE TO ALCUIN]{.style_2} {#from-bede-to-alcuin .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the third quarter of the eighth century, the city of York suddenly
became the main seat of English scholarship and book production. Egbert,
archbishop of York and brother of the strong Northumbrian king Eadberht,
had been one of Bede's disciples. He founded a school in his cathedral
which soon became famous not only in England, but also on the Continent.
As head of this school was appointed a great teacher, Aethelberht, who
was Egbert's kinsman. When Aethelberht became archbishop (in 767), he
put Alcuin in charge of the school, which by then eclipsed
Wearmouth-Jarrow as the principal centre of English learning. Thus,
through Egbert the substance of Bede's teaching was transmitted to a
generation of scholars who became a main factor in the general
development of European culture and learning.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-631}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ALCUIN OF YORK (735---804)]{.style_2} {#alcuin-of-york-735804 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Alcuin of York---a great English name---more than any other single
Englishman before him or for some centuries after him, contributed on
the European continent to the spread of scholarship, of the copying of
books, and of the knowledge of the Sacred Scriptures. Alcuin was born at
York, in the year of the death of another great Englishman, Bede. He was
educated at the cathedral school of York, probably under the able
headship of Aethelberht, and succeeded him as head of the school. He
founded a library at York, which became one of the finest in Europe;
according to Alcuin himself, this library contained "all Latin
literature, all that Greece had handed on to the Romans, all that the
Hebrew people had received from on High, all that Africa with
clear-flowing light had given" (as quoted by Can. F.
Harrison).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[As a friend of Charlemagne (742---814) he played an important part in
the revival of learning in Europe. "Thanks to this revival---writes
Malone---the culture of classical antiquity did not die out in western
Europe but was transmitted to later generations and became the
foundation upon which modern civilization was built."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Alcuin became the "master of the Schools of the Palace", and confidant
and adviser of the Emperor in education and in Church affairs. Although
it is still uncertain what exact part Charlemagne and Alcuin played in
the creation of the Caroline hand (which became the literary hand of the
Frankish Empire, and during the following two centuries the main book
hand of western Europe), there is no doubt that the Imperial decree of
the year 789 calling for the revision of church books, was mainly due to
Alcuin: the work of revision naturally brought with it great activity in
the writing schools of the chief monastic centres of the
Empire.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Alcuin is intimately associated with the most important stage of the
history of the Vulgate in the Middle Ages. While Ireland and England
were taking the lead in promoting the study and circulation of the
Bible, the Sacred Scriptures in the Frankish Empire were sinking into
confusion and corruption.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Having already in 796 been appointed abbot of the great and wealthy
abbey of St. Martin at Tours, which he transformed into a great centre
of learning, Alcuin received the Imperial commission to prepare a
revised edition of the Latin Bible. He settled at Tours where he died in
804.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Finding that the great majority of Bible manuscripts were seriously
defective, and knowing the value of the texts of northern England, he
sent to York in 796 for copies. In the light of these texts the work
proceeded. In 801 the revision was complete, and on Christmas Day in
that year a copy of the restored Vulgate was presented by him to
Charlemagne. Of the many copies of this revised text, written under
Alcuin's own direction, none has come down to us, but there are several
manuscripts which preserve Alcuin's text. The best is the]{.style_}
[Codex Vallicellianus,]{.style_1} [in Rome, which contains the whole
Bible; so does also another good copy, now in the British Museum
(]{.style_}[Add. MS]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [10546):]{.style_1} [the text
is written in double columns on pages measuring 20 inches ×
inches.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The revision of the Latin Bible was only one of Alcuin's great cultural
activities. He was also "the principal agent in carrying the English
influence into the Continent". Indeed, the artistic inspiration of a
series of splendid manuscripts of the Gospels---written in gold letters
upon white or purple vellum, and adorned with magnificent
decorations---is clearly derived from the Anglo-Irish manuscripts. The
original centre of the production of these "Golden Gospels" appears to
have been "in the neighbourhood of the Rhine, where Alcuin was settled .
. . before his retirement to Tours; and the earliest examples of this
style appear to have been written during the time of his residence in
that region. In any case they are a splendid evidence of the value in
which the sacred volume was held, and they show how the tradition of the
English illumination was carried abroad into France" (Kenyon).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Alcuin wrote Latin poetry as well as treatises on theology, grammar,
rhetoric, history, spelling, argumentation, and other subjects, but,
curiously enough, his works are not famous for their depth. On the other
hand his letters (written mainly to Charlemagne and to Arno of Salzburg)
are very important for their reflection of the life and customs of that
period.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[To sum up, "Alcuin's career is of peculiar interest as a link between
the phase of English scholarship which culminated in the work of Bede
and the revival of western learning under Charlemagne" (F. M. Stenton).
Indeed, "Alcuin and his pupils brought about a continental reception of
English learning which profoundly influenced the whole literature of the
Carolingian age".]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-632}

::: calibre5
:::

## [KING ALFRED]{.style_2} {#king-alfred .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[([Fig. X---19](#calibre_link-259){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[below]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[English prose is still poor when we reach the period of the greatest of
the early English sovereigns, King Alfred the Great (c. 849---99), who
is commonly (though, as we have indicated, wrongly) associated with the
beginnings of English prose. Careful for the moral and intellectual
welfare of his people, he invited to his court learned men (such as
Asser, Werferth, and Plegmund) from all parts of Europe, in order to put
into execution his great scheme for the education of his people. He did
much to revive the knowledge of writing (neglected during the Danish
invasion), and, by his own toil and the work of his school, not a little
was added to the work which Aldhelm and Bede had begun. His capital,
Winchester, became the centre of English thought, and the West Saxon
dialect---the dialect of his dwarfed dominions---became the English
literary language, and maintained its supremacy until the close of the
Old English period.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Under Alfred and his immediate successors, monasticism flourished in
Wessex, but in the north it had been so thoroughly uprooted during the
Danish invasions---the Danes, indeed, burnt the religious houses and put
their inmates to the sword---"that it did not come back into its own
until the twelfth century" (Malone). English learning was, therefore,
chiefly concentrated in the south and west: at Glastonbury, Winchester,
Canterbury, Worcester, and other centres.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Though apparently no copy of King Alfred's work has come down to us, it
is well known that he prefixed a translation of the Ten Commandments and
other extracts from the Mosaic Law to his own codes of laws, and
translated (or caused to be translated) several other parts of the
Bible. He is said to have been engaged on a version of the Psalter in
the last days of his life. Many other Winchester works are attributed to
his pen, but some are undoubtedly the production of the scholars who
were associated with him. These works include translations into English
of Boëthius,]{.style_} [de Consolatione,]{.style_1} [the]{.style_}
[Universal History]{.style_1} [of Orosius; Bede's]{.style_}
[Ecclesiastical History,]{.style_1} [Pope Gregory's]{.style_} [Regulae
or Cura Pastoralis]{.style_1} [("Pastoral Care")---[Fig.
X--19](#calibre_link-259){.calibre9},]{.style_} [below,]{.style_1} [and
a few other works.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[[Fig. X---19](#calibre_link-259){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[below,]{.style_1} [reproduces a portion of the manuscript, which "is
undoubtedly the copy sent (by King Alfred) to Werferth, bishop of
Worcester" (Lowe). There are interlinear Latin glosses.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[According to some scholars, the Anglo-Saxon version of the]{.style_}
[Paris Psalter]{.style_1} [(see p. 508) may have been King Alfred's
work. Recently (1950) J. I'A. Bromwich has suggested that "the boldest
and simplest explanation is that Alfred has just as good a claim to the
translation of the]{.style_} [Paris Psalter]{.style_1} [as he has to
the]{.style_} [Cura Pastoralis]{.style_1} [and the Boëthius. The
unfinished state of the version lends weight to William of Malmesbury's
assertion that the king's death interrupted his work." Bromwich throws
additional doubt on Alfred's authorship of the Old English translation
of Bede's]{.style_} [Ecclesiastical History.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[In Stenton's opinion, however, the authenticity of the translation of
Orosius (to which King Alfred added a section, including a piece of
systematic geography) is beyond question, while the translation of Bede
although certainly produced under Alfred's influence, may not be his
work. However, Alfred not only "was the most effective ruler who had
appeared in western Europe since the death of Charlemagne\.... His
unique importance in the history of English letters comes from his
conviction that a life without knowledge or reflection was unworthy of
respect, and from his determination to bring the thought of the past
within the range of his subjects' understanding\.... His books remained
an isolated achievement \... (but they) were still being copied in
Norman England\.... Through the strength and reputation of King Alfred
and his son Christianity was saved from obliteration even in the regions
of the densest Danish settlement" (Stenton).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-633}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE GOLDEN AGE OF MONASTICISM]{.style_2} {#the-golden-age-of-monasticism .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Anglo-Saxon civilization, just as it began to rise, was met by a new
blow, and sunk down once more. During many decades, what is now Denmark
and Scandinavia continued to pour forth innumerable pirates,
distinguished by strength and valour, by ignorance and cruelty. No
country suffered so much from these invaders as England. Her coast lay
near to the ports whence they sailed; nor was any part of the Island so
far distant from the sea as to be secure from attack. The same
atrocities which had attended the victory of the Saxon over the Celt
were now, after the lapse of ages, suffered by the Saxon at the hands of
the Dane. The Danish raids and invasions shattered the organization of
the English Church, religious houses were destroyed and their inmates
put to the sword; the whole monastic life, especially in the north and
the east, was disrupted; the libraries were plundered, and the pursuit
of learning became a matter of the greatest difficulty. See also p. 480
ff.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Christian Revival following the Danish Raids]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The early tenth century brought a remarkable Christian revival together
with the re-establishment of English monasticism, mainly, however, in
the south. In the north, the invasion of Norsemen from Ireland, who
founded a kingdom at York, produced a strange hybrid Norse and Irish
culture combined with the preceding Anglo-Celtic elements.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Monastic England]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the five centuries which followed the arrival in Kent of St.
Augustine, changes of all kinds took place in monastic England. At first
the monasteries were poor; they were given land, but not always of the
best, and often in wild regions. In the course of time, by skill and
industry the monks brought the land into a fertile state, they became
leaders in agriculture and craftsmanship, learning was kept alive in
their schools, and numerous books were produced in their
cloisters.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Soon enough they became rich: they lived on the produce of the land and
the abundant gifts of their patrons. The need for toil being over, they
sank into indolent affluence. The old Benedictine Order relaxed its
severity. Large abbeys sunk into poverty, though others arose in their
places. In the age of feudalism and disorder, the monks exhibited the
same disorder as did society.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[St. Dunstan]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The great reform of English monasticism was mainly associated with St.
Dunstan (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 925---88), abbot of the wealthy and
ancient abbey of Glastonbury and, later, archbishop of Canterbury. A
nephew of Athelm, archbishop of Canterbury, he was son of a thane, and
kinsman of a chaplain to King Athelstan, Aelfheah, who was bishop of
Winchester (934---51) and a forerunner of the English monastic revival:
it was Aelfheah to whom Dunstan made a monk's profession and who
ordained him priest. Dunstan studied at the then celebrated school of
Glastonbury.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Collaborating with St. Aethelwold and St. Oswald, St. Dunstan restored
many of the old monasteries, especially those plundered by the Danes.
Some of the double monasteries were restored for one sex only. The
system of the double monasteries seems to have died out in other
countries, too, at the same time.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Moreover, always with the king's authority, he reformed some
monasteries by replacing the canons by monks and by enforcing the rule
of celibacy.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[St. Aethelwold, since 963 bishop of Winchester, was Dunstan's greatest
pupil; he restored the famous monastery of Abingdon. St. Oswald, a pupil
of the monks of Fleury, himself the founder of the great abbey of
Ramsey, succeeded Dunstan as bishop of Worcester, and later became
archbishop of York.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Other Monastic Reforms]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the early tenth century, the Benedictines were overshadowed by the
rise of a new Order, of reformed Benedictines, known as the Congregation
of Cluny (now in the Dept. of Saône-et-Loire, Central France). The
contribution of Cluniac monasticism (especially through the monastery of
Fleury on the Loire) and of the reformed monastic movements of Burgundy
and Lorraine (especially through Einsiedeln) to the English reform was
very great, though Stenton believes that foreign example came to English
reformers not as an incentive to a new task, but as a means of
perfecting work which had already been well begun. The years 955 to
980---with relative peace in England---were the best in this movement.
In the synodal council at Winchester, which took place between 963 and
975, the]{.style_} [Regularis Concordia]{.style_1} [was
composed,]{.style_} [i.e.]{.style_1} [the Agreement concerning the Rule
of the monks and nuns of the English nation. All the English monasteries
were to follow the same usages. The strength of the movement may be seen
from the institution of the monastic cathedral, which was a unique
feature of the medieval English Church. Indeed, as Stenton has remarked,
between 975 and 1066 every English diocese came for a time under the
rule of a bishop who was a professed monk.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-634}

::: calibre5
:::

::: calibre15
:::

## [BOOK PRODUCTION OF MONASTIC ENGLAND]{.style_2} {#book-production-of-monastic-england .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is agreed that the Benedictine reformation brought fresh vitality to
the whole English Church. It brought into being a new religious
literature in the English language. It also produced the golden age of
monastic book production. The monastic revival lasted too short to be
able to produce an important Latin literary school, but it certainly
created an atmosphere favourable to the multiplication of Latin books.
Stenton has emphasized that for the monastic revival it was necessary
that every monastery should possess the liturgical texts essential to
its services, calendars recording the feast-days of the saints whom it
honoured, Psalters, Gospel-books, and writings by the Fathers of the
Church. "The need for such volumes, and for more specialized texts, such
as the benedictionals or pontificals which contained the offices proper
to a bishop, stimulated the development of English penmanship, and
resulted in the production of books which in quality of script and
excellence of decoration could not be rivalled in contemporary Europe.
The famous manuscripts of this period, such as the Winchester
'Benedictional of St. Aethelwold' and the 'Bosworth Psalter', which was
probably written at Canterbury for Dunstan, stand for a large amount of
work which, if less ornate, is equally accomplished. By the early part
of the eleventh century England was supplying books to foreign churches.
\... No foreign bishop or abbot of this age could have conceived it
possible that a time would come when the isolation and illiteracy of the
late Old English church would be accepted as a commonplace by most
historians" (Stenton).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The book production of this period, with its superb illumination, will
be dealt with in the volume on]{.style_} [Illumination and
Binding.]{.style_1} [Here a few general remarks can be made. Already in
the ninth century foreign elements came into England through the
Carolingian school of Rheims; the Anglo-Celtic elements gradually
disappeared. It is true that the old "Insular" script continued to be
the basic English hand (as may be shown by the superb codex of English
verse known as the]{.style_} [Exeter
Book]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[,]{.style_1} [but the Carolingian minuscule
introduced about this time began to influence the development of the
"Insular" script. The main centre of artistic book production was the
Winchester school---the greatest English school of illumination; it
flourished particularly in the last decades of the tenth century and in
the eleventh century. But many other monasteries---such as Bury St.
Edmunds, Peterborough (the new name of the old Medeshamstede, given
after the reform of Aethelwold), and even the far distant monasteries of
York and Durham---produced richly illuminated Gospel-books,
benedictionals, pontificals, sacramentaries, and service books. A new
type of book was developed, giving rise to a truly national
style.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The monastic]{.style_} [scriptoria]{.style_1} [(see p. 207 f.) did not
yet exist. Very often the monastic scribes did their work in the
cloisters. In later times, especially in the thirteenth to the fifteenth
centuries]{.style_} [scriptoria]{.style_1} [came into being. At first,
they were small rooms, quite often on the first floor. Apparently
no]{.style_} [scriptorium]{.style_1} [can be identified among the
remains of the English monasteries. Curiously enough, when]{.style_}
[scriptoria]{.style_1} [came to be regularly employed,]{.style_}
[i.e]{.style_1}[. in the thirteenth century, the golden age of monastic
book production was already gone. By then, books were mainly produced
commercially by non-monastic scribes, and even monasteries often bought
their books from lay copyists.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-635}

::: calibre5
:::

## [AETHELRED II UNREAD (979---1016)]{.style_2} {#aethelred-ii-unread-9791016 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The epithet]{.style_} [Unread]{.style_1} [(meaning "No Counsel" or,
better perhaps, "Without Deliberation") given to the king who bore the
name Aethelred (meaning "Noble Counsel") clearly indicates the opinion
held of him by his contemporaries. He marks the end of the Old English
Monarchy. Athelstan (c. 895---940), the grandson of Alfred the Great,
having annexed Northumbria and made tributary to himself the rulers of
Wales, Cumberland, and Scotland, was the first king to unite England,
and to be intimately associated with the leading Western rulers of his
time. This situation did not last long. The political union of this
Island was as yet too artificial. The completion of the West-Saxon realm
was reserved for the hands, not of a king or warrior, but of a priest:
St. Dunstan, the great ecclesiastical statesman of the tenth century
(see p. 516 f.). There "are few parallels in any country to the
enthusiasm with which Edgar brought the whole power of the English state
to the furtherance of Dunstan's religious policy" (Stenton). Never
before had England seemed so strong or so peaceful.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[But with the King's death, in 975, the whole fabric fell asunder, and
the disorder became acute when in 978, after the treacherous
assassination of Edward, his brother Aethelred became king. Soon
afterwards (in 980) new Danish raids molested the Island, and ruin hung
over the West Saxon realm. In time, Aethelred's kingdom shrank into the
realms of Wessex and Kent, and no efforts of force or policy seemed able
to restore even the political unity of Wessex, Mercia, and Northumbria.
The want of political stability rendered entirely ineffective the
struggle against the Danes, and with the death of Aethelred (on
23.4.1016) and of his son and successor Edmund (on 30.11.1016), the West
Saxons accepted the Dane Cnut as their king. With the conversion of the
Danes to Christianity, one cause of deadly animosity was removed, while
the Danish and Saxon forms of speech, both dialects of one linguistic
group, began to be blended together. But the distinction between the two
nations had by no means disappeared, when an event took place which
prostrated both, in common slavery and degradation, at the feet of
another people; the new conquerors were a most remarkable nation, the
Normans.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000091.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-268}

[[Fig. X--24](#calibre_link-267){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Latin Hymnal with interlinear Anglo-Saxon Gloss; eleventh century
(Durham Cathedral Library, B.iii. 32; Mynors's list, No. 22).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Last Luminaries of Old English Learning]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The cultural level of England at this time is in striking contrast to
the political humiliation. "\... a number of manuscripts written in
England during this period have a distinctive place in the history of
European book production. Few of them can be dated with precision. Some
of the most famous may have been written before the Danish peril became
acute. But the unbroken development of English handwriting between the
reign of Edgar and the Norman Conquest shows that the activities of
English]{.style_} [scriptoria]{.style_1} [were never seriously
interrupted during the years of trouble. The Danish ravages must have
impoverished many religious communities, and may have brought permanent
destruction to some, but they had no discernible effect on the
intellectual quality of English monasticism" (Stenton).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It will suffice to mention two luminaries of the Old English
scholarship and two lesser lights, who flourished in Aethelred's reign;
they wrote at a time when civilization was again threatened by foreign
invaders. Aelfric, a pupil of St. Aethelwold (see p. 517), was
undoubtedly the leader of the religious literary movement of the time.
He has been confused with Aelfric, archbishop of Canterbury
(995---1005), or even with Aelfric, archbishop of York. In point of
fact, c. 987, Aelfheah, Aethelwold's successor as bishop of Winchester,
appointed him as abbot of the new monastery of Cerne Abbas (in Dorset),
and in 1005 Aelfric became abbot of the new monastery at Eynsham (in
Oxfordshire), both these monasteries having been founded by Aethelmaer,
son of the chronicler Aethelweard. Abbot Aelfric wrote books both in
English for the "needs of men with little knowledge or inadequate
scholarship", and in Latin: "it was obviously essential that the
knowledge of Latin should be kept alive for use in the services of the
church" (Stenton). His Latin books included the biography of Aethelwold,
an abridgment of the]{.style_} [Regularis Concordia]{.style_1} [(see p.
517) for his monks at Eynsham, and]{.style_} [A Latin and English
Grammar and Glossary]{.style_1} [(for which he was called]{.style_}
[Grammaticus]{.style_1}[), containing a set of imaginary dialogues in
Latin and English.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Byrhtfert of Ramsey was "the most eminent man of science produced by
the English church since the death of Bede" (Stenton). He was a pupil of
Abbo---a learned monk from Fleury, who for two years taught at the
monastic school of Ramsey, which for a certain period "was in closer
touch with continental learning than any other house of the English
revival". Byrhtfert's most important work was a scientific treatise
known as]{.style_} [Byrhtfert's Manual,]{.style_1} [dealing with
reckoning time, with the purpose to help parish priests in their regular
duties. Wulfstan, archbishop of York, in 1014 wrote a treatise on the
principles of government in Church and State, and a great homily, known
as]{.style_} [Sermo Lupi ad Anglos,]{.style_1} [in which he denounced
the misdeeds of his people. Aelfric's friend Aethelweard, ealdorman of
the south-western shires, translated the]{.style_} [Anglo-Saxon
Chronicle]{.style_1} [into (a rather barbaric) Latin, for the benefit of
Matilda, abbess of Essen (both, Matilda and Aethelweard, were scions of
the royal house of Wessex).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[An interesting feature of the new religious literature was that,
although it was an "outcome of the monastic revival, it was not written
for monastic readers" (Stenton).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Last Old English Writers]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Abbot Aelfric wrote in 991 and 992 the]{.style_} [Catholic
Homilies,]{.style_1} [a collection of the lives and passions of English
saints, which has been described as "the classic example of Anglo-Saxon
prose". Soon afterwards, at the request of Aethelweard (see]{.style_}
[above)]{.style_1} [and his son, he wrote the]{.style_} [Lives of the
Saints]{.style_1}[, dealing with the saints honoured by the Anglo-Saxon
monks in their services. At the same time, also at the request of
Aethelweard, he translated portions from the Bible, starting
from]{.style_} [Genesis]{.style_1}[. He also wrote]{.style_} [Pastoral
Letters]{.style_1}[, both for Wulfsige, bishop of Sherborne, and
especially for Wulfstan, bishop of Worcester and archbishop of York.
"The pastoral letters which Aelfric had written for Wulfstan of York
\... were still being copied in the reign of Henry II" (Stenton).
Archbishop Wulfstan and Byrht-ferth of Ramsey both wrote in the Old
English language.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-267}

[[Fig. X---24](#calibre_link-268){.calibre9} reproduces an interesting
book from this period---a]{.style_} [Latin Hymnal]{.style_1} [with
Anglo-Saxon glosses.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-636}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ANGLO-SAXON CHRONICLE []{#calibre_link-270 .calibre14}([Fig. X---25](#calibre_link-269){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#anglo-saxon-chronicle-fig.-x25 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The chief literary monument, actually the only great work written in
English (then Anglo-Saxon) before the Norman Conquest, is the
so-called]{.style_} [Anglo-Saxon Chronicle,]{.style_1} [a collection of
chronicles of English history, begun and completed by English writers in
the English tongue. That invaluable document, the oldest history of any
Germanic people written in a Germanic language, was composed in the
tenth and eleventh centuries in the monasteries of Winchester,
Canterbury, Worcester, and Abingdon; after the Norman Conquest it was
continued in Peterborough until the year 1154.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000092.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-269}

[[Fig. X---25](#calibre_link-270){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Peterborough Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, quoted as MS.E (Bodleian
Library, Oxford, Laud. MS. 636).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Six complete manuscripts of the]{.style_} [Anglo-Saxon
Chronicle]{.style_1} [are extant (a seventh was burnt in the British
Museum fire of 1731,]{.style_} [Cotton. Otho, B.xi;]{.style_1} [only
three leaves are preserved; of an eighth, only one leaf is
preserved,]{.style_} [Cotton]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [Domitian,
A.ix]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[;]{.style_1} [the earliest, written in 891,
and continued to 1070, is now in Corpus Christi College, Cambridge; the
Peterborough manuscript is in Oxford; the other four are in the British
Museum.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[All the preserved manuscripts begin with a kind of introduction
purporting to be an outline of history from the invasion of Britain by
Julius Caesar to the middle of the fifth century A.D. This introduction
and the annals which follow down to the year 891, are generally speaking
common to all the]{.style_} [Chronicles]{.style_1}[; they are ultimately
derived from an original written in English in King Alfred's time. As
regards the following years, the manuscripts contain rather different
accounts, though down to the year 915, a large amount of material is
common to most of them. The preserved manuscripts are generally
distinguished by the symbols]{.style_} [A-F,]{.style_1} [the
manuscript]{.style_} [A,]{.style_1} [preserved in Corpus Christi
College, Cambridge (]{.style_}[MS. 173]{.style_1}[) being the most
important: it is also known as]{.style_} [Parker's
Chronicle]{.style_1}[, because it belonged to Archbishop Parker.
The]{.style_} [Peterborough Chronicle]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[MS.E,]{.style_1} [preserved in the Bodleian Library
(]{.style_}[Laud]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [MS. 636]{.style_1}[), covers
the longest period (down to 1154), and is particularly important for the
reign of the Conqueror and of the Norman kings. See [Fig.
X---25](#calibre_link-269){.calibre9}. The manuscripts preserved in the
British Museum are]{.style_} [MS.B]{.style_1}
[(]{.style_}[Cott]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}
[Tiberius]{.style_1}[,]{.style_} [A.vi]{.style_1}[),]{.style_}
[MS.C]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[Cott]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [Tiberius,
B]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}[i]{.style_1}[)---these being closely
related---]{.style_}[MS.D]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[Cott.
Tiberius]{.style_1}[,]{.style_}
[B.iv]{.style_1}[)]{.style_}[,]{.style_1} [for which it has been
suggested that its final form may have been destined for the Scottish
court,]{.style_} [MS.F]{.style_1}
[(]{.style_}[Cott]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [Domitian, A.viii]{.style_1}[),
which is a bilingual text, in English and Latin. There are also three
important Latin versions.]{.style_} [Cott. Otho,
B]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}[xi]{.style_1} [is known as]{.style_}
[MS.W.]{.style_1}

[]{#calibre_link-637}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BIBLE VERSIONS]{.style_2} {#bible-versions .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[It must be emphasized that the English productions were mainly
translations of Latin originals, which shows that the prose literature
was as yet mainly imitative. There were many other translations from
this period, some of which have come down to us. Of all books of the
Bible none has been Englished so often as the]{.style_}
[Psalter]{.style_1}[. Numerous versions in prose as well as in verse,
some of which still survive, were written before those of John
Wycliffe's followers. A manuscript in the British Museum, containing the
Psalms in Latin---formerly supposed to have been once in St. Augustine's
possession, but now assigned to A.D.]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 700---has
glosses or "word-for-word translation" in an Old English dialect of the
late ninth century; according to Prof. B. Dickins, it is not Kentish (as
some scholars thought), but a dialect of the Midlands. The Oldest
English Psalter is the Anglo-Saxon]{.style_} [Paris Psalter]{.style_1}
[(see pp. 508 and 515). Only the first fifty Psalms are in prose, and
these are variously ascribed to Aldhelm, to King Alfred, or to
others.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest complete English prose Psalter, which at the same time is
also the earliest version in English prose of any entire book of
Scripture, belongs to a later period; it is preserved in two
manuscripts, one at the British Museum
(]{.style_}[Add]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [MS]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}
[17376]{.style_1}[), and the other at Trinity College, Dublin. The
former---a small thick octavo volume, containing 220 leaves of
vellum---is assigned by F. Madden to the first half of the fourteenth
century. It also contains William Shoreham's]{.style_} [Religious
Poems]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Trinity College manuscript
[]{#calibre_link-272}(]{.style_}[A.4.4]{.style_1}[)---[Fig.
X---26](#calibre_link-271){.calibre9}---is a quarto volume, written in
the fourteenth century. A note at the end of the]{.style_}
[Psalter]{.style_1}[, in the hand of the original scribe, gives the name
of John Hyde as the owner of the book. The]{.style_} [Psalter]{.style_1}
[now fills the first fifty-five leaves of the manuscript, and is
followed by Wycliffe's]{.style_} [Commentary on the Apocalypse, a Tale
of Charity, an Exposition of the Decalogue,]{.style_1} [a]{.style_}
[Description of Jerusalem]{.style_1}[, in Latin prose. It also contains
Richard Rolle's poem]{.style_} [The Prykke of Conscience,]{.style_1}
[but this is written by a different scribe. The language of
the]{.style_} [Psalter]{.style_1} [is almost pure West Midland;
the]{.style_} [Psalter]{.style_1} [is very carefully and distinctly
written. [Fig. X---6](#calibre_link-242){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[above.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Both manuscripts---the British Museum one and the Trinity College
one---contain the Latin text as well as the English translation, which
follow each other verse by verse. To the]{.style_} [Psalter]{.style_1}
[are added eleven]{.style_} [Canticles]{.style_1} [used for Divine
Offices, and the]{.style_} [Athanasian Creed]{.style_1}[. The Latin text
is that of the Vulgate, with some deviations from the modern editions.
Another difference exists in the division of some of the
Psalms.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Rolle's poem---previously referred to---may here be briefly dealt with:
Richard Rolle (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 1300---49) was an Oxford
theologian who gave up scholarship to become a hermit; he was a poet and
mystic; he wrote beautifully, especially in English (he also wrote in
Latin), and was widely read. The numerous preserved manuscripts of
the]{.style_} [Prykke of Conscience]{.style_1} [have been divided into
four families of recensions, designated respectively by the
symbols]{.style_} [Υ, Xii]{.style_1}[,]{.style_} [C]{.style_1}[, and ,
of which the fourth ( ) represents the Northern recension; the second
(]{.style_}[Xii]{.style_1}[) is an East Midland recension, differing
notably from the others in content and arrangement as well as in dialect
colour. The Trinity College manuscript belongs to this second group and
forms a special sub-group with numerous other manuscripts of the British
Museum (]{.style_}[Harl]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}
[1731]{.style_1}[,]{.style_} [2281]{.style_1}[, and]{.style_}
[2377]{.style_1}[;]{.style_} [Royal 18]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [A.
v]{.style_1}[;]{.style_} [Landsd]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}
[348]{.style_1}[;]{.style_} [Arund]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}
[140]{.style_1}[;]{.style_} [Add]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}
[11305]{.style_1}[), the University Library in Cambridge
(]{.style_}[Ee.4.35]{.style_1}[). the Bodleian Library
(]{.style_}[Bodl]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [1491]{.style_1} [and]{.style_}
[2322]{.style_1}[), the Princeton University Library (]{.style_}[Yates
MS]{.style_1}[.), the Cathedral Library, at Lichfield (Nos. 6 and 18),
and of other collections. [Fig.
X---26](#calibre_link-271){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[below]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000093.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-271}

[[Fig. X---26](#calibre_link-272){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Earliest complete English Psalter written in prose (Trinity
College, Dublin, MS. No. 69; A.4.4; portion of fol. 29 recto); (below)
Prykke of Conscience (the same manuscript ; portion of fol. 83
verso).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000094.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-273}

[Fig. X---27]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

["Early Version" of the Wycliffe Bible; original copy of the
translator(?), Nicholas de Hereford (Bodleian Library, MS. Bodl. 959,
fol. 288).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest preserved version of the Gospels is the paraphrase, in the
Northumbrian dialect---written by Aldred the Priest]{.style_}
[c]{.style_1}[. 950---between the lines of the Latin text of the
magnificent]{.style_} [Lindisfarne Codex]{.style_1} [(see p. 501 ff.),
which is dated to]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 700.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The first independent translation of the Gospels also belongs
to]{.style_} [c]{.style_1}[. 950, and was written in the West Saxon
dialect, but the earliest manuscripts extant (two and a fragment of a
third, at Oxford, two at Cambridge, and two in the British Museum) are
of a later period, the oldest being a manuscript written by Aelfric at
Bath about the year 1000, and now in Corpus Christi College,
Cambridge.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The earliest English version of a great portion of the Old Testament
(the]{.style_} [Pentateuch]{.style_1}[,]{.style_} [Joshua,
Judges]{.style_1}[,]{.style_} [Kings]{.style_1}[,]{.style_}
[Esther]{.style_1}[,]{.style_} [Job]{.style_1}[,]{.style_}
[Judith]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [Maccabees]{.style_1}[), of which two
copies are extant---one at Oxford and the other in the British
Museum---is attributed to Aelfric, Archbishop of Canterbury, c. the year
990.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The first English translation of the whole Bible is known as
the]{.style_} [Wycliffe Bible]{.style_1}[, but John Wycliffe
(]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 1324---84)---the great English reformer of
Oxford, who became notable for his freedom of faith, fearlessness of
character and the persecution which tried to hamper him in his
work---had very little to do with this version. It was, indeed, produced
by his followers in the late fourteenth century. As a matter of fact,
there are two versions of the]{.style_} [Wycliffe Bible]{.style_1}[:
both were made from the Latin Vulgate, and neither had any influence on
our present English Bible. The]{.style_} [Early Version]{.style_1}[, the
work of Nicholas Hereford and other followers of Wycliffe, was finished
in 1382; the original (?) copy, of which all the preserved manuscripts
are transcripts, is preserved in Oxford (Bodleian Library,]{.style_}
[Bodl]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [MS. 959]{.style_1}[;
[]{#calibre_link-638}see [Fig. X---27](#calibre_link-273){.calibre9}).
The codex, of 323 leaves, measuring 13 × inches, contains]{.style_}
[Genesis to Baruch]{.style_1}[, iii, 20; the text is in double columns,
usually of fifty-three lines to the page. In 1388, a much more accurate
rendering of the Bible---the]{.style_} [Revised
Version]{.style_1}[---was issued by a group headed by John Purvey. A
prologue, commentary, and notes were added. This recension---of which
150 copies survive---superseded the earlier one. Both versions were
suppressed during the fifteenth-century persecution of Wycliffe's
followers, the Lollards. Under the statute]{.style_} [De Heretico
Comburendo,]{.style_1} [in 1400, many Lollards and their books were
burned. An act of Parliament at Hampton Court, in 1414, declared that
"all who read the Scriptures in the mother-tongue shall forfeit land and
money". The English Bible was regarded by Church and State of England as
being of such a dangerous and incendiary character that long after the
invention of printing no translation into English was
permitted.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000095.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-274}

[Fig. X---28]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Chaucer, fifteenth-century copy, English (Pierpont Morgan Library, New
York, M. 817).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-639}

## [DECADENCE OF OLD ENGLISH LITERATURE]{.style_2} {#decadence-of-old-english-literature .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Norman Conquest almost at once struck a death blow at Anglo-Saxon
literature. The English upper class was overthrown and kept in
subjection; the lower classes were too ignorant to carry on the work for
themselves; the new upper classes spoke and wrote in Norman French. The
English native literature died out wholly, and a new literature, founded
on Romance models, took its place. English poetry struggled on, but in
the end it, too, succumbed to Romance models. Latin was taught in the
schools, not English.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Nevertheless, the English language itself was not stamped out; it
continued to be spoken by the common people. In the late twelfth and
early thirteenth centuries the intermixture of Norman and English was
progressing fast, and, in the combination, English was beginning to take
pride of place. Early in the fourteenth century the amalgamation was all
but complete. The new form of the English language ("Middle English"),
with its splendid literary productions, such as Chaucer's]{.style_}
[Canterbury Tales]{.style_1}[, cannot be dealt with in detail in the
present book. []{#calibre_link-640}See [Fig.
X---28](#calibre_link-274){.calibre9}; also p. 533. f.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-641}

::: calibre5
:::

::: calibre15
:::

## [THE DOMESDAY OR DOOMSDAY BOOK []{#calibre_link-276 .calibre14}([Fig. X---29](#calibre_link-275){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#the-domesday-or-doomsday-book-fig.-x29 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The origin of this name is uncertain; according to tradition, it was so
called because of the tyranny of the Norman nobles: in the eyes of the
people it was like the great reckoning of doomsday.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[\[According to]{.style_} [The Oxford English Dictionary,]{.style_1}
[the name---already applied in the twelfth century---"appears to have
been derived directly from]{.style_} [Domesday]{.style_1} [the Day of
the Last Judgement, and]{.style_} [Domesday Book]{.style_1} [the Book by
which all men would be judged. It originated as a popular appellation
\..., given to the Book as being a final and conclusive authority on all
matters on which it had to be referred to\].]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It was also known as]{.style_} [Liber de Wintonia or Rotulus Wintoniae,
Liber de Regis or Scriptura Thesauri Regis, Angliœ Notitiœ et Lustratio,
Censualis Angliœ,]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [Liber
Judicarius]{.style_1}[. The original manuscript, in two volumes, is
written in Latin, and is preserved in the Public Record Office, London.
It is the record of an official survey of England made in 1085---7
during the reign of William the Conqueror. Other books carry us on
through the succeeding centuries, which make it more valuable still as a
source of information.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000096.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-275}

[[Fig. X---29](#calibre_link-276){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Domesday Book (Public Record Office, London). The page here reproduced
deals with Cambridgeshire.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[The decision to compile the]{.style_} [Domesday]{.style_1} [survey was
taken at the Christmas council of 1085, and before the end of 1086 the
returns, written on separate rolls, had been brought to the king. The
exact date of the writing of the two volumes of the]{.style_} [Domesday
Book]{.style_1} [is uncertain. "It is uncertain how many hands were
employed on them, and therefore hard to estimate the speed at which they
could have been produced. The handwriting as a whole points definitely
to a late 11th-century date for the manuscript. On general grounds,
there is an overwhelming probability that the volumes were written
before the information which they contain was seriously out of date;
that is, before, at least, the confiscations after the revolt of 1088"
(F. M. Stenton).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Domesday Book]{.style_1} [is divided into two volumes; one, known as
the second volume (though according to some scholars it seems to have
been compiled first), deals with the counties of Essex, Norfolk, and
Suffolk; the other deals with the rest of England. Curiously enough, not
only Cumberland, not yet conquered, is not dealt with, but neither are
Northumberland or Durham. London, Winchester, and other towns are not
considered either.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The term given to this survey in the colophon of Volume II is]{.style_}
[descriptio]{.style_1}[. "As the ordered description of a national
economy it is unique among the records of the medieval world"
(Stenton).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is a systematic record of the ownership and occupancy of the land,
of the nature of its cultivation, the number of its inhabitants and
their respective classes (freemen, villeins, serfs), of estate
valuations, and so on. It was so thorough that the author of
the]{.style_} [Anglo-Saxon Chronicle]{.style_1} [wrote: "So very
straitly did he \[William\] cause the survey to be made, that there was
not a single hyde, nor a yardland of ground, nor---it is shameful to say
what he thought no shame to do---was there an ox or a cow or a pig
passed by, and that was not down in the accounts, and then all these
writings were brought to him."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The]{.style_} [Doomsday Book]{.style_1} [became the official register
of land ownership; it covers the greater part of England. It is,
therefore, the starting-point of every manorial history of England.
Indeed, many land titles start with it.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Its compilation was thus a marvellous enterprise, admirably planned.
King William sent into each county the commissioners, who ascertained
and recorded the dues to the crown, the special "customs" of the single
manors, and so on. A jury empanelled in each Hundred declared on oath
the extent and nature of each estate, the names, numbers, condition of
its inhabitants, its value before and after the Conquest, the sums due
from it to the Crown, and so forth. This survey thus made possible
taxation on a sound basis, and became an essential census roll, though
it was not a complete survey, because it omitted to mention any land
which was not taxable.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-642}

::: calibre5
:::

## [POST-CONQUEST MONASTIC REFORM]{.style_2} {#post-conquest-monastic-reform .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The second great reform of monasticism took place after the Norman
Conquest. This restoration is connected with the activity of the Cluniac
Benedictines and the Cistercian Benedictines. The first English
establishment of the Cistercians was Waverley Abbey (1128), near
Farnham, in Surrey, but much more important was Rievaulx Abbey (1132),
some thirty miles north of York. When the monasteries were suppressed
(see p. 534) the Cistercians had seventy-five abbeys and twenty-six
nunneries in England, and eleven abbeys and seven nunneries in Scotland.
Beside the Orders of monks (including the Carthusians), there were also
the Orders of canons (Augustinian or Austin, and Premonstratensian) and
the Orders of friars (Dominican, Franciscan, Carmelite, and Austin). By
the time of the Dissolution, there were some 300 flourishing Benedictine
houses in England, including Ely, Durham, Winchester, St. Albans,
Westminster Abbey, Peterborough, Norwich, Shrewsbury, Bath, Whitby, St.
Mary's of York, Glastonbury, Bury St. Edmunds, Abingdon, Rochester,
Reading, Gloucester, Evesham, Worcester.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-643}

::: calibre5
:::

## [MIDDLE ENGLISH]{.style_2} {#middle-english .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[With the Norman Conquest Anglo-Saxon literature and book production
suffered an eclipse; at the same time, it was the beginning of the final
process in the welding of the English nation into one compact body. New
influences, new words and new thoughts necessarily affected the literary
output. Latin became the medium of government and scholarship; Norman
French was the exclusive language of the higher classes. Thus the
survival of an English literary language was extremely difficult if not
impossible during the period of Norman French dominance. But English did
not die out; as mentioned, the]{.style_} [Anglo-Saxon
Chronicle]{.style_1} [was continued until 1154 (see p. 523 f).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, although there was a certain renaissance in the thirteenth
century, it was only in the fourteenth century that literature became
once more a force in England. Three names stand out in this period:
William Langland (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[.
1332---]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 1400), the reputed author of the
allegorical poem]{.style_} [The Vision of Piers the Plowman]{.style_1}
[(about forty manuscripts are extant) ; John Gower
(]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 1325---1408), author of three long poems; and
especially, Geoffrey Chaucer (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 1340---1400),
the author of the]{.style_} [Canterbury Tales]{.style_1} [and other
poems, which established his claim to be called "the father of English
poetry" ([Fig. X---28](#calibre_link-274){.calibre9}). The British
Museum possesses a copy of the so-called C Text of]{.style_} [Piers
Plowman]{.style_1} [(a Cotton manuscript), an illuminated copy of
Gower's]{.style_} [Confessio Amantis]{.style_1}
[(]{.style_}[Harl]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [MS. 7184]{.style_1}[), one of
the best copies of the]{.style_} [Canterbury Tales]{.style_1}
[(]{.style_}[Harl]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [MS. 1758]{.style_1}[). Also a
copy each of]{.style_} [The Governail of Princes]{.style_1} [by Hoccleve
or Occleve (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 1368---]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[.
1450), of]{.style_} [Storie of Thebes]{.style_1} [and of]{.style_} [The
Falls of Princis,]{.style_1} [by the very prolific poet John Lydgate, a
monk of Bury (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 1370---]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[.
1446), are preserved in the British Museum (respectively,]{.style_}
[Harl. MSS. 4866]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [1766]{.style_1}[), the
former containing the famous portrait of Chaucer in the margin opposite
stanza 714; the latter is the author's dedication copy to Humphrey, Duke
of Gloucester.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A recent interesting discovery may here be mentioned. Dr. Derek Price,
of Cambridge, having examined]{.style_} [The Equatorie of the
Planetis]{.style_1}[, a manuscript written in 1392 and preserved in the
Perne Library, Peterhouse, Cambridge, has proved that its author could
not have been---as hitherto thought---Simon Bredon, who died in 1372. It
would appear, instead, that the codex is a hitherto unknown work of
Chaucer, and would provide for the first time an example of his
handwriting as well as an uncorrupted specimen of his language and
spelling. Apparently, we have in this manuscript a free adaptation from
an Arabic or Persian source, presumably through a Latin
translation.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-644}

::: calibre5
:::

## [END OF THE MIDDLE AGES IN ENGLAND]{.style_2} {#end-of-the-middle-ages-in-england .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The ending of the Middle Ages, signalized so resoundingly on the
Continent, was marked by quite distinctive events in England, events
which had profound consequences not only on the political and
constitutional history of the country, but also in the sphere of its art
and culture. These are the Wars of the Roses (1455-85), and the
establishment, with the House of Tudor, in 1485, of a system of absolute
monarchy; the new nationalism, fostered by Henry VII (1485---1509), and
developed by Henry VIII (1509---47), separated the country from the
Roman Church and the Continent.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The dissolution of the monasteries was followed by the book massacres,
when the university and college libraries and the parish service books
were plundered and stripped by the commissioners of Edward VI. At the
same time, however, noble book collectors, like Archbishop Parker
(1504---74) and Sir Robert Cotton (1571---1631), set to work to gather
what they could of the scattered records of English book production. So
also did Sir Thomas Bodley (1545---1613) in Oxford, Sir Thomas Smith
(1513---77) and Archbishop Williams (1582---1650) in Cambridge,
Archbishop Usher (1581---1656) in Dublin, Sir Hans Sloane (1660---1753),
Kings George II (1683---1760) and George III (1738---1820), Robert
Harley, Earl of Oxford (1661---1724), and many others, to whom Great
Britain and Western Civilization owe the foundation of the British
Museum Library, and the University libraries of Oxford, Cambridge and
Dublin. There were no such bibliophiles in Durham; hence this city,
which could boast the only English monastic library to survive in bulk
after the Reformation, in later times lost such precious treasures as
the]{.style_} [Lindisfarne Gospels.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000097.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-277}

[Fig. X---30]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Luttrell Psalter (British Museum, Add. MS. 42130); neighbourhood of
East Anglia; c. 1340; Gothic "liturgical" hand.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[As a result of the Reformation, the continuity of English religious art
was broken and the book illumination, for which England was famous in
the fourteenth century, died out. Unlike, for instance, the Italian
illumination, which could boast an uninterrupted development and a
steadily maintained religious patronage, the English religious art of
the Middle Ages left no inheritance. There were, however, later painters
in East Anglia; they are connected by certain scholars with the purely
local artistic strain left by the East Anglian school of
[]{#calibre_link-645}illumination: [Fig.
X--30](#calibre_link-277){.calibre9}.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-646}

::: calibre5
:::

## [BIBLIOGRAPHY]{.style_2} {#bibliography-11 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. H. Hennessy (transl. and ed.) : Dubhaltach Macfirbisich,]{.style_}
[Chronicum Scotorum, a Chronicle of Irish Affairs, from the Earliest
Times to A.D. 1135,]{.style_1} [London, 1866.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. O. Westwood,]{.style_} [Fac-similes of the Miniatures and Ornaments
of Anglo-Saxon and Irish Manuscripts,]{.style_1} [London,
1868.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[M. MacNair Stokes,]{.style_} [Early Christian Art in
Ireland,]{.style_1} [London, 1887; Dublin, 1911 and 1928.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Annals of Ulster]{.style_1}[, etc., vol. I, ed. by W. M. Hennessy; vol.
II, ed. by B. MacCarthy, Dublin, 1887 and 1893.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. Plummer,]{.style_} [Two of the Saxon Chronicles,]{.style_1} [Oxford,
1892;]{.style_} [Vitae Sanctorum Hiberniae,]{.style_1} [Oxford,
1910.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. J. Lawlor,]{.style_} [Chapters on the Book of Mulling]{.style_1}[,
Edinburgh, 1897.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[S. A. Brooke,]{.style_} [English Literature from the
Beginning]{.style_1}[, etc., London, 1898.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[T. K. Abbott,]{.style_} [Catalogue of the Manuscripts in the Library of
Trinity College,]{.style_1} [Dublin, 1900.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. F. Wakeman,]{.style_} [A Handbook of Irish Antiquities]{.style_1}[,
3rd ed., Dublin, 1903.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. B. Brown,]{.style_} [The Arts in Early England]{.style_1}[, London,
1903---21.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. R. Allen,]{.style_} [The Early Christian Monuments of
Scotland,]{.style_1} [etc., Edinburgh, 1903;]{.style_} [Celtic Art in
Pagan and Christian Times]{.style_1}[, 2nd ed., London, 1912.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. B. Bury,]{.style_} [St. Patrick and his Place in History, London,
1905.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Cambridge History of English Literature,]{.style_1} [Cambridge, 1907
onwards.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. M. Chadwick,]{.style_} [The Origin of the English
Nation]{.style_1}[, Cambridge, 1907 (repr., 1924);]{.style_} [The Heroic
Age]{.style_1}[, Cambridge, 1912 (repr., 1926) ;]{.style_} [The Study of
Anglo-Saxon]{.style_1}[, Cambridge, 1941 ;---------and N. K.
Chadwick,]{.style_} [The Growth of Literature]{.style_1}[, 3 vols.,
Cambridge, 1932---40.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. M. Doran,]{.style_} [The]{.style_1} [\...]{.style_} [Origin of the
Ornament in the Book of Durrow,]{.style_1} ["The Burlington Magazine",
1908.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Brandl,]{.style_} [Englische Literatur]{.style_1}
[(=]{.style_}[Geschichte der altenglischen Literatur]{.style_1}[),
Strasbourg, 1908.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. Déchelette,]{.style_} [Manuel d'archéologie préhistorique, celtique
et gallo-rom.,]{.style_1} [Paris, 1908---14.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. Cabrol,]{.style_} [L'Angleterre chrétienne avant les
Normands,]{.style_1} [Paris, 1909.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. W. C. Oman,]{.style_} [England before the Norman
Conquest]{.style_1}[, London, 1910.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. M. Lindsay,]{.style_} [Early Irish Minuscule Script,]{.style_1}
[Oxford, 1910 ;]{.style_} [Early Welsh Script]{.style_1}[, Oxford,
1912.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[L. Gougaud,]{.style_} [Les Chrétientés celtiques]{.style_1}[, Paris,
1911 ;]{.style_} [Christianity in Celtic Lands]{.style_1}[, London,
1932.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. H. Orpen,]{.style_} [Ireland under the Normans]{.style_1}[, 4 vols.,
Oxford, 1911---20.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. Gwynn,]{.style_} [Liber Ardmachanus, The Book of Armagh]{.style_1}[,
Dublin, 1913.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[British Museum,]{.style_} [Schools of Illumination]{.style_1}[.
Reproductions from manuscripts, 6th Part (Hiberno-Saxon, English and
French), London, 1914---30;]{.style_} [Guide to an Exhibition of English
Art]{.style_1}[, London, 1934.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. Sullivan,]{.style_} [The Book of Kells,]{.style_1} [London, Paris,
and New York, 1914.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. G. Millar,]{.style_} [Les Manuscr. à peintures des
biblioth]{.style_1}[.]{.style_} [de Londres,]{.style_1} [Paris,
1914---20;]{.style_} [The Lindisfarne Gospels,]{.style_1} [London,
1923;]{.style_} [English Illuminated Manuscripts,]{.style_1} [Paris and
Brussels, 1926---8;]{.style_} [The Library of A. C. Beatty,]{.style_1}
[etc., Oxford, 1927---;]{.style_} [The Luttrell Psalter]{.style_1}[,
London, 1932;]{.style_} [The St. Trond Lectionary,]{.style_1} [etc.,
Oxford, 1949.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[B. Dickins,]{.style_} [Runic and Heroic Poems]{.style_1}[, etc.,
Cambridge, 1915.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. P. Krapp,]{.style_} [The Rise of English Literary Prose]{.style_1}[,
New York, 1915;]{.style_} [The Paris Psalter and the Meters of
Boethius]{.style_1}[, New York, 1932;---------and E. van Kirk Dobbie
(ed.),]{.style_} [The Anglo-Saxon Poetic Records]{.style_1}
[(]{.style_}[The Junius Manuscript, The Vercelli Book, The Exeter
Book,]{.style_1} [etc.), New York, 1931---42.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. MacNeill,]{.style_} [Phases of Irish History,]{.style_1} [Dublin,
1920 (3rd impress., 1937);]{.style_} [Celtic Ireland,]{.style_1} [Dublin
and London, 1921.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. A. Neilson and A. H. Thorndike,]{.style_} [A History of English
Literature,]{.style_1} [New York, 1921.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[R. Dunlop,]{.style_} [Ireland from the Earliest Times to the Present
Days]{.style_1}[, Oxford, 1922.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. Brøndsted,]{.style_} [Early English Ornament]{.style_1}[, etc.,
London and Copenhagen, 1924.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. G. Crump and E. F. Jacob (ed.),]{.style_} [The Legacy of the Middle
Ages,]{.style_1} [Oxford, 1926.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[N. Aberg,]{.style_} [The Anglo-Saxons in England]{.style_1}[, etc.,
Uppsala, 1926.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. Hull,]{.style_} [A History of Ireland,]{.style_1} [etc., 2 vols.,
London, 1926---30.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. Neckel,]{.style_} [Germanen und Kelten,]{.style_1} [etc.,
Heidelberg, 1929.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. F. Kenney,]{.style_} [The Sources for the Early History of
Ireland]{.style_1}[, etc., I, New York, 1929.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. E. King (transl. and ed.), Bede,]{.style_} [Opera
Historica,]{.style_1} [2 vols., London and New York, 1930.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[T. D. Kendrick,]{.style_} [A History of the Vikings]{.style_1}[,
London, 1930;]{.style_} [Anglo]{.style_1}[-]{.style_}[Saxon Art to A.D.
900]{.style_1}[, London, 1938.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. W. Clapham,]{.style_} [English Romanesque Architecture before the
Conquest]{.style_1}[, Oxford, 1930.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. H. Hensinkveld and E. J. Bashe,]{.style_} [A Bibliographical Guide
to Old English]{.style_1}[, Iowa City, 1931.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. Ryan,]{.style_} [Irish Monasticism]{.style_1}[, etc., Dublin and
Cork, 1931.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Kingsley Porter,]{.style_} [The Crosses and Culture of
Ireland,]{.style_1} [New Haven, 1931.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[M. Maclean,]{.style_} [The Literature of the Celts]{.style_1}[, new
ed., London, 1926.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Mahr,]{.style_} [Christian Art in Ancient Ireland,]{.style_1} [etc.,
Dublin, 1932.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[R. E. W. Flower,]{.style_} [The Two Eyes of Ireland, Religion and
Literature,]{.style_1} [etc., "REP. OF THE CHURCH OF IRELAND CONF.",
Dublin, 1932;]{.style_} [The Irish Tradition,]{.style_1} [Oxford,
1947.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. T. Leeds,]{.style_} [Celtic Ornament in the Brit. Isles down to A.D.
700,]{.style_1} [Oxford, 1933---.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. A. Phillips,]{.style_} [History of the Church of Ireland from the
Earliest Times]{.style_1}[, etc., London, 1933---.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. W. Clapham,]{.style_} [Notes on the Origins of Hiberno-Saxon
Art,]{.style_1} ["ANTIQUITY", 1934.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[R. A. S. Macalister,]{.style_} [Ancient Ireland,]{.style_1} [etc.,
London, 1935.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. C. Burkitt,]{.style_} [Kells, Durrow, and Lindisfarne]{.style_1}[,
"ANTIQUITY", 1935.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. J. Sedgefield (ed.),]{.style_} [Beowulf]{.style_1}[, Manchester,
1935.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. E. Wardale,]{.style_} [Chapters on Old English
Literature,]{.style_1} [London, 1935.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[B. Salin,]{.style_} [Die altgermanische Tierornamentik,]{.style_1}
[etc., 2nd ed., Stockholm, 1935.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. Curtiss,]{.style_} [A History of Ireland]{.style_1}[, London, 1936
(6th ed., 1950);]{.style_} [A History of Medieval Ireland,]{.style_1}
[etc., 2nd ed., London, 1938.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[R. V. Collingwood and J. N. L. Myres,]{.style_} [Roman Britain and the
Engl. Settlem.,]{.style_1} [2nd ed., Oxford, 1937.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[R. H. Hodgkin,]{.style_} [A History of the Anglo-Saxons,]{.style_1}
[etc., 2 vols., 2nd ed., Oxford, 1939.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. H. Verbist,]{.style_} [Saint Willibrord,]{.style_1} [etc., Louvain,
1939.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[R. B. A. Mynors,]{.style_} [The Durham Cathedral
Manuscripts,]{.style_1} [Oxford, 1939.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. L. Micheli,]{.style_} [La Miniature du Haut M.-A. et les influenç.
irlan]{.style_1}[-]{.style_}[daises]{.style_1} [, Brussels,
1939.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[D. Knowles,]{.style_} [The Monastic Order in England,]{.style_1} [etc.,
Cambridge, 1940 (repr., 1949).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. Henry,]{.style_} [Irish Art]{.style_1}[, etc., London,
1940.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. Klaeber (ed.),]{.style_} [Beowulf]{.style_1}[, new ed., Boston,
Mass., 1941.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. L. Weisberger,]{.style_} [Die keltischen Voelker im Umkreis von
England,]{.style_1} [Marburg, 1941.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. W. Kennedy,]{.style_} [The Earliest English Poetry,]{.style_1} [New
York and London, 1943; (ed.)]{.style_} [Beowulf]{.style_1}[, 4th print.,
New York, 1950.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[M. L. W. Laistner,]{.style_} [A Hand-List of Bede
Manuscripts]{.style_1}[, Ithaca, New York, 1943.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. Sampson,]{.style_} [The Concise Cambridge History of English
Literature,]{.style_1} [Cambridge, 1945.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[T. F. O'Rahilly,]{.style_} [Early Irish History and
Mythology,]{.style_1} [Dublin, 1946.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[P. Harvey (ed.),]{.style_} [The Oxford Companion to English
Literature]{.style_1}[, 3rd ed., Oxford, 1946.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[É. Legouis and L. Cazamian,]{.style_} [A History of English
Literature]{.style_1}[, rev. ed., London, 1947.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. Masai,]{.style_} [Essai sur les origines de la miniature dite
irlandaise,]{.style_1} [Brussels and Antwerp, 1947.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[M. Dillon,]{.style_} [Early Irish Literature,]{.style_1} [Chicago,
1948.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. J. Entwistle and E. Gillett,]{.style_} [The Literature of
England,]{.style_1} [A.D.]{.style_} [500---1946,]{.style_1} [2nd ed.,
London, 1948.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. C. Baugh and others,]{.style_} [A Literary History of
England,]{.style_1} [New York, 1948, London, 1950.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. Mossé,]{.style_} [Manuel de l'anglais du Moyen Age des
origines]{.style_1} [etc., Paris, 1949.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. F. Schirmer,]{.style_} [Kurze Geschichte der englischen
Literatur]{.style_1}[, 2nd. ed., Halle, 1949.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. K. Anderson,]{.style_} [Literature of the Anglo-Saxons]{.style_1}[,
Princeton, 1949.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[M. D. Legge,]{.style_} [Anglo-Norman in the Cloister,]{.style_1}
[Edinburgh, 1950.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. M. Stenton,]{.style_} [Anglo]{.style_1}[-]{.style_}[Saxon
England]{.style_1}[, 2nd ed., repr., Oxford, 1950.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. Fox and B. Dickins (ed.),]{.style_} [The Early Cultures of N.-W.
Europe]{.style_1} [("H. M. CHADWICK MEMORIAL STUDIES"), Cambridge,
1950.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. L. Wrenn and J. R. C. Hall (ed. and transl.),]{.style_}
[Beowulf]{.style_1}[, London, 1950.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. S. Delmer,]{.style_} [English Literature from 'Beowulf' to T. S.
Elioi,]{.style_1} [22nd ed., London, 1951.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-647}

::: calibre5
:::

## [CONCLUSION---FATE OF BOOKS]{.style_2} {#conclusionfate-of-books .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[What has happened to the many thousands of books produced in the
British Isles which have not come down to us? We have already mentioned
the numerous causes of destruction of books. "The trials and
tribulations of books," writes H. Jackson, "are equalled only by the
trials and tribulations of mankind; their sufferings are identical with
those of their creators, and if they live longer they are not immune
from decay and death. They have been beaten and burnt, drowned,
tortured, imprisoned, suppressed, executed, censored, exiled, reviled,
condemned, buried; they are overworked and underworked, misused and
maltreated in every manner known to fate and chance and the most
ingenious of miscreants and misguided zealots."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[What has here been said about books in general, can be said about
English books in particular. Time, damp, the book-worm, and religious
zealotry have worked the destruction of numerous early manuscripts. The
mistaken zeal, enthusiasm, and bigotry of the early leaders of the
Reformation, and of those whom they employed, swept away without
distinction the secular books with those of devotion, preserved in the
religious houses, and thus deprived culture of many treasures. Even
where the books may have been preserved, the cupidity of official
visitants of the religious establish-mentswould lead to the destruction
of many valuable ornaments with which the bindings were enriched and
embellished.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Not only were the libraries completely sacked, but the huge volumes
which contained the ancient services, and abounded in all the churches
and monasteries, were destroyed without mercy, ardently and
enthusiastically. To show the extent of the devastation and frightful
havoc then committed, W. S. Brassington quotes the following account of
a writer of the time (Bale's]{.style_} [Preface]{.style_1} [to]{.style_}
[Leland's Journey]{.style_1}[, 1549): "Never had we been offended for
the loss of our libraries, being so many in number, and in so desolate
places for the more part, if the chief monuments and most notable works
of our most excellent writers had been preserved. If there had been in
every shire of England but one]{.style_} [solempne]{.style_1} [library,
to the preservation of those noble works, and preferment of good
learning in our posterity, it had been yet somewhat. But to destroy all
without consideration is, and will be, unto England for ever a most
horrible infamy among the grave seniors of other nations. A great number
of them which purchased those superstitious mansions, reserved of those
library books, some to scour their candlesticks, and to rub their boots;
some they sold to the grocers and soap-sellers; some they sent over sea
to the bookbinders, not in small numbers, but at times whole ships full,
to the wondering of the foreign nations. Yea, the universities of this
realm are not all clear of this detestable fact. But cursed is that
belly which seeketh to be fed with such ungodly gains, and shamcth his
natural country. I know a merchant man, which shall at this time be
nameless, that bought the contents of]{.style_} [two noble
libraries]{.style_1} [for]{.style_} [forty shillings]{.style_1} [price;
a shame it is to be spoken. This stuff hath he occupied in the stead of
grey paper, by the space of more than ten years, and yet he hath store
enough for as many years to come!"]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[This is not the place to tell the whole story of this wholesale
destruction of books. It will suffice to relate that when the
Commissioners of Edward VI came to Oxford in 1550, and found the
magnificent public library, founded in 1426 by Humfrey Duke of
Gloucester, they decided that all the books were "popish", and even
without due examination of the contents of the volumes---the ornaments
upon the binding being sufficient in many instances to seal the fate of
a book---they ordered the burning of some books, and the sale of the
others to bookbinders to be cut up for covers and end-papers, or to
tailors for measures. When the antiquary John Leland (chaplain and
librarian to Henry VIII, from 1533, and also commissioner of king's
antiquary, with power to search for manuscripts and records in all the
suppressed religious houses of England) visited Oxford after the
suppression of the monasteries, he found few books, only moths and
beetles swarming over the empty shelves. The University even sold the
benches at which the readers had sat. When Sir Thomas Bodley returned to
Oxford in the early seventeenth century, he found Duke Humfrey's library
a roofless and grass-grown ruin.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The mistaken zeal of the early leaders of the Reformation in England
was only one cause, though the main one, of the wholesale destruction of
early English books. Other causes---both in time of war and peace---have
already been mentioned (see, for instance, Chapter VI). Here a few more
details may be given of the peacetime enemies of the books. Jackson
rightly says that "every library, especially those that are old and
large, or small and neglected, breeds its own inimical flora and fauna,
mould, bookworms, moths,]{.style_} [anthrene, vorilette,]{.style_1}
[bugs, mice, rats, the story of whose devastations would fill many
volumes". Other scholars have added to this list: gas, bookbinders,
houseflies, black-beetles, and servants; but especially dust, and the
act of irreverent and unskilled dusting. Neglect is one of the most
dangerous enemies of "the book". Jackson mentions Henry Bradshaw
(1831---86; he was University librarian at Cambridge) as saying,
"Nothing could be more disgraceful than the way in which the manuscripts
of Bishop Moore's library, presented to the University by George I, were
literally shovelled into their places; and for the thirty-five years
that followed the presentation the pillage was so unlimited that the
only wonder is that we have any valuable books left."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Then, again, there are those ferocious enemies, fire and water. Damage
by water is a common misfortune, and many good books have been lost or
damaged at sea, on inland waterways, through floods, and especially
through damp. As to fire, it will suffice to mention again the fire
which, on October 23, 1731, burned many precious manuscripts of the
valuable library of Sir John Cotton at Ashburnham House, Little Dean's
Yard, in the City of Westminster: 114 of the total 958 volumes were
destroyed, and ninety-eight partially destroyed. The Cotton Library,
founded by Sir Robert Bruce Cotton (1571---1631), was by his grandson
bequeathed to the nation in 1700, and after the foundation of the
British Museum (in 1753), it was incorporated with the latter.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Roman writer Terentianus Maurus (late second century A.D.), author
of a popular manual on metre, used to say:]{.style_} [habent sua fata
libelli,]{.style_1} ["books have their fates". Indeed, the fate of a
book is often stranger than that of a human being. Many great books only
by miracle escaped from total loss. The strange stories of the recovery
of some books have already been mentioned. Jackson tells the following
story. Upon Midsummer's Eve, 1626, a cod-fish was brought to Cambridge
Market and cut up for sale. In the maw of the fish a hard thing was
found, which was drawn out with the entrails; it was congealed with a
jelly, and the mass gave off "an ancient and fish-like smell", but,
after a washing, it was seen to be a book bound in parchment. Those
standing about looked upon it with wonder and admiration, and Benjamin
Prime, the Bachelor's Beadle, who was present, carried the book to Dr.
Samuel Ward, Master of Sidney Sussex College, who took special notice of
it, afterwards describing the discovery of this literary Jonah in a
letter to Archbishop Usher. The book contained three treatises,
(1)]{.style_} [A Preparation for Death;]{.style_1} [(2)]{.style_} [The
Treasure of Knowledge;]{.style_1} [and (3)]{.style_} [A Mirror, or
Looking Glass to know thyself by, a brief Instruction to teach one
willing to die not to fear Death]{.style_1}[. Dr. Ward thought that it
was probably a]{.style_} [special admonition to us at
Cambridge]{.style_1}[, but apparently its author was]{.style_}
[a]{.style_1} [Protestant, Richard Tracy, who published this book in
1540, and dedicated it to Lord Thomas Cromwell. However, this "fish
book" induced a Cambridge man, Thomas Randolph, to write an amusing
poem, which included the following two lines:]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[If fishes thus do bring to us books, then we]{.style_1}

[May hope to equal Bodley's Library.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Many precious books were discovered on the shelves of libraries. The
aforementioned Bradshaw discovered in 1857, in the University Library of
Cambridge, the]{.style_} [Book of Deer,]{.style_1} [one of the most
ancient Celtic manuscripts, which threw light on ancient Celtic language
and literature. Another discovery was that of manuscripts containing the
earliest remains of the Waldensian literature. Bradshaw's successor,
Francis Jenkinson, "was constantly discovering fresh treasures on the
shelves" (Jackson). Jackson also mentions, among many other similar
discoveries, how Dr. Williamson found the only copy of the
famous]{.style_} [Service Book]{.style_1}[, of 1612, in a monastery,
among a lot of printer's rubbish in a room which had not been opened for
twenty years.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The history of books teems with such accounts as those of the story of
the]{.style_} [Lindisfarne Gospels,]{.style_1} [or of the]{.style_}
[Book of Kells,]{.style_1} [or of the beautifully illuminated]{.style_}
[Latin Psalter,]{.style_1} [clearly English workmanship of the
fourteenth century, of Exeter College, Oxford, but it will suffice to
end this list with the]{.style_} [Gospel-book of St.
Margaret,]{.style_1} [Queen of Scotland, who died in 1093. She was the
sister of Edgar the Atheling, wife of Malcolm III "Canmore", of
Scotland, and mother-in-law of Henry I. Madan tells us that the book in
question, a little octavo volume in worn brown binding, in 1887 stood on
the shelves of a small parish library in Suffolk; but was turned out and
offered at the end of a sale at Sotheby's, the parishioners probably
preferring to have, instead, a few works of fiction. At Sotheby's it was
catalogued as "Latin Gospels of the Fourteenth Century, with
Illuminations". It was bought, for £6, by the Bodleian Library, and
described in its catalogue as an ordinary accession. Later it was found
that the writing was of the eleventh century, and the illumination was
English, although influenced by the Byzantine style. It contained on a
fly-leaf a poem in Latin hexameters, describing how this very volume was
dropped into a stream, given up for lost, and then recovered by a
soldier "sent back", who plunged head first into the water and brought
it up. By a sheer miracle, the beautiful volume suffered very little
from the effect of the water.]{.style_}
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: {#calibre_link-278 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-17}

::: calibre7
:::

### [CHAPTER XI---APPENDIX]{.style_2} {#chapter-xiappendix .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

### [INKS, PENS AND OTHER WRITING TOOLS]{.style_2} {#inks-pens-and-other-writing-tools .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

[FOLLOWING A. Lucas, the Honorary Consulting Chemist of the Egyptian
Department of Antiquities and formerly Director of the Chemical
Department of Egypt, we may distinguish writing materials into two main
classes, the essential and the accessory. The essential, or primary
materials comprise the pigment (or ink), the ground (parchment, paper
and so on) on which ink is placed in the process of writing, and the
implements (such as pens) used to transfer the ink to the ground
destined to receive it. The secondary materials include the receptacles
in, or on which the inks and pens are kept (inkhorn, writing box), the
grinders used by ancient scribes to prepare the ink.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Various ancient "writing grounds"---such as clay tablets, papyrus
rolls, waxen tablets, leather, parchment, palm leaves, bamboo sticks,
silk---have been dealt with in previous chapters. Paper, of which the
invention was almost as important as that of printing itself, did not
become commonly available until the 15th century A.D. and so is beyond
our present scope but inks, pens and other accessories concern us
now.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-648}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Ink]{.style_2} {#ink .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Writing ink is a liquid containing a colouring matter---mainly black,
when not specified otherwise---used for writing on paper, parchment, and
similar substances; the term may also be applied to viscous paste, known
as "printing ink" used in printing. Other sorts of ink---such as marking
or indelible inks, sympathetic or cobalt inks, or copying inks---are
outside the subject here dealt with, and will not be discussed. However,
ink in all its forms has not only been useful in all ages, but still
continues to be indispensable both for our spiritual necessities and for
conducting the ordinary business of life.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The word "ink"---as may be seen from the old forms]{.style_} [enke,
enk, henk]{.style_1}[, and]{.style_} [inke]{.style_1}[---derives from
Old French]{.style_} [enque]{.style_1} [(modern French being]{.style_}
[encre]{.style_1}[), itself a derivation from late Greek]{.style_}
[énkauston]{.style_1} [and late Latin]{.style_} [incaustum]{.style_1}[,
from which the Italian term for "ink",]{.style_}
[inchiostro]{.style_1}[, has derived;]{.style_} [incaustum]{.style_1}
[was the name of the (Tyrian) purple ink used by the Byzantine emperors
for their signatures. It was also called]{.style_}
[kinnábaris]{.style_1}[, in Greek, and]{.style_} [sacrum
incaustum,]{.style_1} [in Latin, but in later times]{.style_}
[kinnábaris]{.style_1} [became synonymous with the Latin term]{.style_}
[minium]{.style_1}[. The term]{.style_} [énkauston]{.style_1}[, derived
from the Greek verb,]{.style_} [nka ein]{.style_1} [(Latin,]{.style_}
[inurere]{.style_1}[, "to burn in"), may suggest some process of fixing
the ink by a caustic,]{.style_} [i.e.]{.style_1} ["burning", corrosive
substance; or else, it may be connected with "encaustic" painting, as
described by Pliny, xxxv, 122, 149, but neither suggestion is
satisfactory, or else, the term "ink" is etymologically not
exact.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Greek word]{.style_} [mélan]{.style_1}[, "black", and its Latin
equivalent]{.style_} [atramentum]{.style_1}[---hence, for instance, the
Polish term for "ink",]{.style_} [atrament]{.style_1}[---were used in
Graeco-Roman times and in late Latin for the common carbon ink (see p.
548 ff).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The German term for "ink",]{.style_} [Tinte]{.style_1}[, and the
Spanish]{.style_} [tinta]{.style_1}[, have derived from
Italian]{.style_} [tinta]{.style_1} [(=]{.style_}[colore]{.style_1}[,
"colour") and the Latin and Italian]{.style_} [tingere]{.style_1}[, "to
colour".]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-649}

::: calibre5
:::

## [ANCIENT CHINA AND INDIAN INK]{.style_2} {#ancient-china-and-indian-ink .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In China, ink---now known as "Chinese ink" or "Mandarin black"---is
usually moulded into sticks or small cakes of solid material, and is
sometimes perfumed; it is lamp-black, prepared with glue or sometimes
gum. It is attributed to T'ien Chu, supposed to have lived under the
legendary emperor Huang Ti (reputed to have lived in the early second
millennium B.C.). It is, at any rate, a very ancient invention. See also
p. 403.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[An ancient Chinese palette for fluid ink is reproduced in [Fig.
XI---1](#calibre_link-112){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[below]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Ink similar to "Chinese ink", but in fluid condition, is nowadays known
as "India ink", and is employed by artists, architects, civil engineers,
and others, who need a superior ink, for instance, for drawing plans and
maps. India ink, too, is occasionally manufactured in little cakes or
sticks. It is a "high-class" carbon ink (see p. 550). In Japan it is
prepared from pine soot and sesame-oil lamp-black, mixed with a liquid
glue obtained from the hides of cattle.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Some manufacturers use cuttle-fish for the same purpose; and it is
interesting that the Romans also used liquid obtained from cuttle-fish,
as we are informed by Cicero, 106---43 B.C. (]{.style_}[De Natura
Deorum]{.style_1}[, ii.50.127), and from a satire by A. Persius Flaccus,
A.D. 34---62 (iii.12).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-650}

::: calibre5
:::

## [EGYPTIAN CARBON INK ([Fig. XI---1](#calibre_link-112){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [above]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#egyptian-carbon-ink-fig.-xi1-above .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[In Egypt, ink was already employed in pre-Dynastic times,]{.style_}
[i.e.]{.style_1} [before the third millennium B.C. as we can see from
pottery bearing inscriptions in ink, which was found by Sir W. M.
Flinders Petrie in pre-Dynastic tombs. If thus, as would seem, the need
for writing ink in Egypt arose in pre-Dynastic times, its employment
became more general with the introduction of papyrus, on which
characters were formed by the application of coloured fluids by means of
a brush. Early Egyptian ink was carbon ink, which is thus the oldest ink
material known.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000098.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-112}

[[Fig. XI---1](#calibre_link-279){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Egyptian writing palettes (Cairo Museum): (below) Chinese
inkstand (Collection of Sir Herbert Ingram, Bt.). attributed by Sir
Herbert Ingram to the late Chou period, c. 250 B.C.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[We can see from the palettes ([Fig.
XI---1](#calibre_link-112){.calibre9},]{.style_} [above]{.style_1}[),
which have come down to us, that in Egypt the ink was in the form of
small cakes resembling, except in shape, modern water colours. Black ink
was prepared by mixing soot with water and a gummy substance. In Lucas's
opinion, the soot employed was in most cases scraped from cooking
vessels, but occasionally the carbon was specially prepared, and in
exceptional instances it was prepared from charcoal. However, the
chemical analysis of the writing ink of the Egyptian papyrus documents
or of the ostraca and pottery inscriptions, as well as of the remains of
the black-ink "cakes" on the palettes, shows that Egyptian black ink was
what we know as carbon ink; it was composed of very finely divided
carbon in a solution of some adhesive substance, which held the carbon
in suspension and fixed it to the writing ground (such as
papyrus).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-651}

::: calibre5
:::

## [COLOURED INKS]{.style_2} {#coloured-inks .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Egyptians also used inks of various colours, but generally only for
illustrated scenes and not in writing. Red, however, was in common use
for writing, and it is seen on early Egyptian papyri. Ordinary papyrus
documents or books were written in black ink, but titles and certain
passages, such as the first lines of columns or chapters, were often
written in red, in a manner similar to the "rubrics" as they appear in
medieval manuscripts, and even in some modern editions of the Prayer
Book.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Greek term for red ink was]{.style_} [m lánion kókkinon,]{.style_1}
[the Latin term]{.style_} [minium]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[rubrica]{.style_1}[. In the Middle Ages, red ink was made---apart from
purple ink, which was very expensive---from vermilion (sometimes from
vermilion and gum) or cinnabar. A volume written entirely in red ink, of
the ninth or tenth century, is in the British Museum (]{.style_}[Harl.
MS. 2795]{.style_1}[), but such manuscripts are extremely
rare.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Lucas has suggested that the Egyptian cakes of colour were probably
made by mixing finely ground pigment with gum and water and drying, and
were used in the same manner as modern water-colours, namely, by dipping
the painting brush in water and rubbing it on ink. Having examined
various specimens of pigments from Egyptian palettes, Lucas has found
that the materials employed were red ochre (for red), calcium carbonate
or calcium sulphate (for white), orpiment or sulphide of arsenic (for
bright yellow). Other analyses have shown that magnesium carbonate or
gypsum were also used for white; red lead
(]{.style_}[minium]{.style_1}[) for red; yellow ochre, containing in
some instances calcium sulphate, for yellow; limonite (one form of oxide
of iron) for brown; artificial green frit (a powdered glass) or
malachite, for green; and blue frit, for blue.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The employment of gold and silver as writing fluids will be discussed
in the book on]{.style_} [Illumination and Binding]{.style_1}[; see
also, in the present book, pp. 278 ff., 290 f. and]{.style_}
[passim]{.style_1}[. In a third- or fourth-century (A.D.) papyrus
preserved at Leiden there is an old recipe for manufacture of golden
ink.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-652}

::: calibre5
:::

## [WRITING INK IN GRAECO-ROMAN AND LATER TIMES]{.style_2} {#writing-ink-in-graeco-roman-and-later-times .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Ink (]{.style_}[deyô]{.style_1}[) is mentioned once in the Hebrew Bible
(]{.style_}[Jer]{.style_1}[. xxxvi, 18), where Baruch says that he wrote
Jeremiah's prophecies "in the book with ink". We have no means of
knowing what kind of ink it was. While W. R. Smith, referring
to]{.style_} [Ex]{.style_1}[. xxxii, 33, and]{.style_} [Num]{.style_1}[.
v, 23, has suggested that]{.style_} [deyô]{.style_1} [was made from
lamp-black, and could be washed off, in the opinion of other scholars,
it was not carbon ink, but iron-gall ink. If, however, we consider
talmudic information and the early Jewish tradition, we must assume
that]{.style_} [deyô]{.style_1} [was a carbon ink. On the other hand, in
the second century A.D., apparently a new ingredient was
added,]{.style_} [khálkanthon]{.style_1}[, which in this instance seems
to indicate sulphate of copper. Later, the]{.style_} [Mishnah]{.style_1}
[also mentions copperas, gall-nuts and gum.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-653}

::: calibre5
:::

## [CARBON INK ([Fig. XI---2](#calibre_link-110){.calibre13})]{.style_2} {#carbon-ink-fig.-xi2 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Lewis, who analysed the ink of the Early Hebrew ostraca discovered
at Lachish (South Palestine) in 1935 and assigned to]{.style_}
[c.]{.style_1} [587 B.C. (see]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [p.
240), has found that they were written with an iron-carbon mixture quite
unlike a carbon ink. He therefore has suggested that while the Hebrews
commonly used a mixed iron-carbon ink, they reserved carbon inks for
religious writings to avoid confusing erasures with worn-down
texts.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[It is generally agreed that, before the introduction of vellum (see
Chapter V), the Greeks and the Romans used carbon ink. They had various
kinds of ink, but we are mainly concerned with the following;
(i)]{.style_} [Mélan graphikón]{.style_1}[, in Greek (in the Byzantine
period, also called]{.style_} [melánion]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[atéramnon]{.style_1}[) or]{.style_} [atramentum librarium,]{.style_1}
[in Latin,]{.style_} [i.e]{.style_1}[. "book ink" or "writing ink"; this
was usually prepared of soot from pitch-pine, mixed with gum, or
vinegar; it was more unctuous than ours, and resembled printer's ink;
(2)]{.style_} [atramentum tectorium]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[pictorium]{.style_1}[, which was mainly used by painters; and
(3)]{.style_} [atramentum sutorium]{.style_1} [(in Greek,]{.style_}
[khálkanthon]{.style_1}[), which was mainly used to dye leather; it
probably contained sulphate of copper (see Cicero,]{.style_} [Ep. ad
familiares]{.style_1}[, ix, 21). We have sufficient literary evidence to
show that]{.style_} [atramentum librarium]{.style_1} [was carbon ink:
see Vitruvius, vii, 10:]{.style_} [ex fulgine factum
atramentum]{.style_1}[; Pliny (]{.style_}[Nat. Hist.]{.style_1} [xxxv,
6) mentions soot and gum as the main ingredients of writing
ink.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000099.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-110}

[[Fig. XI---2](#calibre_link-280){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Roman writing materials and implements as represented in wall-paintings
of Pompei (now preserved in the National Museum, Naples).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[In later Graeco-Roman times iron-gall writing ink (see below) was used,
and in course of time, its use became universal in Europe; but in the
East, carbon ink continued to be employed. Lucas mentions the following
two recipes for Oriental inks. (1) For carbon ink still prepared for
Coptic religious books, "put a quantity of incense on the ground and
round it place three stones or bricks, and, resting on these, an
earthenware dish bottom upwards, covered with a damp cloth; ignite the
incense. The carbon formed is deposited on the dish, from which it is
removed and made into ink by mixing with gum and water". (2) For
"Persian Ink", as described in an old Arabic book of the Cairo Royal
Library: "An earthenware vessel containing date stones and stoppered
with clay, is put over a fire until the next day; then it is removed and
allowed to cool; its contents, then, are ground and sifted, and made
into ink with gum arabic and water." Such ink---containing very little
free carbon---would be of poor quality.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[If we accept the principle that the perfect record ink should be
harmless to the manuscript and permanently readable however aged, then
carbon ink should be considered as superior to ordinary iron-gall inks;
these contain sulphuric acid which damages paper, especially good paper,
sometimes irreparably. Carbon ink has no harmful effect upon the
material written on, and it appears to be the most permanent of all
inks, because it is not bleached nor changed by atmospheric agencies,
such as sunlight.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[On the other hand, such ink requires frequent stirring to prevent the
carbon from sinking in the liquid; in other words, it easily becomes
thick, and clogs the pen. Moreover, while the perfect ink, when applied
to paper, should penetrate so as to be difficult of erasure, carbon ink
can be easily wiped out soon after writing. Hence, in Roman times, the
sponge (from Greek]{.style_} [spóngos]{.style_1}[) was one of the
regular implements of the]{.style_} [scriba librarius]{.style_1}
[(Suetonius,]{.style_} [Augustus]{.style_1}[, 85).]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-654}

::: calibre5
:::

## [IRON-GALL WRITING INK]{.style_2} {#iron-gall-writing-ink .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Modern common ink is essentially a solution of an iron salt, ferrous
sulphate, such as copperas or green vitriol, clear yellow tannin
nut-galls or other tannin-yielding substance, a preservative, and soft
water. The use of this decoction depends upon the formation of a bluish
substance, which is produced by exposure to the air. Such ink is known
as iron-gall ink.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The origin of iron-gall writing ink is generally dated to the Middle
Ages; the American authors of the standard work on]{.style_}
[Inks]{.style_1}[, give the date 1126. According to Lucas, it appeared
first on parchment assigned to the seventh or eighth century A.D.; and
Mitchell, who accepts this date, has argued that iron-gall ink was first
described in the eleventh century.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Wiesser's analysis of the ink on Fayyûm papyri has shown two kinds of
ink: carbon ink and iron ink; the latter would also seem to have been
employed on a papyrus of the fourth century A.D., analysed by Schubart.
But various specimens of ink on Coptic ostraca examined by W. E. Crum,
and numerous specimens on ostraca and papyri from Roman times and up to
the ninth century A.D., examined by Lucas, were all carbon ink. On the
other hand, in various instances of parchment documents examined by
Lucas and dated between the seventh and the twelfth centuries, the ink
was an iron compound.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In late Roman times such ink was already employed for writing on
vellum; of the Roman vellum manuscripts examined at the British Museum
in 1935, nine out of twelve were written with iron ink free of carbon;
amongst those so written were one of the earliest known vellum
documents, a second-century A.D. copy of Demosthenes,]{.style_} [De
falsa legatione,]{.style_1} [and the famous fourth-century]{.style_}
[Codex Sinaiticus]{.style_1} [(see Chapter V). [Fig.
V---10](#calibre_link-143){.calibre9}, A, and 11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Therefore, in considering the results of his analysis of the ink of the
Lachish ostraca, A. Lewis concludes that iron inks pre-dated classical
times, and that they developed with the use of skins as writing
material, from which carbon inks wear or wash off cleanly. It may be
assumed that both the origin and the development of the iron inks were
slow processes, lasting many centuries. "Permanent and imperishable
record or safety inks have been the subject of an unending quest"
(Lewis).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Philo of Byzantium (third century B.C.) in his treatise on]{.style_}
[Ancient Mathematicians]{.style_1}[, described a kind of sympathetic
ink, which may be considered as a non-coloured type of iron ink; it was
made of nut-galls; when the writing was completed and the document was
dipped in an extract of iron salt, this writing became nearly
black.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Theophilus, in his work]{.style_} [De diversis artibus]{.style_1} [(i,
40), written probably in the twelfth century, gives a recipe for the
manufacture of ink from thorn wood boiled down.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the Middle Ages ink was mainly produced in the monasteries. A
fifteenth-century Italian recipe informs us that iron-gall ink was then
universally known (at least, in the Christian world). In the sixteenth
century, we get information about its production from the Italians,
Gerolamo Cardano (1535), Alessio Piemontese (1557), and Giovan Battista
della Porta (1567). In the seventeenth century, Pietro Maria Canepario,
Professor of Medicine at Venice, wrote a curious book concerning inks,
in six parts (]{.style_}[De atramentis cujuscunque generis
opus]{.style_1}[, etc., 1619; an edition was printed in London in
1660).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Robert Boyle (1663), Otto Taccherini (1666), and especially the French
chemists Nicholas and Louis Lémery published works or articles on ink.
From the eighteenth century onwards, much scientific research was done
in this field. It will suffice to mention that the English chemist and
physician, William Lewis, found that the colouring of iron-gall ink
depends not only upon metallic iron, but also upon a reaction produced
by a vegetable extract. Thus, by using logwood he obtained an
improvement of colour without loss of permanence. R. W. Scheele (1786),
N. Denyeux (1793), A. Seguin (1795), Reids (1820), J. J. Berzelius
(1832), F. J. Runge (1847), A. Leonhardi (1856), and in more recent
times, O. Shuttig and G. S. Neumann may be mentioned amongst those who
developed ink production and the ink industry.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The importance of the study of ink for the dating of manuscripts and
for their attribution to a certain country is very great, and it has
been emphasized by eminent scholars, such as Prof. E. A. Lowe. "If
librarians"---he writes---"could be induced to grant permission, one
would like to submit the ink of our manuscripts to chemical analysis;
the experiment might yield instructive results. For instance, it could
establish whether the blue ink found in the ninth-century additions to
the Codex Bezae \... is identical with the blue ink in the manuscripts
of the Excerpts from St. Augustine made by Florus \...; if it is then it
too was made at Lyons. It might also tell us whether Northumbrian ink
differed from Kentish, Irish from English and Insular from Continental.
The only observation which a layman can safely make is that the ink in
Continental manuscripts has now a brownish hue, whereas the ink in
Insular manuscripts is mostly black and very fresh: some Insular
manuscripts might have been written yesterday, the Lindisfarne Gospels,
for example. There is another difference between Insular and Continental
manuscripts. In the latter it can often be noticed that the ink has
flaked off on the flesh-side of the leaf. Insular manuscripts are
remarkably free from this, both flesh-side and hair-side holding the ink
equally well. The Insular method of preparing the membrane probably
account for this."]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-655}

::: calibre5
:::

## [Writing Tools]{.style_2} {#writing-tools .calibre12}

[]{#calibre_link-656}

::: calibre5
:::

## [GRAECO-ROMAN TIMES ([Fig. XI---2](#calibre_link-110){.calibre13} and 3)]{.style_2} {#graeco-roman-times-fig.-xi2-and-3 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[For ancient Mesopotamia, see Chapter III, particularly p. 83 and [Fig.
III---1](#calibre_link-75){.calibre9} and 2,]{.style_} [f]{.style_1}[;
for ancient Egypt see Chapter IV (p. 158) and pp. 547 f., 557 and [Fig.
IV---1](#calibre_link-93){.calibre9},
[XI---1](#calibre_link-112){.calibre9},]{.style_}
[above]{.style_1}[.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-657}

::: calibre5
:::

## [STILUS]{.style_2} {#stilus .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The main writing tools of the Greeks and the Romans were the]{.style_}
[stilus]{.style_1} [and the reed-pen or]{.style_} [calamus]{.style_1}[.
The "stilus" (not stylus) was called in Greek]{.style_} [graph s,
grapheîon]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [graph dion]{.style_1}[; in late
writers,]{.style_} [stylos]{.style_1}[, and in Latin]{.style_}
[stilus]{.style_1}[---see Horace,]{.style_} [Sat]{.style_1}[. I, x,
72---or simply]{.style_} [ferrum]{.style_1} [("iron") ---see for
instance, Ovid,]{.style_} [Metam]{.style_1}[., ix, 521---or else, from
Greek,]{.style_} [graphium]{.style_1}[---see Ovid,]{.style_}
[Amores]{.style_1}[, I, xi, 23. It was an instrument of iron, bronze,
silver or other material, such as ivory (Ovid,]{.style_}
[Metam]{.style_1}[., ix, 521 ; Martial, xiv, 21) and was used for
writing on boards or waxen tablets (Plautus,]{.style_}
[Bacch]{.style_1}[., iv, 4, 63; Pliny, xxxiv, 139), the letters being
scratched with a sharp point. The other end of the stilus was rounded
into a knob or flattened, and was used, in the event of an error, to
deface what had been written, by smoothening the wax. Hence, the
expression]{.style_} [vertere stilum]{.style_1} [("to turn the stilus"),
for "blot out, correct".]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The case, in which the stilus was kept, was called in Greek]{.style_}
[graphiothék]{.style_1} [, and in Latin]{.style_}
[graphiarium]{.style_1} [(Martial, xiv, 21) or]{.style_} [graphiaria
theca]{.style_1} [(Suetonius,]{.style_} [Claudius]{.style_1}[,
35).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The iron stilus was a dangerous weapon, and in later times it was
prohibited by the Romans. Suetonius tells us that Caesar seized the arm
of Cassius in full Senate, and pierced it with his stilus. He also says
that Caligula excited the people to massacre a Roman senator with their
stili. Seneca mentions that a Roman knight, Erixo, having scourged his
son to death was attacked in the forum by the mob who stabbed him with
their iron stili, so that he narrowly escaped being killed, though the
emperor interposed his authority (]{.style_}[De Clementia,]{.style_1}
[i, §14).]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000101.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-36}

[[Fig. XI---3](#calibre_link-281){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Above) Craeco-Roman "poetess" with codex and stilus as represented in
a Pompeian wall-painting; (below) Roman stili and pens.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000102.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-263}

[[Fig. XI--4](#calibre_link-282){.calibre9}]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[(Left) A scribe as represented in a Bible written and illuminated in
Italy in A.D. 1169 (preserved in Certosa di Pisa; photo by Gabinetto
Fotografico Nazionale, Rome); (right) St. John, reading from a roll, as
represented in the Lindisfarne Gospels (British Museum, Gott. Nero. D.
iv).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000103.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. XI---5]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Byzantine scribe (Byzantine Gospels, Vatican Library, Urb. Gr. My. 2,
fol. 21 recto).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-658}

## [CALAMUS]{.style_2} {#calamus .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[For writing on papyrus the reed-pen (a stick of common reed,]{.style_}
[Paragamites communis]{.style_1}[) was used, at least from the third
century B.C. onwards; it was called in Greek]{.style_}
[kálamos]{.style_1} [(also]{.style_} [dónax grapheîos]{.style_1}[), and
in Latin]{.style_} [calamus]{.style_1} [(also]{.style_}
[canna]{.style_1}[). Reeds were used also for thatching and wall
building, for making mats, crates, and so on; hence, the exact term for
a reed-pen was]{.style_} [calamus scriptorius]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[chartarius.]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[At first, it was used with the end frayed or pulped; later, like the
quill-pen, it was cut to a point and split; it was sharpened with a
knife; in Greek]{.style_} [kalamoglypheîn,]{.style_1} [and in
Latin]{.style_} [calamum acuere]{.style_1} [or]{.style_}
[temperare]{.style_1} [(the last term appears also in modern Italian)
meant "to sharpen"; the penknife used was called in Greek]{.style_}
[glýphanon]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [smíl ,]{.style_1} [and in
Latin]{.style_} [scalprum librarium]{.style_1}[---see for instance
Tacitus,]{.style_} [Annal.,]{.style_1} [v, 8. Suitable calami came
chiefly from Egypt (Pliny, xvi, 36; Martial, xiv, 38) or Cnidus, on the
southern coast of Asia Minor (Ausonius,]{.style_} [Epistles,]{.style_1}
[vii). Some specimens of ancient reeds cut like a pen are preserved in
the British Museum.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The calamus was introduced into Egypt in Graeco-Roman times, and Sir W.
M. Flinders Petrie discovered in that country a number of such pens
belonging to the Roman period. According to Winlock, the complete
adoption of the split pen by the Egyptians "may be safely related to the
adoption of the Greek alphabet for writing the Egyptian language during
the fourth century A.D.", i.e. to the creation of the Coptic alphabet.
(In fact, the Coptic alphabet originated much earlier: see p. 307
and]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [p. 467 ff.)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In the sixth or seventh century, the monks of the Christian monastery
of Thebes (see Winlock and Crum,]{.style_} [The Monastery of Epiphanius
at Thebes]{.style_1}[) were using reed split pens. "The pens were made
of reeds, which averaged about 1 inch in diameter. An unused new pen . .
. was 26.5 cm. long. The old pens had been resharpened so often that
finally they were mere stumps less than 6 cm. long . . . and one of them
had been lengthened by sticking a bit of wood into the end."]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Reeds continued in use to some extent through the Middle Ages; in Italy
they appear to have survived into the fifteenth century. Ranwolff, who
travelled in 1583, wrote that the "Turks, Moors, and eastern nations,
use canes for pens, which are small and hollow within, smooth without,
and of a brownish red colour". Later travellers, such as Halhed,
Tavernier, and others, related that the Indians, the Tartars, and the
Persians "write with small reeds bearing the hand exceedingly lightly".
In some countries---such as Egypt, India and Persia---the use of
reed-pens lingered on down to our own times, though nowadays it has
gradually died out. In eastern and south-eastern Asia, as already
mentioned, bamboo canes, cut to about the length and thickness of our
pen, are still used for writing.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Corresponding to our steel pen were the Roman metal reeds of bronze or
silver, of which a few have been found in Italy, one in England (which
is preserved in the British Museum), and one near Cologne; such pens,
however, were not greatly used. A metal pen, about 2 inches long, shaped
and slit after the fashion of a quill pen, was found by Prof. Waldstein
in the so-called tomb of Aristotle at Eretria (modern Aletria), the
ancient seaport of the Greek island of Euboea.]{.style_}

::: calibre11
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000104.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. XI--6]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Late Byzantine scribe (Bodleian Library, Oxford, MS. Can. Gr.
122).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-659}

## [ACCESSORY WRITING MATERIALS]{.style_2} {#accessory-writing-materials .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The case in which the reed-pens were kept was called in Greek]{.style_}
[kalamothék]{.style_1} [or]{.style_} [kalamís,]{.style_1} [and in
Latin]{.style_} [calamarium]{.style_1} [(hence]{.style_}
[calamaio,]{.style_1} [the Italian word for "inkstand") or]{.style_}
[theca calamaria,]{.style_1} [also]{.style_} [theca libraria,]{.style_1}
[or]{.style_} [theca cannarum,]{.style_1} [or else]{.style_}
[graphiarium.]{.style_1} [In the same case the inkstand,]{.style_}
[atramentarium]{.style_1} [(in Greek,]{.style_} [melandókon]{.style_1}
[or]{.style_} [melandokheíon]{.style_1}[) was usually kept. In the
famous Diocletian's edict]{.style_} [De Pretiis rerum
venalium]{.style_1} [(]{.style_}[Corp. Inscr. Lat.,]{.style_1} [iii,
801), the]{.style_} [calamarium]{.style_1} [is referred to as made of
leather. Sometimes, however, separate receptacles were provided for the
ink and the reed-pens.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000105.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. XI---7]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Armenian scribe (illuminated Armenian Gospel-book, National Library,
Paris, Armén., 18).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[In Egypt, the pens were kept in recesses on the palettes which also
contained depressions (usually circular, but sometimes rectangular) for
the cakes of ink. See [Fig.
XI--1](#calibre_link-112){.calibre9},]{.style_} [above.]{.style_1}
[These palettes were made of various materials such as wood, stone,
often alabaster or serpentine, even wood covered with gold (such a
specimen was found in the tomb of Tutankhamen, as also was a beautifully
decorated pen-holder; both are preserved in the Cairo Museum).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In Chapter V, in the section dealing with]{.style_} [The
Scriptorium]{.style_1} [other accessory writing implements have been
mentioned. There can be hardly any doubt that similar tools were used in
Graeco-Roman times. The late M. R. James has pointed out that a number
of epigrams in the]{.style_} [Palatine Anthology,]{.style_1} [vi, 62--8,
295, "mostly late, but all variations on an ancient theme", give lists
of various Greek writing implements, including---apart from those which
have already been referred to---the]{.style_} [mólibdos]{.style_1} [(a
disc of lead with which lines were ruled), the]{.style_}
[kanón]{.style_1} [(the ruler which served to keep the lines and columns
straight), and the]{.style_} [kis ris]{.style_1} [(the pumice stone,
with which the nib of the pen was smoothed, and the roughness of the
papyrus or parchment was rubbed away).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000106.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[Fig. XI---8]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[Carolingian scribe (the Lorsch Gospels, eleventh century: written and
illuminated in the Carolingian school of Trèves (Vatican Library, Pal.
Lat. 50; fol. 67, verso).]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-660}

## [THE QUILL ([Fig. XI---4](#calibre_link-263){.calibre13},]{.style_2} [left]{.style_2}[)]{.style_2} {#the-quill-fig.-xi4-left .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The quill-feather (in Latin]{.style_} [penna]{.style_1}[), made from
the wing feather of geese, swans (swan-quills were much valued),
peacocks, crows (crow-quills were used for fine lines), or turkeys, was
used in the West in early medieval times, but it is not easy to
ascertain when it was introduced. It is possible that, as soon as vellum
came into general use, so obviously convenient an implement, always
ready to hand, came to be used, particularly in places where reeds of a
kind suitable for writing could not be had. Indeed, the flexible
pressure of the quill-feather, which in heavy strokes might have proved
too much for the fragile papyrus, was much more suitable for the hard
but smooth surface of the parchment than the non-flexible reed-pen.
Because of its suitability for writing on vellum, the quill-feather was
the main pen of the Middle Ages, as well as of modern times down to the
nineteenth century.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[However, the word "pen" (Lat.]{.style_} [henna]{.style_1}[) is first
mentioned by an anonymous historian who tells us that, to enable the
unlettered founder of the Ostrogothic kingdom in Italy, Theodoric the
Great (A.D. 455--526), to write his name, he was provided with a stencil
plate, through which he drew with a]{.style_} [penna]{.style_1} [the
strokes which formed the first four letters of his name. In time, the
terms "pen" and "calamus" became synonymous and interchangeable. It is,
therefore, impossible to say when the quill-feather superseded the
reed-pen. There is no doubt, however, that for quite a long period both
the calamus and the quill-feather were in use. St. Isidore of Seville or
Isidorus Hispalensis (]{.style_}[c]{.style_1}[. 560--636), mentions both
as being used in his time (]{.style_}[instrument scribae calamus et
penna. Ex his enim verba paginis infiguntur, sed calamus arboris est,
penna avis, cuius acumen in duo dividitur, in toto corpore unitate
servata]{.style_1} [\[]{.style_}[Ethymologiae]{.style_1}[, vi, 14; ed.
Migne,]{.style_} [Patrologia Latina]{.style_1}[, 82.241\]).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[[Figs. XI--4](#calibre_link-263){.calibre9}--8 reproduce medieval
scribes as represented in Byzantine, Northumbrian, early Italian,
Balcan, Armenian, and Carolingian codices.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-661}

::: calibre5
:::

## [THE STEEL-PEN]{.style_2} {#the-steel-pen .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[The quill-feather could not last long, and each user, as in the case of
the reed-pen, had to cut or sharpen his quill-pen with a penknife.
Therefore, owing to the loss of time involved in sharpening the points
of quill-nibs, various attempts were made either to employ other
materials, or to give durability to the quill-feather by gilding the nib
(Watt, in 1818), or by attaching to it horn or tortoiseshell tips (such
nibs, invented in 1823 by J. I. Hawkins and S. Morden, were beautifully
decorated). All these attempts were unsuccessful.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Around 1780, a split-ring manufacturer, S. Harrison of Birmingham,
produced a metallic pen for the chemist Dr. J. Priestly; in 1803, Wise
introduced in London the complete steel nib, or rather the split
cylinder steel-pen. In 1805, Breithaupt of Kassel marketed silver and
steel pens: they were too heavy, too hard, and non-flexible. The nib was
patented by Donkin in 1808.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[In 1809, the English engineer J. Bramah (1748-1814) patented a machine
for cutting goose-feathers into three or four nibs to be used with a
pen-holder. In 1810, the first patent was granted in America to P.
Williamson (of Baltimore) for the manufacture of metallic pens. In 1822,
J. Mitchell invented the machine-made pen. In 1830, J. Perry of
Birmingham, assisted by Mason, patented his system to produce pens which
were so flexible that they could compete with quill-pens. It was the
birth of the modern pen, and Birmingham became the first centre of the
steel-pen industry, of which it is still one of the main centres. In
1845, Sonnecken and Renleaux invented special pens for Gothic writing.
Mass production of steel-pens was started in 1860 at Camden (New Jersey,
U.S.A.). Steel-pens, however, did not displace the quill-feather until
late in the nineteenth century, and soon afterwards the gold-nibbed
fountain-pen conquered the market.]{.style_}

[]{#calibre_link-662}

::: calibre5
:::

## [HAIR BRUSHES]{.style_2} {#hair-brushes .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[Fine hair brushes---a very early Chinese invention, see p. 407 f.---are
still used by the Chinese for their writing: they first liquefy their
ink, then dip their brushes into it. In the West also, fine hair brushes
were used, but mainly for the large capital letters. They were so
employed until the sixteenth century; even after the invention of
printing, they were used mainly by illuminators for the drawing of large
capital letters. A still finer brush was used in applying gold to
illumination; this was called in Greek]{.style_} [kondilion,]{.style_1}
[and in Latin]{.style_} [penicillus;]{.style_1} [hence, the word
"pencil", which literally means "little tail". This finer type is still
used by artists in painting, and is made of hog's bristles or finer
camel hair, fitch, or sable. The larger pencil brushes are sometimes set
in tin tubes; the smaller ones in feather quills.]{.style_}
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: {#calibre_link-283 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-18}

::: calibre7
:::

### [GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY]{.style_2} {#general-bibliography .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. Janin,]{.style_} [Le Livre]{.style_1}[, Paris, 1870.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. Egger,]{.style_} [Histoire du Livre]{.style_1}[, etc., Paris,
1880.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. Bouchot,]{.style_} [Le Livre,]{.style_1} [Paris, 1886 ;]{.style_}
[The Book,]{.style_1} [etc. (Engl. transl.), London, 1890.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[O. Noel,]{.style_} [Histoire du commerce,]{.style_1} [Paris,
1891.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. H. Putnam,]{.style_} [Books and their Makers during the Middle
Ages,]{.style_1} [London and New York, 1896.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. Wattenbach,]{.style_} [Das Schriftwesen im Mittelalter,]{.style_1}
[3rd ed., Leipsic, 1896.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[L. Blau,]{.style_} [Studien zum althebraeischen Buchwesen,]{.style_1}
[Strasbourg, 1902.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. E. Sandys,]{.style_} [A History of Classical Scholarship,]{.style_1}
[etc., Cambridge, 1903-8; 3rd ed., 1921.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. M. Thompson,]{.style_} [Handb. of Greek and Latin
Palaeography,]{.style_1} [3rd ed. London, 1906;]{.style_} [An
Introduction to Greek and Lat. Paleography,]{.style_1} [Oxford,
1912.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. J. Davenport,]{.style_} [The Book,]{.style_1} [etc., London,
1907;]{.style_} [The Book,]{.style_1} [etc., New York, 1908;]{.style_}
[Byways among English Books,]{.style_1} [London, 1927.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. Poppenberg,]{.style_} [Buchkunst,]{.style_1} ["Die Kunst", vols.
57-8, 1908.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Cim,]{.style_} [Le Livre,]{.style_1} [5 vols., Paris,
1908.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. Morris,]{.style_} [The Ideal Book,]{.style_1} [London,
1908.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. Burford Rawlings,]{.style_} [The Story of Books,]{.style_1} [London,
1910.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[B. Haendke, in "REPERTORIUM FUER KUNSTWISSENSCHAFT", 1911.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[V. Gardthausen,]{.style_} [Griechische Palaeographie,]{.style_1}
[I,]{.style_} [Das Buchwesen,]{.style_1} [2 end ed., Leipsic,
1911.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. W. Pollard,]{.style_} [Fine Books,]{.style_1} [London,
1912.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. A. Lowe,]{.style_} [The Beneventan Script,]{.style_1} [etc., Oxford,
1914;]{.style_} [Scriptura Beneventana,]{.style_1} [Oxford,
1929;]{.style_} [Codices Latin antiquiores,]{.style_1} [etc., 5 vols.,
Oxford, 1934-1950.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[The Art of the Book,]{.style_1} ["Studio", Special number, London,
1914.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[M. Gerlach,]{.style_} [Das alte Buch und seine Ausstattung
vom]{.style_1} [15 bis zum 19 Jahrh., Vienna, Gerlach and Wiedling,
1918.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. Madan,]{.style_} [Books in Manuscript,]{.style_1} [London, 1920
(latest ed.).]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[M. Audin,]{.style_} [Le Livre,]{.style_1} [etc., Lyon, 1921;]{.style_}
[Le Livre,]{.style_1} [etc., Paris, 1927.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[T. Birt,]{.style_} [Aus dem Leben der Antike,]{.style_1} [Leipsic, 4th
cd., 1922.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Bauckner,]{.style_} [Einfuehrung in das mittelalt.
Schrifttum,]{.style_1} [Munich, 1923.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Meillet and M. Cohen,]{.style_} [Les Langues du monde,]{.style_1}
[Paris, 1924.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[B. Adarjukukoff and A. Sidaroff,]{.style_} [The Book in
Russia,]{.style_1} [2 vols. (in Russian), Moscow, 1924.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[P. G. Angoulvent,]{.style_} [The Development of the Book,]{.style_1}
["Fleuron", London, 1924.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[S. De Ricci, ed.,]{.style_} [Catalogue de l'Exposition du livre
italien,]{.style_1} [etc., Paris, 1926.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. H. Hitchcock,]{.style_} [The Building of a Book,]{.style_1} [New
York, 1927; 2nd ed., 1929.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. G. Kenyon,]{.style_} [Ancient Books and Modern
Discoveries,]{.style_1} [Chicago, 1927.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. J. Sawyer and F. J. Harvey Darton,]{.style_} [English Books,
1575]{.style_1}[---]{.style_}[1900,]{.style_1} [2 vols., Westminster,
1927.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[R. B. McKerrow,]{.style_} [Introduction to Bibliograply for Literary
Students,]{.style_1} [Oxford, 1927.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. Dana Orcutt,]{.style_} [In Quest of the Perfect Book,]{.style_1}
[etc., London, 1927;]{.style_} [The Book in Italy during the XVth and
XVIth centuries,]{.style_1} [London, 1928.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. Stemplinger,]{.style_} [Buchhandel im Altertum]{.style_1}[, Munich,
1927.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. von Le Coq,]{.style_} [Buried Treasures of Chinese
Turkestan,]{.style_1} [London, 1928.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. Bohatta,]{.style_} [Einfuehrung in die Buchkunde,]{.style_1}
[Vienna, 1928.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. Guppy,]{.style_} [Stepping-stones to the Art of
Typography,]{.style_1} [Manchester, 1928;]{.style_} [Human
Records,]{.style_1} [etc., "BULL. OF THE JOHN RYLANDS LIBRARY",
Manchester, 1942.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[S. Dahl,]{.style_} [Geschichte des Buches,]{.style_1} [Leipsic,
1928;]{.style_} [Histoire du Livre,]{.style_1} [etc., Paris, 1933; Germ.
2nd ed., 1941.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. M. Kimball,]{.style_} [Story of Books,]{.style_1} [Dalla (Texas),
1929.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. H. Boulton,]{.style_} [The Romance of the British Museum,]{.style_1}
[London, 1931.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[C. Dawson,]{.style_} [The Making of Europe,]{.style_1} [London,
1932.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[R. N. D. Wilson,]{.style_} [Books and their Histary,]{.style_1} [New
York, 1933.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[B. Boyce,]{.style_} [Progressive Bookcraft,]{.style_1} [Oxford,
1934.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. B. Poynton,]{.style_} [Books and Authors,]{.style_1} ["GREECE AND
ROME", 1934.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[M. Lipman,]{.style_} [How Men kept their Records,]{.style_1} [New York,
1934.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[M. Ilin,]{.style_} [Black on White,]{.style_1} [etc., London,
1937.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[B. H. Newdigate,]{.style_} [The Art of the Book,]{.style_1} [London,
1938.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[K. Loeffler and J. Kirchner, ed.,]{.style_} [Lexicon des gesamten
Buchwesens,]{.style_1} [3 vols., Leipsic, 1934---7.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[D. C. McMurtrie,]{.style_} [Book: the Story of Printing and
Bookmaking,]{.style_1} [New York, 1937; London, 1938; 3rd cd., New York,
1943, Oxford, 1944.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. Lesne,]{.style_} [Les livres, 'Scriptoria' et
bibliothèques,]{.style_1} [Lille, 1938.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. Curtius,]{.style_} [Schrift and Buchmetaphorik,]{.style_1} [etc.,
Halle, 1942.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[F. Harrison,]{.style_} [Book about Books,]{.style_1} [London,
1943.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Esdaile,]{.style_} [The British Museum Library,]{.style_1} [London,
1946.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. Foerster,]{.style_} [Mittelalt. Buch- und
Urkundeninschriften,]{.style_1} [Bern, 1946.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[W. Levison,]{.style_} [England and the Continent in the Eighth
Century,]{.style_1} [Oxford, 1946.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[J. Vorstius,]{.style_} [Grundzuege der
Bibliotheksgeschichte,]{.style_1} [4th ed., Leipsic, 1948.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. Leyh,]{.style_} [Handbuch der Bibliothekswissenshaft,]{.style_1}
[2nd ed., vol. 1:]{.style_} [Schrift und Buch,]{.style_1} [Leipsic,
1949.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[D. Diringer,]{.style_} [The Alphabet,]{.style_1} [2nd ed., London and
New York, 1949.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. Lehmann-Haupt, ed.,]{.style_} [One Hundred Books about
Bookmaking,]{.style_1} [New York and Oxford, 1949.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[K. Jacob,]{.style_} [Quellenkunde d. deutschen Geschichte im
Mittelatter,]{.style_1} [2nd vol., 4th ed., Berlin, 1949.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[G. A. Catton,]{.style_} [ABC of Bookcraft,]{.style_1} [London,
1950.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[R. Latouche,]{.style_} [Textes d'histoire médiévale,]{.style_1} [etc.,
Paris, 1951.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. R. Sawyer,]{.style_} [Books are People,]{.style_1} [Portland, Ore.,
1951.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[P. A. Bennett, ed.,]{.style_} [Books and Printing,]{.style_1}
[Cleveland, 1951.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[H. C. Gardiner, ed.,]{.style_} [Great Books,]{.style_1} [New York,
1951.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[S. Jennett,]{.style_} [Making of Books,]{.style_1} [London,
1951.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[E. Mehl,]{.style_} [Deutsche Bibliotheksgeschichte,]{.style_1} [and B.
Bischoff,]{.style_} [Palaeographic,]{.style_1} [in "DEUTSCHE PHILOLOGIE
IM AUFRISS" (1951\--2), col. 315-78, and 379---451.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A. Allen,]{.style_} [Story of the Book,]{.style_1} [London,
1952.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[P. A. Schneider and F. Wormald, in "BULL. OF THE JOHN RYLANDS LIBRARY,"
Manchester, 1952.]{.style_}
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: {#calibre_link-284 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-19}

::: calibre7
:::

### [INDEX]{.style_2} {#index .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

[Proper names include Territories, Peoples, Languages and Scripts;
modern authorities (quoted in the bibliography or cited in the text)
have been omitted.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

['ABBASID]{.style_}

[Abbeys;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Monasteries]{.style_}

[Abbo]{.style_}

[Abbreviations]{.style_}

[Abdi-Khiba]{.style_}

['Abdullah III;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Al-Ma'm n]{.style_}

[Aberdeenshire]{.style_}

[Abhidhamma]{.style_}

[Abingdon]{.style_}

[Abufaraj;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Bar-Hebraeus]{.style_}

[Abulpharagius;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Bar-Hebraeus]{.style_}

[Ab S lih]{.style_}

[Ab s r]{.style_}

[Abyssinia]{.style_}

[Academy]{.style_}

[Accents]{.style_}

[Accessory writing materials]{.style_}

[Accius (L.)]{.style_}

[Accordion method;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Concertina
method]{.style_}

[Account Book]{.style_}

[Achemenid(ae)]{.style_}

[Acoustic devices]{.style_}

[Acta Synodi I]{.style_}

[Action photographs]{.style_}

[Acts]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---------of Martyrs]{.style_}

[---------of the Apostles;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Codex Laudianus
(Graeco-Latin)]{.style_}

[Acute-angled character]{.style_}

[Adamnán]{.style_}

[Aedan mac Gabrain]{.style_}

[Aelfheah (Bishop)]{.style_}

[Aelfric (Abbot)]{.style_}

[Aelfric (Archbishop of Canterbury)]{.style_}

[Aelfric (Archbishop of York)]{.style_}

[Aelius Tubero]{.style_}

[Aeneid;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Virgil]{.style_}

[Aeolian lyric poets]{.style_}

[Aeschylus]{.style_}

[Aethelberht (Archbishop)]{.style_}

[Aethelberht (King)]{.style_}

[Aethelmaer]{.style_}

[Aethelred II Unread]{.style_}

[Aethelweard]{.style_}

[Aethelwold (St.)]{.style_}

[Afghanistan]{.style_}

[Africa(n)]{.style_}

[Africanus]{.style_}

[Agade]{.style_}

[Agave Americana;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [also Amatl]{.style_}

[Agglutinative languages]{.style_}

[Aghvanir;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Albania (Colchis)]{.style_}

[Agnean, Agni]{.style_}

[Agram; see Zagreb]{.style_}

[A. H. (Anno Hegirae)]{.style_}

[Aha]{.style_}

[Ahaucan May;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Ahkin May]{.style_}

[Ahaz]{.style_}

[Ahkin May]{.style_}

[Ahura Mazdah]{.style_}

[Aidan (St.)]{.style_}

['Ain Feshkha]{.style_}

[Ajiki]{.style_}

[Akhenaton]{.style_}

[Akhetaton]{.style_}

[Akhmim(ic)]{.style_}

[Akkadian(s)]{.style_}

[Alabaster]{.style_}

[Alam t]{.style_}

[Alba (Scotland)]{.style_}

[Albania (Colchis), Alban(s)]{.style_}

[Albanian]{.style_}

[Al-B run]{.style_}

[Albums of calligraphy,------painting]{.style_}

[Alburnus Major]{.style_}

[Alcaeus]{.style_}

[Alchemy]{.style_}

[Alcman]{.style_}

[Alcubierre (Roco Joaquin de)]{.style_}

[Alcuin]{.style_}

[Aldfrith (King)]{.style_}

[Aldhelm]{.style_}

[Aldred the Priest]{.style_}

[Aleppo]{.style_}

[Alexander the Great]{.style_}

[Alexandria]{.style_}

[Alexandrian Museum and Library (Alexandrina)]{.style_}

[Alexis]{.style_}

[Aleyan Ba'al]{.style_}

[Alfonso V the Magnanimous]{.style_}

[Alfred the Great]{.style_}

[Al-Hall j]{.style_}

['Ali ibn-Hazm]{.style_}

[Aljamiah]{.style_}

[Allah]{.style_}

[Al-Ma'm n]{.style_}

[Al-Med na]{.style_}

[Alphabet;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [under individual
alphabets.]{.style_}

[Altamira]{.style_}

[Alvan(s);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Alban(s)]{.style_}

[Amadjur]{.style_}

[Amalgamation ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Blending]{.style_}
[and]{.style_1} [Compromises]{.style_}

[Amate, Amatl paper]{.style_}

[Ambrose (St.)]{.style_}

[Ambrosian Library;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Milan]{.style_}

[Amenti]{.style_}

[America(n)]{.style_}

[Amiata (Monte); Amiatinus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Codex
Amiatinus]{.style_}

[Ammianus Marcellinus]{.style_}

[Amoor Cork Tree]{.style_}

[Amorite(s)]{.style_}

[Amphitheatrica (Papyrus)]{.style_}

[Amra Choluim Chille (Elegy on St. Columba)]{.style_}

[Amsterdam (Indian Institute)]{.style_}

[Amulets]{.style_}

[Amun]{.style_}

[Anacreon of Teos]{.style_}

[Analects of Confucius]{.style_}

[Analte(h); see Amate]{.style_}

[Analytic writing]{.style_}

[Anatolia(n)]{.style_}

[Ancient Middle East]{.style_}

[Ancus Martius]{.style_}

[Aneirin]{.style_}

[Angad]{.style_}

[Angliae Notitiae et Lustratio; see Domesday Book]{.style_}

[Anglian]{.style_}

[Angling]{.style_}

[Anglo-Celtic contributions to the development of the medieval
book]{.style_}

[-------Christian culture : its spread]{.style_}

[-------Irish]{.style_}

[-------Latin]{.style_}

[-------Saxon(s);---Chronicles;---MSS.: their classification]{.style_}

[Animism]{.style_}

[Annals of Spring and Autumn]{.style_}

[Annals of the Kingdom of Ireland]{.style_}

[Annals of Tigernach]{.style_}

[Annam]{.style_}

[Anthologies]{.style_}

[Anthony]{.style_}

[Anthropology]{.style_}

[Antimony]{.style_}

[Antinopolis]{.style_}

[Antioch]{.style_}

[Antiochus Epiphanes]{.style_}

[Antiphonary;---of Bangor;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Bangor]{.style_}

[Antiquity;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Egypt, Greece, Hebrew,
Mesopotamia, Rome, etc.]{.style_}

[Anyang]{.style_}

[Apellicon]{.style_}

[Aphorisms]{.style_}

[Aphraates, Aphrahat]{.style_}

[Aphr m (St.);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Ephraem]{.style_}

[Apocryphal book]{.style_}

[Apollonius Rhodius]{.style_}

[Apollos]{.style_}

[Appian (Appianus of Alexandria)]{.style_}

[Appius Claudius]{.style_}

[Aquinas (Thomas, St.)]{.style_}

[Arabia(n), Arabic, Arabs]{.style_}

[Arab(ic)-Persian;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Persian-Arabic]{.style_}

[Aral Sea]{.style_}

[Aram, Aramaean(s), Aramaic]{.style_}

[Aramaeo-Indian;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Kharoshthi]{.style_}

[Aranyakas]{.style_}

[Aratus]{.style_}

[Archilochus]{.style_}

[Archimedes]{.style_}

[Architecture]{.style_}

[Arcot]{.style_}

[Arethas of Patras]{.style_}

[Argyll(shire)]{.style_}

[Arhats]{.style_}

[Aristarchus]{.style_}

[Aristeides (Publius Aelius)]{.style_}

[Aristides,]{.style_} [Apology]{.style_1}

[Aristocracy]{.style_}

[Aristophanes]{.style_}

[Aristophanes of Byzantium]{.style_}

[Aristotle]{.style_}

[Armadillo]{.style_}

[Armagh;---Gospels;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Book of Armagh]{.style_}

[Armarius]{.style_}

[Armenia(n)]{.style_}

[Armorican (dialect in Brittany)]{.style_}

[Arno of Salzburg]{.style_}

[Arrian]{.style_}

[Arsinoë;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Fayyûm]{.style_}

[Arthur (King)]{.style_}

[Arthurian legend(s),---romance]{.style_}

[Art(istic)]{.style_}

[Aryan(s)]{.style_}

[Aryan, Aryo-Indian;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Kharoshthi]{.style_}

[Ash]{.style_}

[Ashburnham House (Westminster)]{.style_}

[Ashmolean Museum]{.style_}

[Ashur]{.style_}

[Ashurbanipal]{.style_}

[Asia; ---Minor]{.style_}

[A oka]{.style_}

[Assamese]{.style_}

[Assassins]{.style_}

[Asser]{.style_}

[Assyria(n),]{.style_}

[Assyriologist(s)]{.style_}

[Astrolabes]{.style_}

[Astrology]{.style_}

[Astronomical sciences]{.style_}

[Atalanus]{.style_}

[Athanasian Creed]{.style_}

[Athanasius (St.)]{.style_}

[Atharva-Veda]{.style_}

[Athelmus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Aldhelm]{.style_}

[Athelstan (King)]{.style_}

[Athenaeus]{.style_}

[Athenaíõn Politeía;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Aristotle]{.style_}

[Athenians, Athens]{.style_}

[Atlantic (Ocean)]{.style_}

[Atramentrum;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Ink]{.style_}

[Atrectus]{.style_}

[Atticus]{.style_}

[Augusta (Papyrus)]{.style_}

[Augustine (St.)]{.style_}

[Augustine (St., of Canterbury);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [also St.
Augustine Gospels]{.style_}

[Augustinians;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Austin]{.style_}

[Augustus]{.style_}

['Auja el-Hafir]{.style_}

[Aulic scripts]{.style_}

[Aulus Gellius]{.style_}

[Aurelius (Emperor)]{.style_}

[Ausonius]{.style_}

[Austin canons,---friars]{.style_}

[Australasia]{.style_}

[Australia(n)]{.style_}

[Austria]{.style_}

[Austriac]{.style_}

[Austro-Asiatic]{.style_}

[Avesta]{.style_}

[Avicenna]{.style_}

[Avrom n Dagh]{.style_}

[Axum]{.style_}

[Azerbaijan]{.style_}

[Aztec(s)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[BABYLON(ia,-ian)]{.style_}

[Bacchylides]{.style_}

[Bacon (Roger)]{.style_}

[Bactria(n)]{.style_}

[Bactro-Pali; see Kharoshthi]{.style_}

[Baebius (H.) Pamphilus]{.style_}

[Baeda;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Beda, Bede]{.style_}

[Baghd d]{.style_}

[Baikal (Lake)]{.style_}

[Baked clay;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Clay tablets]{.style_}

[Bakhsh l MS.]{.style_}

[Balearic Islands]{.style_}

[Bali Island]{.style_}

[Balkans]{.style_}

[Balkh]{.style_}

[Ballads]{.style_}

[Ballymote (Book of)]{.style_}

[Balochi]{.style_}

[Balti]{.style_}

[Baltic]{.style_}

[Baltimore]{.style_}

[Baluchistan]{.style_}

[Bamboo,---canes;---screening]{.style_}

[Bamborough, Bamburgh]{.style_}

[Bangor (Ireland);---Antiphonary]{.style_}

[Bangor (Wales)]{.style_}

[Barbarians]{.style_}

[Barcelona (Central Library)]{.style_}

[Bards]{.style_}

[Bar-Hebraeus]{.style_}

[Bark (Tree-)]{.style_}

[Bar-Kokhba]{.style_}

[Baruch; Book of---]{.style_}

[Basalt]{.style_}

[Basil (St.)]{.style_}

[Basque]{.style_}

[Bas-reliefs]{.style_}

[Bataks]{.style_}

[Bath]{.style_}

[Battle of Actium (Poem)]{.style_}

[Bayeux Tapestry]{.style_}

[Beatus (St.) de Liebana]{.style_}

[Bebbanburgh ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Bamborough]{.style_}

[Beda, Bedae, Bede]{.style_}

[Beech (-bark, -tablets, -tree, -sticks, etc.)]{.style_}

[Beginnings;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Origins]{.style_}

[Behnessa;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Oxyrhynchus]{.style_}

[Belshazzar]{.style_}

[Benedict Biscop]{.style_}

[Benedict (St.)]{.style_}

[Benedictine monasteries,---Order, etc.]{.style_}

[Benedictional of St. Aethelwold]{.style_}

[Benedictionals]{.style_}

[Beneventan script]{.style_}

[Beng l( )]{.style_}

[Benkulen]{.style_}

[Beowulf]{.style_}

[Berber]{.style_}

[Berlin (Academy of Science, State Museums, and other Institutions) ;
---Genesis]{.style_}

[Berne]{.style_}

[Bertha (Queen)]{.style_}

[Bethlem]{.style_}

[Beza]{.style_}

[Bh rja ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Bark]{.style_}

[Bible (and allied words);---versions]{.style_}[see also]{.style_1}
[Greek Bible, Latin Bible, Septuagint, Vetus Latina, Vulgate, and under
Coptic, Irish, Syriac, etc.]{.style_}

[Bibliography]{.style_}[and passim]{.style_1}

[Bibliopegi (Bookbinders);]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Bookbinders]{.style_}

[Bibliophiles]{.style_}

[Bihar( )]{.style_}

[Bihz d]{.style_}

[Bilingual MSS.;---palimpsests]{.style_}

[Billfrith]{.style_}

[Binding ;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Book-binding]{.style_}

[Birch bark;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Bark]{.style_}

[Birinus]{.style_}

[Birmingham]{.style_}

[Birr]{.style_}

[Black arts;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Magic(al);---Book of Carmarthen
;---Clanranald;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Book of
Clanranald;---Canons;---Letter;---Sea]{.style_}

[Blank reverse pages]{.style_}

[Blending of cultures]{.style_}

[Block-printing]{.style_}

[Boards;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Wooden tablets]{.style_}

[Bobbio]{.style_}

[Bóc;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Book]{.style_}

[Boccaccio (Giovanni)]{.style_}

[Bochineria nivea]{.style_}

[Bodleian Library (at Oxford)]{.style_}

[Bodley (Sir Thomas)]{.style_}

[Boëthius]{.style_}

[Boetia(ns)]{.style_}

[Boghazkoy]{.style_}

[Bohaïrah, Bohaireh, Bohairic]{.style_}

[Bohemia]{.style_}

[Boisil (St.)]{.style_}

[Bologna]{.style_}

[Bones]{.style_}

[Boniface (St.)]{.style_}

[Book (The word) ;---binders,---binding; ---capitals;---cases;
---collectors;---department (Government------);---forms;]{.style_} [see
also]{.style_1} [Codex, Rolls, etc.;----hands;]{.style_} [see
also]{.style_1} [Cursive scripts; - in embryo;---knife ;]{.style_}
[see]{.style_1} [Knife, Penknife, Scribe's
knife;---markets,---production,---setters,---trade---of
Aneirin;---Armagh;---Ballymote ; ---Clanranald;---Deer;---Dimma ;
---Durrow;---Fermoy;---Fernaig;---Hy
Many;---Kells;---Leinster;---Lismore;---Odes ;---Rites;---Roscrea
;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}[---Dimma ;---Moling, Muling;---Taliesin;
---the Dead; ---Long-lived;---Dun Cow;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Black Book of Carmarthen, Exeter Book, Great Book of Lecan, Red Book of
Hergest, Speckled Book of Mac Egan, Yellow Book of Lecan ;]{.style_}
[also]{.style_1} [under Codex, Codices,]{.style_} [and]{.style_1}
[Papyrus ; - People of the---; ---shrine ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Cumhdach ;---worms]{.style_}

[Books of Wales (Four Ancient)]{.style_}

[Borassus flabellifer (ftabelliformis); see Palm leaves]{.style_}

[Borsippa]{.style_}

[Bosnia]{.style_}

[Bosphorus]{.style_}

[Bosworth Psalter]{.style_}

[Botany]{.style_}

[BottegheBower MSS.]{.style_}

[Boxwood;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [under Wood]{.style_}

[Boyle (Robert)]{.style_}

[Bradford on Avon]{.style_}

[Br hm nas, Brahmans]{.style_}

[Br hm n (c) scripts]{.style_}

[Brahm script]{.style_}

[Bramah (J.)]{.style_}

[Branches of book production]{.style_}

[Brass]{.style_}

[Breasts of man used as writing material]{.style_}

[Breathings]{.style_}

[Bredon (Simon)]{.style_}

[Breithaupt]{.style_}

[Bremen]{.style_}

[Brescia]{.style_}

[Breton;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Brittany]{.style_}
[and]{.style_1} [Brittonic]{.style_}

[Bricks]{.style_}

[Brindisi]{.style_}

[Britain, British,---Isles ;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Anglo-Saxon, Great Britain, Scotland, Wales, etc.]{.style_}

[British and Foreign Bible Society]{.style_}

[British-Indian]{.style_}

[British Museum]{.style_}

[Brittany]{.style_}

[Brittonic]{.style_}

[Brocade]{.style_}

[Bronze]{.style_}

[Brooklyn Museum]{.style_}

[Brush;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Writing-brush]{.style_}

[Brussels]{.style_}

[Brussonetia papyrifera]{.style_}

[Brut d'Angleterre by (R. Wace)]{.style_}

[Buchan]{.style_}

[Buddha, Buddhism, Buddhists;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Census]{.style_} [and]{.style_1} [Religious controversies]{.style_}

[Bukh r]{.style_}

[Bulla(e);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Rods]{.style_}

[Burgundy]{.style_}

[Burma, Burmese]{.style_}

[Burning (of books, etc.);]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Destruction
of books]{.style_}

[Burushaski]{.style_}

[Bury St, Edmunds]{.style_}

[Business documents,---transactions]{.style_}

[Butterfly-method books;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Book forms,
Concertina method of binding, etc.]{.style_}

[Byblos (Byblus)]{.style_}

[Byhrtfert of Ramsey]{.style_}

[Byzantine, Byzantium]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[CADMUG]{.style_}

[Caecilius Statius]{.style_}

[Caedmon]{.style_}

[Caermarthen]{.style_}

[Caesar (Julius)]{.style_}

[Caesarea]{.style_}

[Cairo;---, Coptic Museum;---, Genizah;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Genizah; ---, Museum of Antiquities;---, Royal Library]{.style_}

[Caithness]{.style_}

[C. (Gaius) Sallustius Crispus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Sallust]{.style_}

[C. (Gaius) Velleius Paterculus; see Paterculus]{.style_}

[Cakes of colour,----ink]{.style_}

[Calamus]{.style_}

[Calcutta;---, Sanskrit College]{.style_}

[Calendar(s)]{.style_}

[Calfskin;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Skin(s), Parchment,
Vellum]{.style_}

[Caligula]{.style_}

[Calligraphers, Calligraphic, Calligraphy]{.style_}

[Callimachus]{.style_}

[Callinus]{.style_}

[------of Ephesus]{.style_}

[Cambodia]{.style_}

[Cambrai Homilies]{.style_}

[Cambridge;---, Corpus Christi College;---, Pepys Library, Magdalen
College; ---, Perne Library, Peterhouse; ---, Sidney Sussex College;---,
Trinity College;---, University Library]{.style_}

[Cambridgeshire]{.style_}

[Camden (N.J., U.S.A.)]{.style_}

[Canaanite(s)]{.style_}

[Canepario (Pietro Maria)]{.style_}

[Cane(s);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Calamus]{.style_}

[Cannibal chief]{.style_}

[Canon Alexandrinus;---of Changes,---of Documents]{.style_}

[Canterbury, Archbishop of---;---Gospels;---Tales;]{.style_}
[see]{.style_1} [Chaucer]{.style_}

[Canticles]{.style_}

[Capitals]{.style_}

[Capsa]{.style_}

[Carbon ink; employed by ancient Egyptians; by ancient Greeks; by
ancient Hebrews; by ancient Romans; in the East; in the Far
East]{.style_}

[Carchemish]{.style_}

[Card]{.style_}

[Cardano (Gerolamo)]{.style_}

[Carloman]{.style_}

[Carlsruhe]{.style_}

[Carmelite Order of Friars]{.style_}

[Carmen de Augusti bello Aegyptico (de bello Actico)]{.style_}

[Caroline, Carolingian]{.style_}

[Cartaceous]{.style_}

[Carthusians]{.style_}

[Cartonnage cases]{.style_}

[Cartouches]{.style_}

[Carving]{.style_}

[Cassino;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Monte Cassino]{.style_}

[Cassiodorus]{.style_}

[Cassius Hemina]{.style_}

[Cassius Longinus]{.style_}

[Castilia(n, -ns)]{.style_}

[Casting of founts of type]{.style_}

[Catalan, Catalonia]{.style_}

[Catalogues]{.style_}

[Cataloguing]{.style_}

[Cathach of St. Columcille (Columba)]{.style_}

[Cathedral schools]{.style_}

[Catherine de' Medici]{.style_}

[Catholic catechism,---Church;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Christian
Church, etc.;---Homilies;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Aelfric
(Abbot)]{.style_}

[Catholicos]{.style_}

[Cato (Marcus Porcius Cato)]{.style_}

[Catullus (Valerius)]{.style_}

[Caucasian]{.style_}

[Caudex;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Codex]{.style_}

[Cave paintings]{.style_}

[Caves of the Thousand Buddhas]{.style_}

[Cedar wood;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Wood]{.style_}

[Celebes]{.style_}

[Celibacy]{.style_}

[Celtic]{.style_}

[Cenannus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Book of Kells]{.style_}
[and]{.style_1} [Kells]{.style_}

[Censualis Angliae;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Domesday Book]{.style_}

[Census of Buddhist clergy]{.style_}

[Central America;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [America]{.style_}

[------Asia;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Asia, Tibet, etc.]{.style_}

[------Asian Expedition]{.style_}

[------India]{.style_}

[------Siberia;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Siberia]{.style_}

[Centres of culture and learning]{.style_}

[Ceolfrid]{.style_}

[Ceowidf]{.style_}

[Cerne Abbas]{.style_}

[Certosa di Pisa]{.style_}

[Cethegus (P. Cornelius)]{.style_}

[Ceylon]{.style_}

[Chaldaeans]{.style_}

[Champa, Cham(s)]{.style_}

[Ch'an sect]{.style_}

[Chance]{.style_}

[Chang]{.style_}

[Ch'ang-an]{.style_}

[Chanson de Roland]{.style_}

[Charlemagne]{.style_}

[Charles I;---V]{.style_}

[------Bourbon]{.style_}

[Charms;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Magic(al)]{.style_}

[Charta, Charter, etc.]{.style_}

[Chaucer (Geoffrey)]{.style_}

[Chemistry]{.style_}

[Ch'ên Ching-i]{.style_}

[Ch'ên Ti]{.style_}

[Chêng Ch'iao]{.style_}

[Ch'êng Miao]{.style_}

[Cheops; see Khufu;---and the Magicians (Tale of)]{.style_}

[Cherokee syllabary]{.style_}

[Chester Beatty Collection]{.style_}

[Chester-le-Street]{.style_}

[Chi]{.style_}

[Chiapas]{.style_}

[Chi chiu chang]{.style_}

[Chien]{.style_}

[Ch'ien-fo-tung;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Caves of the Thousand
Buddhas]{.style_}

[-------pi]{.style_}

[Chih]{.style_}

[Ch'ih-tu]{.style_}

[Children of Light and Children of Darkness" ("War between
the)]{.style_}

[Ch'in Dynasty]{.style_}

[China, Chinese (books, language, writing, etc.);]{.style_}

[-------ink]{.style_}

[Chinanteco]{.style_}

[Chinese canon,---classics;---characters (Categories of
the);---gestures;---hemp;---Turkestan;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Eastern Turkestan]{.style_}

[Ching]{.style_}

[Chinggiz Kh n]{.style_}

[Ch'ing-li]{.style_}

[Choluim Chille;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Columba (St.)]{.style_}

[Choral;---lyric]{.style_}

[Chou;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Rod(s);---foot-measure;---period]{.style_}

[Christ (-ian, -ianity, -ian Church) ;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Eastern Church, Western Christianity; Monasteries, etc.]{.style_}

[Christian Arabic books]{.style_}

[------revival in England]{.style_}

[Christianized Romano-Britons]{.style_}

[Christians of St. John;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Mandaean(s)]{.style_}

[Chronicle of the world]{.style_}

[Chronicles (Book of)]{.style_}

[Chronicon Scotorum]{.style_}

[Chronology]{.style_}

[Chrysography;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Gold-writing]{.style_}

[Chrysostom (St. John)]{.style_}

[Chüan]{.style_}

[Chuang-Tzu]{.style_}

[Ch'un Ch'iu;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Annals of Spring and
Autumn]{.style_}

[Church; see Christ, etc.;---of Scotland;---of the East; see
Nestorian(s)]{.style_}

[Ciarán (St.)]{.style_}

[Cicero (Marcus Tullius)]{.style_}

[Cistercian Benedictines,---Order]{.style_}

[Civilization;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Culture;]{.style_}
[also]{.style_1} [the following]{.style_}

[Civilizing agencies]{.style_}

[Classical (texts, writers, etc.);]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Greek, Latin, Roman]{.style_}

[Claudius (Papyrus)]{.style_}

[Claudius Ptolomaeus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Ptolemy]{.style_}

[Clay (Inscriptions on);---pottery;---tablets]{.style_}

[Clement (St.);---VIII (Pope)]{.style_}

[Cleopatra]{.style_}

[Clodius]{.style_}

[Cloisters (Book-production in)]{.style_}

[Clones]{.style_}

[Clonmacnoise]{.style_}

[Cloth (Coarse);]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Linen, Textiles,
etc.]{.style_}

[Cluniac Benedictines, Cluny (Congregation of)]{.style_}

[Cn. (Gnaeus) Terentius]{.style_}

[Cnidus]{.style_}

[Cnut (King)]{.style_}

[Cobalt inks]{.style_}

[Cochin China]{.style_}

[Code (Collection of laws)]{.style_}

[Codex, Codices;---A;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}[---Alexandrinus; ---A.
ii. 10 (Durham);---A. ii. 16 (---); ---A. ii. 17 (---);---A. iv. 19
(---);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Durham Rituale; ---Aleph;]{.style_}
[see]{.style_1}[---Sinaiticus;---Alexandrinus; (---) Ambrosian
Iliad;---Ambrosianus;---A, Am,
Amiatinus;---Argenteus;---Askew;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Pistis
Sophia; ---B;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}[---Vaticanus;---B. ii.
(Durham);---B. iv. 6 (---);---Ben-Asher;
---Bezae;---Bobiensis;---Boernerianus;---Brixianus;---Bruce;
---C;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}[---Ephraemi;---C. iii.]{.style_}
[and]{.style_1} [20 (Durham);---C.iv.7(---);---C. 26. sup.
(Ambrosiana);---C. 301. inf. (---);
---Cavensis;---Ceaddae;---Cenannensis;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Book
of Kells;---Claromontanus;---Colombino; ---Cortes(iano); (---) Cotton
Genesis;---D (N.T.);]{.style_} [see---]{.style_1} [Bezae;---D
(O.T.);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [(---) Cotton Genesis;---D. 23. sup.
(Ambrosiana);---De' Rossi No. ;---Dorbbene; ---Dresden;
---Dublinensis;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Book of
Armagh;---Durmaeh(ensis);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Book of
Durrow;---Δ; see---Sangallensis;---Ephraemi; ---Eusebianus;]{.style_}
[see]{.style_1}[---Vercellianu s ---F;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Book
of Fermoy;---F (O.T.);]{.style_}
[see]{.style_1}[---Ambrosianus;---Farfa;---Fernandez Leal;
---Friderico-Augustanus (Gr. 1);---Fuldensis;---G; see
---Sarravianus;---Galeanus; ---H;]{.style_}
[see]{.style_1}[---Petropolitanus;---Iustinianeus;---K;]{.style_}
[see]{.style_1}[---Tischendorfianus ;---k;]{.style_}
[see]{.style_1}[---Bobiensis ;---L;]{.style_}
[see]{.style_1}[---Ceaddae; ---L :]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [(---)
Vienna Genesis; ---Laudianus (Graeco-Latin);------(Hebrew); -
LB;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Speckled Book of Mac Egan;---Lec.
;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Great Book of Lecan ;---Lindisfarnensis
;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Lindisfarne Gospels;---Livius
Lateranenensis;---LL;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Book of
Leinster;---LU;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Book of the Dun Cow
;---Madrid ; see---Tro-Cortes(iano);---Marchalianus; Mediceus---Laur.
;---Menander; ---Mendoza;---Nuttall ; see---Zouche (Nuttall)
;---Ottobonianus;---Palatinus; ---Paris;---Peresianus ;
---Perez;]{.style_}
[see]{.style_1}[---Paris;---Petropolitanus;---Prophet.; ---Q ;]{.style_}
[see]{.style_1} [Book of Kells ;---Q ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[---Marchalianus ;---r';]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}[---Usserianus
Primus;---r²;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}[---Usserianus Alter;---Rawlinson
B 502 (Rawl.);---R (ushworthianus) ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Mac
Regol Gospels ;---S(inaiticus) ;---S (N.T.);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Pauline Epistles;---S. 45. sup. (Ambrosiana);---Sangallensis;------No.
150; ------No. 267 ;------No. 1395;---Sangermanensis;
---Sarravianus;---Sarzanensis;---Theodosianus;
---Theodulfianus;---Tischendorfianus;---Tro;
---Tro-Cortes(iano);---Turonensis (G); ---Usserianus Alter;
---Usserianus Primus ; ---Vallicellianus;---Vaticanus; ---Vercellensis
(Vercelli Gospels);---Vergil.
Augusteus;------Romanus;------Vaticanus;------1394 St. Gall.; (---)
Vienna Genesis;---Washing-tonianus I;------II ; ---Wuerzburg;---Y; see
Lindisfarne Gospels;---YBL; see Yellow Book of Lecan;---Z; ---Zouche
(Nuttall)]{.style_}

[Cod-fish containing a book]{.style_}

[Coffins]{.style_}

[Coins]{.style_}

[Colchis; see Iberia]{.style_}

[Collating texts]{.style_}

[Colleges]{.style_}

[Colman]{.style_}

[Colmán mac Lénéni]{.style_}

[Cologne]{.style_}

[Colombo (National Museums)]{.style_}

[Colon;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Punctuation]{.style_}

[Colophon(s)]{.style_}

[Coloured inks;------: materials employed in ancient times]{.style_}

[Colours]{.style_}

[Columba (St.)]{.style_}

[Columban(us, St.)]{.style_}

[Column(s)]{.style_}

[Combarelles]{.style_}

[Columcille (St.) ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Columba (St.)]{.style_}

[Comedy]{.style_}

[Comic strips]{.style_}

[Comma;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Punctuation]{.style_}

[Commemorative inscriptions]{.style_}

[Compromises of cultures]{.style_}

[Concertina-method of binding;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Folded
books]{.style_}

[Confucian classics]{.style_}

[Confucianism, Confucius]{.style_}

[Conifer]{.style_}

[Conqueror (The) ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [William the
Conqueror]{.style_}

[Constantine the Great]{.style_}

[Constantinople]{.style_}

["Constitution of Athens" ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Aristotle]{.style_}

[Continent(al);]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Europe]{.style_}

[Continuity of art]{.style_}

[Convents;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Monasteries]{.style_}

[Conversion;---of England]{.style_}

[---------of the Barbarians" ("The)]{.style_}

[Cookery books]{.style_}

[Copan]{.style_}

[Copenhagen (Carlsberg Collection)]{.style_}

[Copernicus]{.style_}

[Copper]{.style_}

[Coptic, Copts;---ink: its preparation]{.style_}

[Copying books, Copyists;---inks]{.style_}

[Corbie]{.style_}

[Cordova]{.style_}

[Corinth]{.style_}

[Cormac mac Cuilennáin]{.style_}

[Corneliana (Papyrus)]{.style_}

[Cornelius Gallus;---Nepos;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Nepos;---Tacitus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Tacitus]{.style_}

[Cornish]{.style_}

[Coronis;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Paragraph]{.style_}

[Cornua(e) ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Rods]{.style_}

[Corrections, Correctors]{.style_}

[Correctorium Parisiense]{.style_}

[Cortés (Hernando)]{.style_}

[Corypha;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Palm leaves]{.style_}

[Cosmic Epic;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Creation Epic]{.style_}

[Cosmogony;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Creation (Story of)]{.style_}

[Cotton;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Textiles]{.style_}

[Cotton(ian) Collection in the British Museum]{.style_}

[---------Library;---, Sir John;---, Sir Robert]{.style_}

[Council of Chalcedon------Ephesus; Trent;------Whitby ;]{.style_}
[see]{.style_1} [Synod of Whitby]{.style_}

[Covers:]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Binding]{.style_}

[Cracow]{.style_}

[Cradle of the book;------writing]{.style_}

[Cratippus]{.style_}

[Creation Epic;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Epics;---(Story
of)]{.style_}

[---------of the book]{.style_}

[Cretan, Crete]{.style_}

[Critical symbols;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Punctuation]{.style_}

[Cronan (St.)]{.style_}

[Crucifixion (Poem on the)]{.style_}

[Crusaders]{.style_}

[Crystal(s)]{.style_}

[Ctesias]{.style_}

[Cuicateco]{.style_}

[Cultivation of wheat]{.style_}

[Cultural activities of monasteries; ---bridges]{.style_}

[Culture]{.style_}

[Cumberland]{.style_}

[Cumhdach]{.style_}

[Cuneiform alphabet;---writing]{.style_}

[Cura Pastoralis;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Gregory the Great]{.style_}

[Curetonian MS.]{.style_}

[Cursive scripts]{.style_}

[Curtius Rufus]{.style_}

[Cuthbert (St.)]{.style_}

[Cuttle-fish]{.style_}

[Cycles (Irish---)]{.style_}

[Cylinder(s)]{.style_}

[Cymric]{.style_}

[Cynewulf]{.style_}

[Cynfeirdd]{.style_}

[Cyprian]{.style_}

[Cypriote, Cyprus]{.style_}

[Cyril (St.) of Alexandria;---of Jerusalem]{.style_}

[Cyrillic character]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[DACIA]{.style_}

[Dacite]{.style_}

[Dairen]{.style_}

[Dakota]{.style_}

[Dallan Forgaill]{.style_}

[Damascenus]{.style_}

[Damascus]{.style_}

[Dampness]{.style_}

[Danes, Danish, Danish raids and invasions]{.style_}

[Daniel (Book of)]{.style_}

[Dante Alighieri]{.style_}

[Dark Ages;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Middle Ages]{.style_}

[Date leaves]{.style_}

[Dating;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Chronology]{.style_}

[Datu]{.style_}

[David (King)]{.style_}

[David I (Scottish King)]{.style_}

[David II (Georgian King)]{.style_}

[Davy (Sir H.)]{.style_}

[De Bouillon (Cardinal)]{.style_}

[Dead Sea Scrolls]{.style_}

[Death Song]{.style_}

[Decalogue]{.style_}

[Deccan]{.style_}

[Decoration;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Illumination, Illustration,
Ornamentation]{.style_}

[Dedicatory inscriptions]{.style_}

[Deer]{.style_}

[Deerskin]{.style_}

[Defacing of writing;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Erasures]{.style_}

[Deipara Convent]{.style_}

[D'Elbouf (Prince)]{.style_}

[Deleb;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Palm leaves]{.style_}

[Della Porta (Giovan Battista)]{.style_}

[Delos]{.style_}

[Delphi]{.style_}

[Deltos;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Wood]{.style_}

[Deluge;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Flood]{.style_}

[Demetrius Phalereus]{.style_}

[Demonology]{.style_}

[Demosthenes]{.style_}

[Demotic]{.style_}

[Denmark;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Danes, Danish]{.style_}

[Deor's Complaint]{.style_}

[Derry ( on Lough Foyle)]{.style_}

[Destruction of books: its causes]{.style_}

[Deuteronomy (Book of)]{.style_}

[Dev n gar]{.style_}

[Devonshire (Library of the Duke of ---)]{.style_}

[Dhammapada]{.style_}

[Dharmaraksa]{.style_}

[Diamond S tra]{.style_}

[Diarmait]{.style_}

[Diatessaron]{.style_}

[Dictionaries]{.style_}

[Didactic literature]{.style_}

[Didymus]{.style_}

[Diego de Landa]{.style_}

[Dimma Mace Nathi]{.style_}

[Dinnshenchas]{.style_}

[Dio (Dion) Cassius]{.style_}

[Diocletian]{.style_}

[Diodorus Siculus]{.style_}

[Diogenes Laertius]{.style_}

[Dionysius Halicarnasseus (]{.style_}[or]{.style_1} [of the
Halicarnassus)]{.style_}

[Diorite]{.style_}

[Dioscorides]{.style_}

[Diphthérai]{.style_}

[Diptych(s,---on,---a)]{.style_}

[Direction of writing]{.style_}

[Discoveries]{.style_}

[Dissolution of monasteries in England]{.style_}

[Dittógraphy]{.style_}

[Divination books]{.style_}

[Divinatory almanac(s)]{.style_}

[Divine Name]{.style_}

[Division (of lines, paragraphs, words)]{.style_}

[Document of History;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Canon of
Documents]{.style_}

[Dolerite]{.style_}

[Domesday Book]{.style_}

[Domestication of animals]{.style_}

[Domhnach Airgid]{.style_}

[Dominic (St.)]{.style_}

[Dominican Order of Friars]{.style_}

[Domitian]{.style_}

[Donative inscriptions]{.style_}

[Dongola]{.style_}

[Donkin]{.style_}

[Doomed Prince (Story of the)]{.style_}

[Doomsday Book;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Domesday Book]{.style_}

[Dorbbéne (Dorbene);]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Codex
Dorbbéne]{.style_}

[Doric]{.style_}

[Dositheans]{.style_}

[Double monastery;---palimpsests]{.style_}

[Drama]{.style_}

[Dravidi]{.style_}

[Dravidian]{.style_}

[Drawing(s)]{.style_}

[Dream of the Rood]{.style_}

[Dresden (State Library)]{.style_}

[Drugs]{.style_}

[Druids]{.style_}

[Drums]{.style_}

[Duald Mac Firbis]{.style_}

[Duauf]{.style_}

[Dublin;---, Royal Irish Academy;---, Trinity College Library]{.style_}

[Dunholm;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Durham]{.style_}

[Dunstan (St.)]{.style_}

[Duodecimo]{.style_}

[Dura Europos]{.style_}

[Durable writing materials;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Clay
tablets, Gold, Ivory, Metal(s), Silver, Stone, etc.]{.style_}

[Durham;---Book; see Lindisfarne Gospels;---, Cathedral
Library;---Rituale]{.style_}

[Durrow;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Book of Durrow]{.style_}

[Dur-Sharrukin;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Khorsabad]{.style_}

[Dutch]{.style_}

[Dutreuil de Rhins MS.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[EADBERHT (King)]{.style_}

[Eadfrith]{.style_}

[Eadhelm;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Aldhelm]{.style_}

[Earliest Biblical papyri;---book catalogue;------written by a
Japanese;---books;------written on leather; ---Chinese book;------dated
colophon;---codices; ---dated Anglo-Saxon codex written in
minuscule;------Christian Arabic MS.;------codex;------Koran;------Kufic
codex;---English great poem;------historical
writing;------literature;------Psalter;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Paris
Psalter;------versions of the Bible;---Hebrew Bible codex;---Indian
literature;------paper MSS.; ---Irish secular literary work ---Japanese
MS.; ---Old Irish glosses;---palm-leaf MSS.;---paper
documents;---papyri;---printed book;---printer;---printing;---Roman
MSS.;---Scottish book;------Gaelic glosses;---South Indian
MS.;---"Universities" of England;---use of parchment;---Vetus Latina
codex;---Welsh glosses; ---written Arab documents;]{.style_} [see
also]{.style_1} [under Oldest]{.style_}

[Early England,---English culture;------religious
literature;------scholars;---Hebrew script;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Hebrew;---history of the book;---Turki;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Kök
Turki;---version of the Wycliffe Bible]{.style_}

[Earthenware]{.style_}

[East]{.style_}

[---Anglia]{.style_}

[Easter Island]{.style_}

[East(ern) Asia;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Asia, Far
East]{.style_}

[---Christianity,---Church]{.style_}

[Eastern Europe;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Europe, Russia,
etc.]{.style_}

[---Hebrew codices]{.style_}

[---Hind]{.style_}

[---India]{.style_}

[---Islam;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Islam]{.style_}

[---Pahlavi]{.style_}

[---Roman Empire;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}[---Church]{.style_}

[---Turkestan]{.style_}

[East India Company]{.style_}

[---Iranian;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Khotanese]{.style_}

[---Midland]{.style_}

[---Syrians;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Nestorians]{.style_}

[Eata]{.style_}

[Ebionites]{.style_}

[Ebony]{.style_}

[Ecclesiastes (Book of)]{.style_}

[Ecclesiasticus (Book of)]{.style_}

[Echternach]{.style_}

[Eclipse records]{.style_}

[Edessa]{.style_}

[Edfu Collection]{.style_}

[Edgar (King)]{.style_}

[Edgar the Atheling]{.style_}

[Edinburgh, (Libraries)]{.style_}

[Edmund (King)]{.style_}

[Education]{.style_}

[Edward (King, St.) ------VI]{.style_}

[Edwin (King)]{.style_}

[Egbert]{.style_}

[Egypt(ian);---carbon ink]{.style_}

[Einsiedeln]{.style_}

[Eisteddfod]{.style_}

[Elam(ites)]{.style_}

[Elbod]{.style_}

[Elegy]{.style_}

[Elephantine]{.style_}

[El-Kahira;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Cairo]{.style_}

[Elm]{.style_}

[Eloquent Peasant (Story of the)]{.style_}

[Ely]{.style_}

[Embroidery]{.style_}

[Emporetica (Papyrus)]{.style_}

[Emptio puellae;---pueri]{.style_}

[Enamel]{.style_}

[Encyclopaedia(s)]{.style_}

[Engineering]{.style_}

[England, English;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Anglo-Saxon, Great
Britain, etc.;---: absolute monarchy;---: end of the Middle
Ages]{.style_}

[English Bible;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Bible, Bible versions,
etc.;---books supplied to foreign churches;---monks;]{.style_} [see
also]{.style_1} [Monasteries, Monks;---prose;---versus Irish;]{.style_}
[see also]{.style_1} [Religious controversies]{.style_}

[Engravings]{.style_}

[Enmerkar]{.style_}

[Ennius]{.style_}

[Enoch (Book of)]{.style_}

[Enûma Anu Enlil;---Elish]{.style_}

[Envelopes]{.style_}

[Ephesus]{.style_}

[Ephorus]{.style_}

[Ephraem (St.) the Syrian]{.style_}

[Epicharmus]{.style_}

[Epics]{.style_}

[Epicurus]{.style_}

[Epistle to the Ephesians; Epistles;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Pauline Epistles]{.style_}

[Equatorie (The) of the Planetis;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Chaucer]{.style_}

[Equinox]{.style_}

[Erasures;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Palimpsests]{.style_}

[Eratosthenes]{.style_}

[Erech;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Uruk]{.style_}

[Eretria]{.style_}

[Erin]{.style_}

[Eritrea]{.style_}

[Erixo]{.style_}

[Errors]{.style_}

[Escurial Library,---Monastery]{.style_}

[Eshnunna]{.style_}

[Essen]{.style_}

[Essenes]{.style_}

[Essex]{.style_}

[Estate valuations;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Domesday Book]{.style_}

[Esther (Book of)]{.style_}

[Estrangel]{.style_}

[Etchmiadzin]{.style_}

[Ethics]{.style_}

[Ethilwald (Bishop)]{.style_}

[Ethiopia, Ethiopic]{.style_}

[Etruria, Etruscan(s)]{.style_}

[Et-Tôr]{.style_}

[Euboea]{.style_}

[Euclid]{.style_}

[Eugipius]{.style_}

[Eumenes II]{.style_}

[Euphrates;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Mesopotamia]{.style_}

[Eupolis]{.style_}

[Euripides]{.style_}

[Europe;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [under individual
countries]{.style_}

[Eusebius Pamphili (of Caesaraea)]{.style_}

[Eusebius (St.) of Vercelli]{.style_}

[Euthydemus]{.style_}

[Evesham]{.style_}

[Ewe]{.style_}

[Excavations;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Discoveries]{.style_}

[Exeter Book]{.style_}

[Exodus (Book of)]{.style_}

[Eynsham]{.style_}

[Ezekiel (Book of)]{.style_}

[Ezra (Book of)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[FABIUS PICTOR]{.style_}

[Fabius Quintilianus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Quintilian]{.style_}

[Fa-hsien]{.style_}

[Fairy tales;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Tales]{.style_}

[Falasha(s)]{.style_}

[Fan-folded books]{.style_}

[Fang tablet]{.style_}

[Fanniana (Papyrus)]{.style_}

[Far-East;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [China, Japan, Korea]{.style_}

[Fârah;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Shuruppak]{.style_}

[Fars]{.style_}

[Fascicles]{.style_}

[Fasti Consolares]{.style_}

[Fate of books]{.style_}

[Fathers of the Church;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [under individual
names]{.style_}

[F timids]{.style_}

[Fayyûm(ic)]{.style_}

[Feirân Oasis]{.style_}

[Fêng-hua]{.style_}

[Fêng Tao (Ying-wang)]{.style_}

[Fenian cycle]{.style_}

[Ferdomnach]{.style_}

[Fibres]{.style_}

[Fiction;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Short stories]{.style_}

[Fig-tree (Wild)]{.style_}

[Fight (The) at Finn's Borough]{.style_}

[Films]{.style_}

[Finan]{.style_}

[Find-Chua;----Lug]{.style_}

[Finnian (St.)]{.style_}

[Finno-Ugrian]{.style_}

[Fir]{.style_}

[Fire;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Burning, Destruction of
books]{.style_}

[First books]{.style_}

[First Punic War;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Punic]{.style_}

[Firth of Forth]{.style_}

[Five Megill th]{.style_}

[Flaking off of ink]{.style_}

[Flann, son of Malachy]{.style_}

[Fleury]{.style_}

[Flood;---tablets]{.style_}

[Florence;---, Archaeological Museum;---, Laurentian Library;---,
Riccardian Library]{.style_}

[Florus]{.style_}

[Flowers]{.style_}

[Folded books;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Concertina method of
binding]{.style_}

[Folio]{.style_}

[Font-de-Gaume]{.style_}

[Foot-measure]{.style_}

[Format]{.style_}

[Fort Peck]{.style_}

[Fossil history]{.style_}

[Fo tsu t'ung chi]{.style_}

[Foundation-deeds]{.style_}

[Fountain-pen]{.style_}

[Four-lingual inscription]{.style_}

[Four Masters (The);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Annals of the Kingdom of
Ireland]{.style_}

[Fourth Century A.D.]{.style_}

[Fragmenta Lipsensia;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Codex
Tischendorfianus]{.style_}

[France, French]{.style_}

[Francis (St.) of Assisi]{.style_}

[Franciscan Order of Friars]{.style_}

[Franco-German Hebrew Codices]{.style_}

[Frankish]{.style_}

[Franks Casket]{.style_}

[Fresco(es)]{.style_}

[Frisia(ns)]{.style_}

[Froissart]{.style_}

[Frome monastery]{.style_}

[Frons;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Margins]{.style_}

[Frontispieces;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Illumination]{.style_}

[Fronto (M. Cornelius)]{.style_}

[Fujiwara Michinaga]{.style_}

[Fulda]{.style_}

[Full stop;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Punctuation]{.style_}

[Funeral slabs]{.style_}

[Fursa (St.)]{.style_}

[Further India;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Burma, Ceylon,
Indonesia, Philippines, Siam, etc.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[GABRIEL (Monk)]{.style_}

[(Gadhelic) Gaelic]{.style_}

[Gaius]{.style_}

[Gaius Lucilius;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Lucilius]{.style_}

[Gaius Valerius Catullus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Catullus]{.style_}

[Galen(us) (Claudius)]{.style_}

[Galilean(s);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Mandaean(s)]{.style_}

[Galileo Galilei]{.style_}

[Gallican Psalter]{.style_}

[Garland of Howth;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Codex Usserianus
Alter]{.style_}

[G th s]{.style_}

[Gaul]{.style_}

[Gaustana;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Khotan]{.style_}

[Ge'ez]{.style_}

[Gelasius (Sacramentary by)]{.style_}

[Gemara]{.style_}

[Genealogies]{.style_}

[Genesis (Book of)]{.style_}

[Geneva (Museum)]{.style_}

[Genghis Kh n ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Chinggiz Kh n]{.style_}

[Genizah]{.style_}

[Geoffrey of Monmouth]{.style_}

[Geographical Maps]{.style_}

[Geography]{.style_}

[George I (King of England);]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---II;---III;]{.style_}

[---IV]{.style_}

[---III (King of Georgia) ;]{.style_}

[---IV]{.style_}

[Georgian(s)]{.style_}

[German (-ic, -s, -y)]{.style_}

[Germanic scripts;---peoples, ---tribes]{.style_}

[Gesso]{.style_}

[Gesture(s)]{.style_}

[Ghazna]{.style_}

[Gildas, Gildus]{.style_}

[Gilding;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Gold]{.style_}

[Gilgamesh]{.style_}

[Giotto]{.style_}

[Glas]{.style_}

[Glasgow (University Library)]{.style_}

[Glastonbury]{.style_}

[Glossary;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Lexicography]{.style_}

[Glosses]{.style_}

[Gloucester]{.style_}

[Glue]{.style_}

[Glutinatores]{.style_}

[Glyphs]{.style_}

[Gnaeus Naevius]{.style_}

[Gnostic writings]{.style_}

[Godfrey Collection]{.style_}

[Gododdin;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Aneirin]{.style_}

[Gogynfeirdd]{.style_}

[Gold,----writing]{.style_}

[Golden Age of monasticism]{.style_}

[Gondar]{.style_}

[Gosinga Vih ra (Khotan)]{.style_}

[Gospel of St. John]{.style_}

[Gospels (Gospel-books);---of Maielbrid;---of St. Chad ; see Codex
Ceaddae]{.style_}

[Gothic;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Black Letter]{.style_}

[Gower (John)]{.style_}

[Graeco-orthodox]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[----Romanff.;-------writing materials and implements]{.style_}

[Grammatical texts]{.style_}

[Grammaticus ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Aelfric (Abbot)]{.style_}

[Granada]{.style_}

[Granatello]{.style_}

[Granius (C.) Licinianus]{.style_}

[Grantha]{.style_}

[Grass]{.style_}

[Great Book of Lecan;---Books of Ireland]{.style_}

[Great Britain;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [England, Ireland,
Scotland, Wales, etc.]{.style_}

[Great Seal Characters]{.style_}

[Greece, Greek(s)]{.style_}

[Greek Bible]{.style_}

[Gregory (St.) of Nazianzus]{.style_}

[Gregory I the Great (Pope);---II;---III]{.style_}

[Grinders]{.style_}

[Grottaferrata]{.style_}

[Ground (Writing---);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Paper, Papyrus,
Parchment, Silk, etc.]{.style_}

[Gruffud Arthur;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Geoffrey of
Monmouth]{.style_}

[Gudea]{.style_}

[Gujar t( )]{.style_}

[Gupta]{.style_}

[Gurob]{.style_}

[Guru]{.style_}

[Gurumukh]{.style_}

[Gwalchmai]{.style_}

[Gwynn MS.;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Book of Armagh]{.style_}

[Gyges]{.style_}

[Gypsum]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[HABAKKUK Commentary]{.style_}

[Hadrian (Abbot)]{.style_}

[Hagiographa]{.style_}

[Hair-brushes for writing;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Writing-brushes]{.style_}

[Half-uncials;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Semi-uncials]{.style_}

[Halhed]{.style_}

[Halls of Books]{.style_}

[Halmidi]{.style_}

[Hammurabi]{.style_}

[Hamouli Library]{.style_}

[Han Dynasty]{.style_}

[Han Fei-tzu]{.style_}

[Han foot-measure]{.style_}

[Handwriting;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Cursive Scripts]{.style_}

[Hanunóo]{.style_}

[Han-Yü]{.style_}

[Haphtarah (Haphtar th)]{.style_}

[Haplógraphy]{.style_}

[Harappa culture]{.style_}

[Har-dedef]{.style_}

[Harding (Stephen)]{.style_}

[Harley (Robert), Earl of Oxford]{.style_}

[Harmony (The) of the Four Gospels;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Diatessaron]{.style_}

[Harqleian (Harqlensian)]{.style_}

[Harrison (S.)]{.style_}

[Har n al-Rashid]{.style_}

[Hattusa]{.style_}

[Havoc;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Destruction of books]{.style_}

[Hawkins (J. I.)]{.style_}

[Hayter (John)]{.style_}

[Hebrew(s); ---Bible;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Old
Testament;---Codices;---University, Jerusalem]{.style_}

[Hebrides;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Inner Hebrides]{.style_}

[Hecataeus]{.style_}

[Hei.an]{.style_}

[Heidelberg]{.style_}

[Helena (Empress)]{.style_}

[Heliand]{.style_}

[Helicon]{.style_}

[Heliopolitan Recension]{.style_}

[Hellenism, Hellenistic ;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Graeco-Roman
and Greece, Greek(s)]{.style_}

[Hemp;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Chinese hemp]{.style_}

[Henry I;---II;---VII;---VIII]{.style_}

[Hepatoscopy]{.style_}

[Heptaptych]{.style_}

[Herat]{.style_}

[Herculaneum]{.style_}

[Heresies;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Religious conflicts]{.style_}

[Hergest Court]{.style_}

[Herodas]{.style_}

[Herodotus]{.style_}

[Heroic legends;---poems]{.style_}

[Hesiod]{.style_}

[Hexagrams]{.style_}

[Hiberno-Saxon;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Anglo-Saxon, Celtic,
Insular, Ireland, etc.]{.style_}

[Hieratic, Hieroglyphic;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Egypt(ian)]{.style_}

[Hieronymus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Jerome (St.)]{.style_}

[Highlands (Scottish)]{.style_}

[Hikari Mountains]{.style_}

[Hilda (Lady)]{.style_}

[Hildelith]{.style_}

[H nay na Buddhism]{.style_}

[Hind]{.style_}

[Hinduism]{.style_}

[Hind (s), Hind stani]{.style_}

[Hipparchus]{.style_}

[Hippocrates]{.style_}

[Hipponax of Ephesus]{.style_}

[Hira gana]{.style_}

[Hispano-Portuguese Hebrew codices]{.style_}

[Historia Britonum;---Tolteca-Chichimeca (Mexican MS.)]{.style_}

[Historical cycles;---records, ---sources,---texts]{.style_}

[Historical Society of Pennsylvania]{.style_}

[History; ---of Culture;---- Science]{.style_}

[Hittite(s)]{.style_}

[Hiuen Tsiang]{.style_}

[Hoccleve (Thomas)]{.style_}

[Holland]{.style_}

[Holy Island;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Lindisfarne]{.style_}

[Holy Land;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Bible, Hebrew(s), Jews,
Palestine, etc.]{.style_}

[Holy Scriptures;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Sacred Scriptures]{.style_}

[Homer]{.style_}

[Homilies]{.style_}

[Homoiographón]{.style_}

[Homoioteleutón]{.style_}

[Homonyms]{.style_}

[Honan]{.style_}

[Honduras]{.style_}

[Honorinus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Aneirin]{.style_}

[Horace (Q. Horatius Flaccus)]{.style_}

[Horiuzji]{.style_}

[Horn-book;---- tips]{.style_}

[Horoscopes]{.style_}

[Horsebreeding]{.style_}

[Horus-name]{.style_}

[Hou Collection]{.style_}

[House of Tablets;---- Wisdom]{.style_}

[Howel ab Owain Gwynedd (Prince)]{.style_}

[Howel Dda (Laws of)]{.style_}

[Hphags-pa]{.style_}

[Hsiao chuan]{.style_}

[Hsiao-t'un]{.style_}

[Hsieh Ho]{.style_}

[Hsi-hsia]{.style_}

[Hsü]{.style_}

[Hsün Hsü]{.style_}

[Hsün-tsang]{.style_}

[Hsün Tzu]{.style_}

[Huang-nieh]{.style_}

[Huang Ti]{.style_}

[H l g Khan]{.style_}

[Human figures;---race]{.style_}

[Humanistic branches]{.style_}

[Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester]{.style_}

[Hunayn ibn-Ish q]{.style_}

[Hurrians]{.style_}

[Husain Fakhkhâr]{.style_}

[Hu-tieh chuang;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Butterfly-method
books]{.style_}

[Huun]{.style_}

[Hvamna-(i), Hvatana-(i);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Khotan]{.style_}

[Hy;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Iona]{.style_}

[Hybrid culture in North England]{.style_}

[Hyde (John)]{.style_}

[Hyginus]{.style_}

[Hymn(s)]{.style_}

[Hyksos]{.style_}

[Hyperides]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[JAMBIC Poetry]{.style_}

[Iberia]{.style_}

[Ibn al-Kh tib]{.style_}

[Ibycus]{.style_}

[I-ch'ih chih shu]{.style_}

[I-Ching (compiler of a lexicon)]{.style_}

[I Ching (Book);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Canon of Changes]{.style_}

[Iconography]{.style_}

[Iconomatic system]{.style_}

[Idea-diffusion]{.style_}

[Ideographic writing]{.style_}

[I-em-hotep (Imhotep)]{.style_}

[Iliad;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Homer]{.style_}

[Il-Kh n]{.style_}

[Illiteracy]{.style_}

[Illumination, Illuminators]{.style_}

[Illustrated encyclopaedias;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Encyclopaedia(s)]{.style_}

[Illustration(s)]{.style_}

[Imperial Orthodox Church;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Eastern
Church]{.style_}

[Implements (Writing-);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Pens, Stili,
etc.]{.style_}

[Inchiostro;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Ink]{.style_}

[Incunabula]{.style_}

[Indelible inks]{.style_}

[Indexes]{.style_}

[India(n)]{.style_}

[India Office Library]{.style_}

[---ink]{.style_}

[Indians (North American);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [America]{.style_}

[Indigenous "paper" in modern Mexico]{.style_}

[Indo-Aryan;----Bactrian;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Kharoshthi;----China ;----European;----Greek;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Kharoshthi;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [under individual languages;
---nesia;----Partian, Indo-Scythian ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Kharoshthi]{.style_}

[Indus Valley]{.style_}

[Ingram (Sir Herbert) -Collection]{.style_}

[Initials]{.style_}

[Ink;---: importance of its study;---: its preparation;---: origin of
the word;---: palettes;]{.style_}

[---: various kinds employed in the Graeco-Roman world]{.style_}

[Ink-cakes;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Cakes]{.style_}

[Inkhorn, Inkstand]{.style_}

[Ink-receptacles]{.style_}

[Inner Hebrides]{.style_}

[Inscriptions]{.style_}

[Insular majuscule manuscripts;---manuscripts;---minuscule
manuscripts;---scripts]{.style_}

[Intellectual progress of man]{.style_}

[Internal evidence]{.style_}

[International language;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Lingua
franca]{.style_}

[Interpolation]{.style_}

[Interrogation marks;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Punctuation]{.style_}

[Intestines used as writing material]{.style_}

[Intolerance;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Burning, Destruction of
books, etc.]{.style_}

[Invention of Irish script;---of movable types;---of paper---of
printing]{.style_}

[Iona]{.style_}

[Ionia(n)]{.style_}

[Iran(ian)]{.style_}

[Iraq]{.style_}

[Ireland, Irish ;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Dublin]{.style_}

[Ireland's Eye]{.style_}

[Irenaeus]{.style_}

[Irish canons;---cycles; ---influence on English book-production;
---minuscule: its development;---recension,---text,---version]{.style_}

[Iron;----carbon ink, employed by the Hebrews;----gall ink, employed in
later Graeco-Roman times; by the Hebrews; in the Middle Ages; its
preparation;---stilus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Stilus]{.style_}

[Isaiah (Book of), Scrolls A and B]{.style_}

[Isidore (St.) of Seville (Isidorus Hispalensis)]{.style_}

[Islam;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Moslem(s)]{.style_}

[Isocrates]{.style_}

[Isolating languages]{.style_}

[Issy (Izezi)]{.style_}

[Italian, Italy]{.style_}

[Italic peoples]{.style_}

[Italics (characters)]{.style_}

[Ivory]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[JABNEH ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Jamnia]{.style_}

[Jack tree;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Wood]{.style_}

[Jacobite(s)]{.style_}

[Jade]{.style_}

[Jain hand]{.style_}

[Jamnia]{.style_}

[Japan, Japanese]{.style_}

[Jarrow]{.style_}

[Jars]{.style_}

[J taka]{.style_}

[Java(-nese)]{.style_}

[Jemdet Nasr]{.style_}

[Jeremiah (Book of)]{.style_}

[Jericho]{.style_}

[Jerome (St.)]{.style_}

[Jerusalem; ---, Convent of St. Mark;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Hebrew University]{.style_}

[Jewellery (Art of)]{.style_}

[Jewish, Jews;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Hebrew(s);----Christian]{.style_}

[Jingles]{.style_}

[Job (Book of)]{.style_}

[John of Stobi ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Stobaeus]{.style_}

[John (St.)]{.style_}

[John the Baptist (Followers of)]{.style_}

[Jonah (Book of)]{.style_}

[Josephus Flavius]{.style_}

[Joshua (Book of)]{.style_}

[Jubilees (Book of)]{.style_}

[Juda, Judaea]{.style_}

[Judaism;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Bible, Jewish, Jews,
Hebrew(s), Palestine, etc.]{.style_}

[Judges (Book of)]{.style_}

[Judith (Book of)]{.style_}

[Julian Calendar]{.style_}

[Julianus]{.style_}

[Juno Moneta]{.style_}

[Jupiter]{.style_}

[Jurchen]{.style_}

[Jurisprudence;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Code]{.style_}

[Justinian (Emperor)]{.style_}

[Juvenal (Decimus Iunius Iuuenalis)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[KAGAD, K gaj, K ghaz]{.style_}

[Kaithi]{.style_}

[Kammuva]{.style_}

[Kana;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Kata kana]{.style_}

[Kanarese, Kannada]{.style_}

[Kansu]{.style_}

[Karaite(s)]{.style_}

[Karens]{.style_}

[K'art'li, K'art'velni;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Georgian]{.style_}

[Kashgar(ia)]{.style_}

[Kashmir]{.style_}

[Kassel]{.style_}

[Kata kana]{.style_}

[Kavirajamarga]{.style_}

[Keating (Geoffrey)]{.style_}

[Ke'gemni]{.style_}

[Kells;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Book of Kells]{.style_}

[Kennicott Bible]{.style_}

[Kent(ish)]{.style_}

[Kepler]{.style_}

[Keret]{.style_}

[Kharoshthi, Kharosstr]{.style_}

[Khárt s]{.style_}

[Khety]{.style_}

[Khirbet-Oumran]{.style_}

[Khmer(s)]{.style_}

[Khoerilius]{.style_}

[Khorasan]{.style_}

[Khordah Avesta]{.style_}

[Khotan(ese), Khotani]{.style_}

[Khufu]{.style_}

[Khu-then;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Khotan]{.style_}

[Khuzistan]{.style_}

[Khwarizm]{.style_}

[Kian]{.style_}

[Kingdoms, Kings (Books of)]{.style_}

[Kish]{.style_}

[Klosterneuburg]{.style_}

[Knife;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Penknife]{.style_}

[Knossos]{.style_}

[Knot-records]{.style_}

[Kog-dz]{.style_}

[Ko-ji-ki ("Record of Ancient Matters")]{.style_}

[Kök Turki]{.style_}

[Konkanapura]{.style_}

[Koran]{.style_}

[Korea(-n)]{.style_}

[Kuan-tzu]{.style_}

[Kucha, Kuchean, Kuci]{.style_}

[Kufic]{.style_}

[Kuh-i-S l]{.style_}

[Ku K'ai-chih]{.style_}

[Ku tablet]{.style_}

[Kuki-chin]{.style_}

[Kum raj va]{.style_}

[K'ung Fu-tzu;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Confucius]{.style_}

[Kung-sun Hung]{.style_}

[Kur]{.style_}

[Kural]{.style_}

[Kurdistan]{.style_}

[Kushana]{.style_}

[Kuyunjik;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Nineveh]{.style_}

[Ky to]{.style_}

[Kyveiliog;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Owain Kyveiliog]{.style_}

[Kywryd]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[LABEL (Projecting)]{.style_}

[L. Accius;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Accius]{.style_}

[Lachish]{.style_}

[Lacquer]{.style_}

[Lactantius (Lucius Caelius]{.style_} [or]{.style_1} [Caecilius
Firmianus)]{.style_}

[Ladakh]{.style_}

[Lagash]{.style_}

[Lahnda]{.style_}

[Lake Texcoco;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Texcoco]{.style_}

[Lambeth Palace, London]{.style_}

[Lamech Scroll]{.style_}

[Lamentations (Book of)]{.style_}

[Lampong tribes]{.style_}

[Lancaster]{.style_}

[Landa]{.style_}

[Landscapes.]{.style_}

[Lanfranc (Archbishop)]{.style_}

[Langland (William)]{.style_}

[Language;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [under individual
languages]{.style_}

[Laon]{.style_}

[Laos]{.style_}

[Lao-Tzu]{.style_}

[Lapis-lazuli]{.style_}

[Larsa]{.style_}

[Lascaux]{.style_}

[Lateran Church, Rome]{.style_}

[Latin;---Bible;---Christian;---Hymnal ---Psalter]{.style_}

[Laud (Archbishop)]{.style_}

[Law Codes;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Code]{.style_}

[Law Scrolls;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Scrolls]{.style_}

[Laws of Howel Dda; see Howel Dda]{.style_}

[Layamon]{.style_}

[Leacán;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Lecan]{.style_}

[Lead;---pencil]{.style_}

[Leaden books]{.style_}

[Learning]{.style_}

[Leather]{.style_}

[Leaves;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Palm leaves]{.style_}
[and]{.style_1} [Page(s)]{.style_}

[Lebor Brecc;---Laigen;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Book of
Leinster;---na Huidre;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Book of the Dun
Cow]{.style_}

[Lecan (---Mic Firbhisigh)]{.style_}

[Ledger]{.style_}

[Legends;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Myths]{.style_}

[Lei Yen-mei]{.style_}

[Leinster]{.style_}

[Leipsic (University Library)]{.style_}

[Lémery (Nicholas and Louis)]{.style_}

[Len (Prince)]{.style_}

[Length of papyrus rolls]{.style_}

[Leningrad (Academy of Science, and other Institutions)]{.style_}

[Leo III (Pope)]{.style_}

[Leonhardi (A.)]{.style_}

[Lepcha(s)]{.style_}

[Lesbos]{.style_}

[Lettering;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Decoration]{.style_}

[Letters (Number of) to a line]{.style_}

[Leviticus (Book of)]{.style_}

[Lew Chew Islands]{.style_}

[Lewis (William)]{.style_}

[Lexicography]{.style_}

[Leyden (University Library)]{.style_}

[Lha-sa]{.style_}

[Liang]{.style_}

[Libel, Libellus]{.style_}

[Liber;---Armachanus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Book of
Armagh;---Commonei;---de Regis,---de Wintonia;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Domesday Book;---hymnorum;---Judic-carius;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Domesday Book]{.style_}

[Librarians, Libraries;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Halls of Books,
House of Tablets, etc.]{.style_}

[Librarii]{.style_}

[Libretto]{.style_}

[Libri lintei;---magistra-tum;---tagetici;---vegonici, etc.]{.style_}

[Lichfield Cathedral Library]{.style_}

[Li Chi;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Book of Rites]{.style_}

[Licinius (C.) Macer]{.style_}

[Liege]{.style_}

[Lieh nü chuan]{.style_}

[Li-fang]{.style_}

[Life of St. Columba.; ------St. Cuthbert;]{.style_} [see
also]{.style_1} [Lives]{.style_}

[Limb]{.style_}

[Lime]{.style_}

[Limestone]{.style_}

[Li-mo]{.style_}

[Linden]{.style_}

[Lindisfarne,---Gospels]{.style_}

[Linen]{.style_}

[Lines (Number of) to a column]{.style_}

[Lingua franca]{.style_}

[Lipit-Ishtar]{.style_}

[Li Po]{.style_}

[Li shu]{.style_}

[Lismore]{.style_}

[Li Ssu]{.style_}

[Literary catalogues---criticism;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Collating
texts;---productions; ---sources]{.style_}

[Literati]{.style_}

[Literature;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [under individual
languages]{.style_}

[Littera scottica (Litterae tunsae)]{.style_}

[Li-tu;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Ni-do]{.style_}

[Liturgical languages---texts, Liturgies]{.style_}

[Liu-Hsiang]{.style_}

[Liu Hsin]{.style_}

[Liver-shaped tablets;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Hepatoscopy]{.style_}

[Lives of outstanding people; ---of Saints.;]{.style_} [see
also]{.style_1} [Life]{.style_}

[Livia]{.style_}

[Livius Andronicus]{.style_}

[Livy]{.style_}

[Li-yen]{.style_}

[Llandaff]{.style_}

[Llywarch Hen]{.style_}

[Local traditions;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Oral traditions,
Traditions]{.style_}

[Lollards]{.style_}

[Lo-lo]{.style_}

[London;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [British Museum, India Office
Library, Public Record Office, Victoria and Albert Museum,
etc.]{.style_}

[Longfellow (Henry Wadsworth)]{.style_}

[Longinus]{.style_}

[Loose-leaf system]{.style_}

[Lorraine]{.style_}

[Lorrha]{.style_}

[Lorsch; - Gospels]{.style_}

[Loss of Greek literary works; ------Latin------;------Pre-Columbian
American books]{.style_}

[Lo-tsun]{.style_}

[Lou-lan]{.style_}

[Louvain]{.style_}

[Louvre Museum]{.style_}

[Love songs]{.style_}

[Lower classes;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Social
conditions]{.style_}

[Lucan (M. Annaeus Lucanus)]{.style_}

[Lucca]{.style_}

[Lucian of Samosata]{.style_}

[Lucius Calpurnius Piso;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Piso]{.style_}

[Lucius Tarquinius Superbus]{.style_}

[Lucretius (Titus---Carus)]{.style_}

[Lucilius (Gaius)]{.style_}

[Luebeck]{.style_}

[Lugaid Lánfili]{.style_}

[Lugalbanda]{.style_}

[Lull (Archbishop)]{.style_}

[Lun Yü;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Analects of Confucius]{.style_}

[Luxeuil]{.style_}

[Luxor]{.style_}

[Lycia(n)]{.style_}

[Lydgate (John)]{.style_}

[Lydia(n)]{.style_}

[Lyons]{.style_}

[Lyric poetry]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[MABINOGION]{.style_}

[Macartney Collection]{.style_}

[Maccabees (Books of)]{.style_}

[Mac Durnan Gospels]{.style_}

[Macgregor (Sir James, Dean of Lismore)]{.style_}

[Mac Regol Gospels]{.style_}

[Madras]{.style_}

[Madrid, American Museum;---, National Library;]{.style_} [see
also]{.style_1} [Escurial]{.style_}

[Madur]{.style_}

[Maelbrighte Gospels]{.style_}

[Maeldithruib]{.style_}

[Magic(al),---spells]{.style_}

[Magna Graecia;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Greece]{.style_}

[Mah bh rata]{.style_}

[Mah vagga]{.style_}

[Mah vansa]{.style_}

[Maildubh]{.style_}

[Mainz]{.style_}

[Maithil]{.style_}

[Majuscule manuscripts]{.style_}

[Majuscule(s)]{.style_}

[Makonde]{.style_}

[Malabar Coast]{.style_}

[Malaga]{.style_}

[Malay (-a, -an)]{.style_}

[Malay-Polynesian]{.style_}

[Malayalam]{.style_}

[Malaysia]{.style_}

[Malcolm III Canmore]{.style_}

[Malkite(s);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Melkite(s)]{.style_}

[Malmesbury]{.style_}

[Maltese]{.style_}

[Man (Creation of)]{.style_}

[Manchester (John Rylands Library)]{.style_}

[Manchu(rian)]{.style_}

[Mandaean(s)]{.style_}

[Mandarin black;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [China, Chinese ink]{.style_}

[Manes, M n , Manichaean(s), (-ism, -us)]{.style_}

[Manipuri(s)]{.style_}

[Manorial history; see Domesday Book]{.style_}

[Manual of Discipline;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Sectarian
document]{.style_}

[Manuscripts;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [also Codices, Rolls, Clay
tablets, etc.]{.style_}

[Manx]{.style_}

[Many sh ("Collection of the Myriad Leaves")]{.style_}

[Map;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Walter Map]{.style_}

[Maple]{.style_}

[Mappillas]{.style_}

[Maps]{.style_}

[Maqr z]{.style_}

[Mar th]{.style_}

[Marble]{.style_}

[Marco Polo]{.style_}

[Marcus Pacuvius;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Pacuvius]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---------Porcius Cato;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Cato]{.style_}

[---------Terentius Varro;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Varro]{.style_}

[---------Valerius Martialis;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Martial]{.style_}

[Margareth (St., Queen of Scotland)]{.style_}

[Margins]{.style_}

[Mari]{.style_}

[Maronite(s)]{.style_}

[Martial (Marcus Valerius Martialis)]{.style_}

[Martin (St.) of Tours]{.style_}

[Martyrology]{.style_}

[Mashtoz;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Mesrop (St.)]{.style_}

[Mas(s)oretic]{.style_}

[Materia Medica]{.style_}

[Mathematical leather roll; ---papyrus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Papyrus;---sciences]{.style_}

[Matilda (Abbess of Essen)]{.style_}

[Matilda (wife of William the Conqueror)]{.style_}

[Ma Tuan-lin]{.style_}

[Maurist Congregation;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Benedictine
Monasteries, Monasteries, Monks, etc.]{.style_}

[Maximinus]{.style_}

[May;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Ahkin May]{.style_}

[Maya]{.style_}

[Mazateco]{.style_}

[Mazdayasnianism]{.style_}

[M. Baebius Pamphilus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Baebius]{.style_}

[Meaning of "book"]{.style_}

[Measures]{.style_}

[Mecca]{.style_}

[Medes]{.style_}

[Medeshamstede; see Peterborough]{.style_}

[Mediaeval;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Medieval]{.style_}

[Medical lore,---texts,---treatises]{.style_}

[Medicine men]{.style_}

[Medieval Ages;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Middle
Ages;---scripts]{.style_}

[Medina]{.style_}

[Medînet el-Fayyûm;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Fayyûm;---Madi]{.style_}

[Mediterranean]{.style_}

[Megalithic]{.style_}

[Megiddo]{.style_}

[Megillah, Megillath sepher, Megill th]{.style_}

[Megillath ha-hoday th;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Dead Sea
Scrolls]{.style_}

[Meithei]{.style_}

[Mei Ying-tso]{.style_}

[Melkite(s)]{.style_}

[Mellitus]{.style_}

[Melrose]{.style_}

[Membrána]{.style_}

[Memorizing]{.style_}

[Memory, Memories;---aids]{.style_}

[Memphis, Memphitic]{.style_}

[Mena, Menes]{.style_}

[Menander (Greek play-writer); (King---)]{.style_}

[Mencius]{.style_}

[Mendai;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Mandaean(s)]{.style_}

[Mendoza Codex;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Codex Mendoza]{.style_}

[Mêng Tien]{.style_}

[Mercia(n)]{.style_}

[Meroë]{.style_}

[Merovingian]{.style_}

[Mesogothic;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Gothic]{.style_}

[Mesopotamia]{.style_}

[Mesrop (St.)]{.style_}

[Metal(s);]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Bronze, Gold, Lead, Silver,
etc.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Metal pens,---reeds;---used as writing material]{.style_}

[Metaphysics]{.style_}

[Metrodorus of Lampsacus]{.style_}

[Meugant]{.style_}

[Mexican, Mexico]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[------, National Anthropological Museum]{.style_}

[Michigan (University of---; Museum of Archaeology)]{.style_}

[Middle Ages]{.style_}

[Middle-Assyrian laws]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---Comedy]{.style_}

[---East;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Ancient Middle East]{.style_}

[---English]{.style_}

[---High German]{.style_}

[---Hill]{.style_}

[---Indian]{.style_}

[---Iranian]{.style_}

[Middleton (Lord)]{.style_}

[Midlands]{.style_}

[Milan (Ambrosian Library)]{.style_}

[Milinda-Pañha]{.style_}

[Military achievements,---documents, ---science,---texts]{.style_}

[Mimes]{.style_}

[Mindoro]{.style_}

[lliniature(s); see Illumination]{.style_}

[Minium]{.style_}

[Minoan;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Cretan]{.style_}

[Minuscule(s)]{.style_}

[Mishnah]{.style_}

[Missil]{.style_}

[Missionaries]{.style_}

[Mitchell (J.)]{.style_}

[Mithridates of Pontus]{.style_}

[Mixe]{.style_}

[Mixtec(s)]{.style_}

[Mlecchas]{.style_}

[Mnemonic aids;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Memory]{.style_}

[Model letters]{.style_}

[Modern Age,]{.style_} [and passim]{.style_1}

::: calibre5
:::

[---German]{.style_}

[---scripts]{.style_}

[---terms]{.style_}

[Modi]{.style_}

[Mohammed;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Islam]{.style_}
[and]{.style_1} [Moslem(s)]{.style_}

[Mo-kao grottos]{.style_}

[Moling (St.)]{.style_}

[Monasteries, Monastic houses, Monasticism, Monks]{.style_}

[Monastic cathedral in England; ---England;---libraries;---reforms in
England;---scriptoria]{.style_}

[Mongolia(n), Mongol(s)]{.style_}

[Monkwearmouth;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Wearmouth]{.style_}

[Monophysitism]{.style_}

[Monosyllabic languages]{.style_}

[Monothelite(s)]{.style_}

[Mon(s)]{.style_}

[Mons Badon]{.style_}

[Montana]{.style_}

[Monte Cassino (Montecassino, Cassino)]{.style_}

[Montfauçon (Bernard de)]{.style_}

[Moore Bede]{.style_}

[Moore (Bishop)]{.style_}

[Moors]{.style_}

[Morden (S.)]{.style_}

[Morgan Library; see Pierpont Morgan Library]{.style_}

[Mosaic legislation]{.style_}

[Moslem(s);]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Arabia(n), Islam,
etc.]{.style_}

[Mo-so]{.style_}

[Mossul]{.style_}

[Mother of pearl used as writing material]{.style_}

[Mo-ti]{.style_}

[Movable types]{.style_}

[Mulberry tree]{.style_}

[Mulling's (St.) Gospels;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Book of Moling,
Mulling]{.style_}

[Multiplication tables]{.style_}

[Mummy of Agram (Zagreb);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Zagreb]{.style_}

[Munda]{.style_}

[Munich]{.style_}

[Munto Panei]{.style_}

[Music]{.style_}

[Mycenae]{.style_}

[Mylasa]{.style_}

[Myrddin]{.style_}

[Mystics]{.style_}

[Mythology, Myths]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[NABONIDUS]{.style_}

[N g r ;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Devan g r]{.style_}

[N gasena]{.style_}

[Nahuas]{.style_}

[Nail-headed character;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Siddhamatrka]{.style_}

[Nam language]{.style_}

[Nancy]{.style_}

[Nanking]{.style_}

[Napata(n)]{.style_}

[Naples; ---National Museum of Antiquities]{.style_}

[Napoleon]{.style_}

[Nara]{.style_}

[Nar-mer Palette]{.style_}

[Nasir ad-D n T s]{.style_}

[Naskhi]{.style_}

[Nasurai;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Mandaean(s)]{.style_}

["National" hands,---scripts,---styles of writing]{.style_}

["Native" languages;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Vulgar
languages]{.style_}

[Natural Sciences]{.style_}

[Nazaraean(s);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Mandaean(s)]{.style_}

[Near East;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [under Egypt, Mesopotamia,
etc.]{.style_}

[(Nebuchadnezzar)Nebuchadrezzar II]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Necho]{.style_}

[Needlework]{.style_}

[Neglect of books;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Destruction of
books]{.style_}

[Negro-African languages]{.style_}

[Nehemiah (Book of)]{.style_}

[Nennius]{.style_}

[Neo-Babylonia(n)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[----Confucianism]{.style_}

[----Platonic]{.style_}

[----Punic]{.style_}

[Nep l]{.style_}

[Nepos (Cornelius---)]{.style_}

[Nero]{.style_}

[Nesana]{.style_}

[Nestorian(ism)]{.style_}

[Neumann (G. S.)]{.style_}

[New r ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Nep l]{.style_}

[Newcastle-on-Tyne]{.style_}

[New Testament]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Bible]{.style_}

[Newton (Sir Isaac)]{.style_}

[New York;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Pierpont Morgan Library]{.style_}

[Nicholas Damascenus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Damascenus]{.style_}

[Nicholas de Hereford]{.style_}

[Nicholas Schow;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Schow]{.style_}

[(Ni-do), Nitok]{.style_}

[Ni-hon-gi (Ni-hon-sho.ki), "Chronicles of Japan"]{.style_}

[Nile Valley;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Egypt]{.style_}

[Nine Oghuz;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Uighur]{.style_}

[Nineveh]{.style_}

[Nippur]{.style_}

[Nisibis]{.style_}

[Nitrian Desert;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Deipara Convent]{.style_}

[Niya]{.style_}

[Norfolk]{.style_}

[Norman(s)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---Conquest]{.style_}

[Normandy]{.style_}

[Norman-French]{.style_}

[Norse(men)]{.style_}

[North Africa;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Africa]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---America;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [America]{.style_}

[--- ryan;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Khotan]{.style_}

[North China]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---Deccan;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Deccan]{.style_}

[---England;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Lindisfarne, Northumbria,
Whitby, Yorkshire, etc.]{.style_}

[---India]{.style_}

[---Italy]{.style_}

[---men;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Norse]{.style_}

[---Sea]{.style_}

[---Semitic alphabet]{.style_}

[---Spain;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Spain]{.style_}

[North-East(ern) India]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---Siberia;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Siberia]{.style_}

[---Turkestan;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Eastern Turkestan]{.style_}

[Northumbria(n)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---codices written in majuscule]{.style_}

[North-West(ern)India;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Kharoshthi]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---Mongolia;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Mongolia]{.style_}

[---Provinces]{.style_}

[Norway, Norwegian]{.style_}

[Norwich]{.style_}

[Notched sticks]{.style_}

[Nubia(n)]{.style_}

[Numa Pompilius]{.style_}

[Number mysticism;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Magic]{.style_}

[Numbers (Book of)]{.style_}

[Numerals, Numerical notation]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[OAXACA]{.style_}

[Occleve;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Hoccleve]{.style_}

[O'Cleary (Michael)]{.style_}

[Octoptych]{.style_}

[Odes (Book of)]{.style_}

[Odo]{.style_}

[O'Donnell]{.style_}

[Odra;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Orissa]{.style_}

[Odyssey;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Homer]{.style_}

[Official documents,---scripts]{.style_}

[Oghamic inscriptions]{.style_}

[Old Comedy]{.style_}

[Old English; last------scholars; last------riters;------literature: its
decadence]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---Frisian]{.style_}

[---High German]{.style_}

[Old Irish glosses]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---Latin version;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Vetus Latina]{.style_}

[---Norse]{.style_}

[---Persian]{.style_}

[---Saxon]{.style_}

[---Syriac version;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Curetonian MS.]{.style_}

[---Stone Age]{.style_}

[---Testament;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Bible, Hebrew(s), Sacred
Scriptures, etc.]{.style_}

[Oldest history of any Germanic people]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---ink material known;---written literature;]{.style_} [see
also]{.style_1} [under Earliest]{.style_}

[Ollamhs.]{.style_}

[Olympiodorus]{.style_}

[Oman (Gulf of)]{.style_}

[Omar (Caliph)]{.style_}

[Omar Khayyâm]{.style_}

[Omen;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Divination books, Magical spells,
Rituals]{.style_}

[Omphalós;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Rod(s)]{.style_}

[Onin]{.style_}

[On-mun]{.style_}

[Onyx]{.style_}

[Opistógrapha, Opistographs]{.style_}

[Optical devices]{.style_}

[Optics]{.style_}

[Oracle bones]{.style_}

[Oral recitation,---tradition;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Tradition(s)]{.style_}

[Orators]{.style_}

[Orders (Monastic;---of Canons);]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Monasteries]{.style_}

[Oriental books;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [under individual
languages;---Churches;---inks]{.style_}

[Origen, Origines]{.style_}

[Origins of Celtic literature------English learning;---------literature;
------Hiberno-Saxon illumination;------Irish writing; ------iron-gall
ink;------language ------parchment; ------pens------peoples;
------scripts;------the Arthurian romance;------the
book;------uncials]{.style_}

[Orihon]{.style_}

[Orissa, Or ya]{.style_}

[Orkhon (River);---script; see Kök Turki]{.style_}

[Orkney]{.style_}

[Ornamentation; see also Decoration]{.style_}

[Orosius (Presbyter)]{.style_}

[Orpheus]{.style_}

[Orthodox Church; see Eastern Church]{.style_}

[Osney Abbey (Oxford)]{.style_}

[Osrhoëne; see Edessa]{.style_}

[Ossian(ic)]{.style_}

[Ostraca]{.style_}

[Ostrogothic see also Gothic]{.style_}

[Oswald (St.)]{.style_}

[Oswiu (King)]{.style_}

[Ottoman]{.style_}

[Outlying regions]{.style_}

[Ovid]{.style_}

[Owain Kyveiliog (Prince)]{.style_}

[Oxford;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Ashmolean Museum, Bodleian
Library;---, Exeter College;---, Jesus College]{.style_}

[Oxyrhynchus;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [under Papyrus]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[PACUVIUS (Marcus)]{.style_}

[Padua]{.style_}

[Page(s), Pagina(e), and]{.style_} [passim]{.style_1}

[Paged book;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Codex]{.style_}

[Pahlavi; Pahlavik]{.style_}

[Painters, Painting(s)]{.style_}

[Painting-brush(es)]{.style_}

[Palaeographyand]{.style_} [passim]{.style_1}

[Palaeolithic; see Old Stone Age; Stone Age]{.style_}

[Palatine Anthology]{.style_}

[---------Library (Rome)]{.style_}

[Palawan]{.style_}

[Palembang]{.style_}

[Palenque]{.style_}

[Palermo]{.style_}

[Palestine;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Bible, Hebrew(s), Holy Land,
Jewish, Jews, etc.]{.style_}

[Palette(s); see Writing-palette(s)]{.style_}

[P l]{.style_}

[Palimpsest]{.style_}

[Palm leaves]{.style_}

[Palmyra palm; see Palm leaves]{.style_}

[Pandya]{.style_}

[Papal chancery]{.style_}

[Paper]{.style_}

[Papier, Papka]{.style_}

[Papyrology]{.style_}

[Papyrus,---rolls]{.style_}

[Papyrus (Papyri) Anastasi I;---II;---VII; Ani---; Augusta---;
Berlin---No. 911, No. 10571; No. 8502, 309; Chester Beatty
---;---Claudius Coptic Pap. I (Heidelberg);---Ebers; Edwin Smith
Surgical---; Greenfield ---.;---Grenf.; ---Harris I (Great
Harris---);---Harris; Hieratica---Hibeh---; Hunefer---; Nash---;
Nebseni---Nu---;---Oxyrh.;---Petrie---Prisse;---Q (St. John);
Regia---Rhind Mathematical ------Sallier II;---Schow (Charta Borgiana);
Timotheus---; Wilbour---]{.style_}

[Paragraph, Paragraphos]{.style_}

[Paraphrase]{.style_}

[Parchemin ; see Parchment]{.style_}

[Parchment ---: its advantages;---rolls]{.style_}

[Paris;---. Louvre Museum;---, National Library;---Psalter]{.style_}

[Parker (Archbishop)]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---------'s Chronicle]{.style_}

[Parsees]{.style_}

[Parsik]{.style_}

[Parthian(s)]{.style_}

[Paschal controversy]{.style_}

[Pashtu]{.style_}

[Pasteboard]{.style_}

[Pastoral Care; see Gregory the Great; ---Letters; see Aelfric
(Abbot)]{.style_}

[Pataliputra]{.style_}

[Paterculus (Marcus Velleius)]{.style_}

[Patimokkha MS.]{.style_}

[Patras]{.style_}

[Patriarch(ates)]{.style_}

[Patrick (St.)]{.style_}

[Paul (St.)]{.style_}

[Pauline Epistles; see also Epistles]{.style_}

[Pausanias]{.style_}

[Pavia]{.style_}

[Pazand]{.style_}

[P-Celtic; see P Group of Celtic]{.style_}

[Peking]{.style_}

[Peloponnese, Peloponnesus]{.style_}

[Pen(s)]{.style_}

[Pen-nibs]{.style_}

[Pencil]{.style_}

[Pen-holder]{.style_}

[Peniarth]{.style_}

[Penknife]{.style_}

[Pennsylvania]{.style_}

[Pennwampum]{.style_}

[Pentaptych]{.style_}

[Pentateuch;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Bible, Hebrew(s), T rah,
etc.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Pergamena (Charta), Pergam né, Pergament;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Parchment]{.style_}

[Pergamum]{.style_}

[Perishable writing materials;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Leather,
Paper, Papyrus, Parchment, Wood, etc.]{.style_}

[Peronne (Perrona Scottorum)]{.style_}

[Perpetual light]{.style_}

[Perry (J.)]{.style_}

[Persecution;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Destruction of books; Religious
conflicts,---persecutions]{.style_}

[Perseus]{.style_}

[Persia(n),---Gulf ---ink;----Arabic;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Arab(ic) -Persian]{.style_}

[Persius (A. Persius Flaccus)]{.style_}

[Peru, Peruvian]{.style_}

[Peshitt (Peshitt )]{.style_}

[Petalismos]{.style_}

[Peterborough;---Chronicle]{.style_}

[Peter (St.)]{.style_}

[Petrarca, Petrarch]{.style_}

[Petronius]{.style_}

[P Group of Celtic]{.style_}

[Phaistos disc]{.style_}

[Pharisee(s)]{.style_}

[Philadelphia (Pa.), University Museum]{.style_}

[Philip II]{.style_}

[Philippines]{.style_}

[Philistines]{.style_}

[Phillatius]{.style_}

[Philo of Byzantium]{.style_}

[Philodemus]{.style_}

[Philology;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Grammatical texts,
Lexicography, etc.]{.style_}

[Philosopher's stone]{.style_}

[Philosophical works]{.style_}

[Philoxenian version, Philoxenus]{.style_}

[Philyra]{.style_}

[Phocylides of Miletus]{.style_}

[Phoenician(s)]{.style_}

[Phonetic writing]{.style_}

[Photius (Patriarch, St.)]{.style_}

[Phrynicus]{.style_}

[Pi; see Writing-brush]{.style_}

[Piacenza]{.style_}

[Piaggi (monk)]{.style_}

[Piao]{.style_}

[Pictograms, Pictography]{.style_}

[Pictographic representation of stories;---symbols;
---writing;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [under individual
scripts]{.style_}

[Pict(s), Pictish]{.style_}

[Picture stories;---writing]{.style_}

[Pictures;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Painting]{.style_}

[Piemontese (Alessio)]{.style_}

[Pien-chun]{.style_}

[Pierpont Morgan Library, New York]{.style_}

[Pigment;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Ink]{.style_}

[Pills]{.style_}

[Pinakes]{.style_}

[Pínax; see Wood]{.style_}

[Pindar]{.style_}

[Pippin]{.style_}

[Pisa]{.style_}

[Pi Shêng]{.style_}

[Piso (Lucius Calpurnius)]{.style_}

[Pitakas]{.style_}

[Pius X (Pope)]{.style_}

[Piyyut(im)]{.style_}

[Plagiarism]{.style_}

[Plaque of Aha; see Aha]{.style_}

[Plaster]{.style_}

[Plato]{.style_}

[Plautus (T. Maccius---)]{.style_}

[Plays; see Comedy, Drama, Tragedy]{.style_}

[Plegmund]{.style_}

[Pliny (---the Elder, Gaius Plinius Secundus;---the Younger, Gaius
Plinius Caecilius Secundus)]{.style_}

[Plundering of libraries; see Destruction of books]{.style_}

[Plutarch]{.style_}

[Po Chu-I]{.style_}

[Poetess]{.style_}

[Poetry, Poets]{.style_}

[Pointed hand; see Minuscule(s)]{.style_}

[Points; see Punctuation]{.style_}

[Poland, Polish]{.style_}

[Political persecution]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Destruction of
books]{.style_}

[Pollux]{.style_}

[Polybius]{.style_}

[Polycarp (St.)]{.style_}

[Polynesia]{.style_}

[Polyptych]{.style_}

[Polytonic languages]{.style_}

[Pompeii]{.style_}

[Pompeius Trogus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Trogus]{.style_}

[Pontifex Maximus]{.style_}

[Pontificals]{.style_}

["Popish" books]{.style_}

[Poplar (tree)]{.style_}

[Portici]{.style_}

[Portraits]{.style_}

[Portugal, Portuguese]{.style_}

[Poseidippus]{.style_}

[P th]{.style_}

[Pottery]{.style_}

[Poultices]{.style_}

[Prague]{.style_}

[Prayer books, Prayers]{.style_}

[Precious metals]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Gold, Metal,
Silver]{.style_}

[Pre-Columbian America;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[America]{.style_}

[Pre-Dynastic period.]{.style_}

[Prehistoric]{.style_}

[Pre-Islamic Turki;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Kök Turki]{.style_}

[Pre-Jerome version;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Vetus Latina]{.style_}

[Preliminary stages of writing]{.style_}

[Premonstratensian Order of canons]{.style_}

[Preservation of books]{.style_}

[Pre-Sophoclean tragedy]{.style_}

[Priene]{.style_}

[Priestly (J.)]{.style_}

[Priests]{.style_}

[Primitive (---communities, ---devices of communication,---human
records,---peoples,---writing materials,---writings), and]{.style_}
[passim]{.style_1}

[Princeton, (University Library),]{.style_}

[Printing; beginning of Japanese---; official---;---ink]{.style_}

[Priscian]{.style_}

[Prisms]{.style_}

[Proclus (of Cyzicus)]{.style_}

[Prodromes of the book]{.style_}

[Profound Mystery,---Purity,---Spirituality]{.style_}

[Propertius (Sextus)]{.style_}

[Property marks]{.style_}

[Prophet-codex]{.style_}

[Prophets (Books of the)]{.style_}

[Prose;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Literature;---Romance]{.style_}

[Prosper (St.)]{.style_}

[Protagoras]{.style_}

[Proto-Beng l ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Beng l ;----Elamite; see
Elam(ites)]{.style_}

[Provençal]{.style_}

[Proverbs (Book of - )]{.style_}

[Prykke (The) of Conscience; see Rolle (Richard)]{.style_}

[Psalms]{.style_}

[Psalter; Gallican---;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Gallican Psalter;
---of Southampton]{.style_}

[Psammetichus (Psamtik) I]{.style_}

[Pseudo-Aristeas]{.style_}

[Ptah-hotep]{.style_}

[Ptolemaic period]{.style_}

[---------Recension]{.style_}

[Ptolemy (Claudius Ptolomaeus)]{.style_}

[Ptolemy I (Sot r);---II (Philadelphus);---V (Epiphanes)]{.style_}

[Public Record Office, London]{.style_}

[Publishers;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Book trade]{.style_}

[Publius Terentius Afer;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Terence]{.style_}

[Pugillares;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Wood]{.style_}

[Pumice-stone]{.style_}

[Punctuation]{.style_}

[Punic]{.style_}

[Pur nas]{.style_}

[Pustaha, Pustaka]{.style_}

[Punj b( )]{.style_}

[Purple Codices;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Codex and under
individual codices]{.style_}

[Purvey (John)]{.style_}

[Pylos]{.style_}

[Pyramid Recension,---Texts]{.style_}

[Pyu]{.style_}

[Pyxíon;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Wood]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[QAL'AT Shergat;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Ashur]{.style_}

[Qara Balgasun]{.style_}

[Qaraites;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Karaites]{.style_}

[Qarashahr]{.style_}

[Q-Celtic;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Q Group of Celtic]{.style_}

[Qeriath ha-T rah ("Reading of the Torah")]{.style_}

[Q Group of Celtic]{.style_}

[Quarter-uncial]{.style_}

[Quarto]{.style_}

[Qubilay Kh n]{.style_}

[Quill,---feather,---nib,---pen,]{.style_}

[Quinternion]{.style_}

[Quintilian (Fabius Quintilianus)]{.style_}

[Quintus Curtius Rufus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Curtius
Rufus]{.style_}

[Quintus Ennius;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Ennius]{.style_}

[Quipu]{.style_}

[Quires]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[RABBI(S)]{.style_}

[Rabbinic hand]{.style_}

[Rabb l]{.style_}

[Radioactivity-dating]{.style_}

[Rajputana]{.style_}

[R m yana]{.style_}

[Ramesses II]{.style_}

[Ramsey]{.style_}

[Randolph (Thomas)]{.style_}

[Ranwolff]{.style_}

[Ras esh-Shamrah;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Ugarit]{.style_}

[Ravenna]{.style_}

[Reading (Benedictine abbey of)]{.style_}

[Reading books]{.style_}

[Real history]{.style_}

[Receptacles (Writing-);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Grinders, Inkhorn,
Writing box]{.style_}

[Recipe (Italian medieval) for ink]{.style_}

[Record of Central Asia (The)]{.style_}

[Recorded history]{.style_}

[Records]{.style_}

[Recovery of MSS.;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Discoveries]{.style_}

[Recto]{.style_}

[Red Book of Clanranald;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Book of
Clanranald;---------Hergest]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[------Ink]{.style_}

[---------Monastery]{.style_}

[Reed(s), Reed-pens;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Calamus]{.style_}

[Reed-pen receptacles]{.style_}

[Reformation]{.style_}

[Refuse heaps]{.style_}

[Regula Magistri]{.style_}

[Regulae Pastoralis;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Gregory the
Great]{.style_}

[Regularis Concordia]{.style_}

[Reichenau]{.style_}

[Reids]{.style_}

[Religion; (The Book follows---)]{.style_}

[Religious conflicts,---persecutions;
---controversies;---literature,]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Sacred
Scriptures]{.style_}

[Renaissance]{.style_}

[Rèndjang]{.style_}

[Renleaux]{.style_}

[Reprint series]{.style_}

[Reproduction of books.]{.style_}

[Resina]{.style_}

[Reverence for literature]{.style_}

[Revised Version of the Wycliffe Bible]{.style_}

[Revision of the Latin Bible]{.style_}

[Revival;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Renaissance]{.style_}

[Rheims]{.style_}

[Rhind Mathematical Papyrus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Papyrus]{.style_}

[Rhine]{.style_}

[Rhodes]{.style_}

[Riding]{.style_}

[Rievaulx Abbey]{.style_}

[Rig-Veda]{.style_}

[Ritual Bible scrolls]{.style_}

[---------symbolism]{.style_}

[Rituals]{.style_}

[Riukiu Islands]{.style_}

[Rochester]{.style_}

[Rock paintings]{.style_}

[Rods (Roll-)]{.style_}

[Rolle (Richard), The Prykke of Conscience]{.style_}

[Rollers;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Rods]{.style_}

[Roll(s) ; see]{.style_} [also]{.style_1} [Papyrus]{.style_}

[Roman, Rome ;---Britain;---Capitol;---law;---tradition;---type of
letters]{.style_}

[Romance (languages)]{.style_}

[Romances;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Short stories]{.style_}

[Rome or Ireland?;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Religious
controversies]{.style_}

[Roscrea]{.style_}

[Roses (Wars of the)]{.style_}

[Rotulus Wintoniae;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Domesday Book]{.style_}

[Roumania]{.style_}

[Round hand;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Majuscule]{.style_}

[Round Table]{.style_}

[Royalist(s);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Melkite(s)]{.style_}

[Rubricators, Rubrics]{.style_}

[Rufanos of Samosata]{.style_}

[Rulers, Ruling]{.style_}

[Runes, Runic]{.style_}

[Runge (F. J.)]{.style_}

[Rushworth Gospels;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Mac Regol
Gospels]{.style_}

[Russia(n); ---manuscripts]{.style_}

[Rustic capitals]{.style_}

[Ruth (Book of)]{.style_}

[Ruthwell]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[SAADYA (Jewish Gaon)]{.style_}

[Sabaean]{.style_}

[Sacks of cities and libraries;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Destruction
of books]{.style_}

[Sacramentaries]{.style_}

[Sacred names;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Divine name
;---Scriptures;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Bible]{.style_}

[Sadducees]{.style_}

[Sagas]{.style_}

[Sahak (St.)]{.style_}

[Sahidic (Sa'idic)]{.style_}

[Saint abbreviated in St.;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [under
individual names, such as Ambrose (St.), Augustine (St.), Basil (St.),
Columba (St.), etc.]{.style_}

[St. Albans]{.style_}

[St. Augustine Gospels;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Canterbury
Gospels]{.style_}

[St. Catherine on Mt. Sinai]{.style_}

[St. Chad Gospels;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Codex Ceaddae]{.style_}

[St. Cuthbert Gospels;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Lindisfarne
Gospels]{.style_}

[St. Denis (Paris)]{.style_}

[St. Edmondsbury (St. Edmundsbury);]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Bury
St. Edmunds]{.style_}

[St. Gall]{.style_}

[---------, Chapter Library]{.style_}

[St. Martin at Tours]{.style_}

[St. Mary Deipara;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Deipara Convent]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[St. Mary's of York]{.style_}

[St. Maur-sur-Loire]{.style_}

[St. Paul;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Jarrow]{.style_}

[St. Paul (Canterbury)]{.style_}

[St. Paul (Carinthia)]{.style_}

[St. Peter;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Wearmouth]{.style_}

[St. Peter (Canterbury)]{.style_}

[St. Riquier]{.style_}

[Saints]{.style_}

[Saïs]{.style_}

[Saïtica (Papyrus)]{.style_}

[Saka;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Khotanese]{.style_}

[S kyamuni;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Buddha]{.style_}

[Saladin (Salah-ad-d n Yusuf)]{.style_}

[Salamanca]{.style_}

[Salerno]{.style_}

[Sallust (Crispus Gaius Sallustius)]{.style_}

[Saltair na Rann]{.style_}

[S ma-Veda]{.style_}

[S m nids]{.style_}

[Samaria]{.style_}

[Samaritan(s)]{.style_}

[Samarqand]{.style_}

[Samnite]{.style_}

[Samsognamba]{.style_}

[Samson]{.style_}

[Samuel (Books of)]{.style_}

[San Pablito]{.style_}

[Sandal-wood]{.style_}

[Sangams]{.style_}

[Sanskrit]{.style_}

[Sappho]{.style_}

[Saqqarah]{.style_}

[S rad]{.style_}

[Sarcophagi]{.style_}

[Sardanapalus;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Ashurbanipal]{.style_}

[Sardinia]{.style_}

[Sarezzano]{.style_}

[Sargon]{.style_}

[Sasanian]{.style_}

[Sastras]{.style_}

[Satire]{.style_}

[Saxon;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Anglo-Saxon, Old Saxon, West
Saxon]{.style_}

[Sayings]{.style_}

[Sayings of Jesus]{.style_}

[Scandinavia]{.style_}

[Schaffhausen]{.style_}

[Scheele (R. W.)]{.style_}

[Schisms; see Religious conflicts]{.style_}

[School texts]{.style_}

[Schools]{.style_}

[Schow (Nicholas)]{.style_}

[Schuttig (O.)]{.style_}

[Sciences]{.style_}

[Scotland, Scottish]{.style_}

[Scottish Gae)(ic).]{.style_}

[Scribes]{.style_}

[Scribe's knife;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Penknife]{.style_}

[Scriptorium (-a)]{.style_}

[Scriptura saxonica;---Thesauri Regis;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Domesday Book]{.style_}

[Scrolls]{.style_}

[Sculpture(s)]{.style_}

[Seals]{.style_}

[Secret language]{.style_}

[Sectarian document]{.style_}

[Sects;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Religious conflicts]{.style_}

[Secular codices,---manuscripts;---literature; ---scribes]{.style_}

[Seguin (A.)]{.style_}

[Seleucia]{.style_}

[Seleucid era,---period]{.style_}

[Semantic(s)]{.style_}

[Semicolon;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Punctuation]{.style_}

[Semite(s), Semitic;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [under individual
peoples and languages]{.style_}

[Semi-uncial(s)]{.style_}

[Semonides]{.style_}

[Senchas Már]{.style_}

[Seneca]{.style_}

[Sennacherib]{.style_}

[Separation marks,---of words;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Punctuation]{.style_}

[Sepher]{.style_}

[Septimius Severus]{.style_}

[Septuagint]{.style_}

[Serapeum]{.style_}

[Sermo Lupi ad Anglos;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Wulfstan]{.style_}

[Serpentine]{.style_}

[Service-books]{.style_}

[Set-jong]{.style_}

[Severus of Antioch]{.style_}

[Seville]{.style_}

[Sevrian]{.style_}

[Sextus Propertius;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Propertius]{.style_}

[Shahbazgarhi]{.style_}

[Shakespeare]{.style_}

[Shamanist]{.style_}

[Shan]{.style_}

[Shan-si]{.style_}

[Sharpening (of pens)]{.style_}

[Sheets]{.style_}

[Schema']{.style_}

[Shen te]{.style_}

[Shên Yüeh]{.style_}

[Sherborne]{.style_}

[Shetlands]{.style_}

[Shih]{.style_}

[Shih Ching]{.style_}

[Shih Huang-ti]{.style_}

[Shih-ming]{.style_}

[Shipwrecked sailor (Story of the)]{.style_}

[Shirvan;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Albania (Colchis)]{.style_}

[Shoreham (William), Religious Poems]{.style_}

[Short stories]{.style_}

[Sh toku (Empress)]{.style_}

[Sh toku Taishi (Prince Sh toku)]{.style_}

[Shoulder-blades employed as writing material]{.style_}

[Shrewsbury]{.style_}

[Shu Ching;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Canon of Documents]{.style_}

[Shunka-ishnala]{.style_}

[Shuo-tao]{.style_}

[Shuo wen (chieh tzu)]{.style_}

[Shuruppak]{.style_}

[Siam]{.style_}

[Siberia]{.style_}

[Siberian script;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Kök Turki]{.style_}

[Sibyl]{.style_}

[Sicily]{.style_}

[Sickler (F. C.)]{.style_}

[Siddhamatrka character]{.style_}

[Sides (of the pages)]{.style_}

[Sidon]{.style_}

[Signal horns]{.style_}

[Sikh(s)]{.style_}

[Sikkim]{.style_}

[Silius]{.style_}

[Silk]{.style_}

[Sillybos;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Label]{.style_}

[Silver (---writing)]{.style_}

[Simonides of Ceos]{.style_}

[Sinai]{.style_}

[Sindh]{.style_}

[Sinhalese;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Ceylon]{.style_}

[Sinkiang]{.style_}

[Sino-Japanese style of writing]{.style_}

[Si-nuhe (Story of)]{.style_}

[Sinuthius;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Shen te]{.style_}

[Sixtus V (Pope)]{.style_}

[Skins;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Leather]{.style_}

[Slaves]{.style_}

[Slavic, Slavonic, Slavs]{.style_}

[Sleeping Beauty]{.style_}

[Sloane (Sir Hans)]{.style_}

[Small Seal characters]{.style_}

[Smith (Sir Thomas)]{.style_}

[Smoke and fire signals]{.style_}

[Smoothening of wax on tablets]{.style_}

[Smyrna]{.style_}

[So Ching]{.style_}

[Social conditions: their influence on book-production]{.style_}

[Sogdian(s)]{.style_}

[Soiscela mor Choluim Chille (The Great Gospel of Columcille=
Columba);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Book of Kells]{.style_}

[Soli]{.style_}

[Solon (Lawgiver)]{.style_}

[Solon (Poet)]{.style_}

[Song]{.style_}

[Song Hyon]{.style_}

[Song of Songs (Songs of Solomon)]{.style_}

[Sonnecken]{.style_}

[Sophocles]{.style_}

[Sosii (Brothers)]{.style_}

[Sotheby's]{.style_}

[Sound-writing ; \*]{.style_}[see also]{.style_1} [Phonetic
writing]{.style_}

[South Arabic]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---------Asia;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Asia, Further India]{.style_}

[---------England ;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Kent, Mercia,
Wessex, West Saxon]{.style_}

[---------Europe]{.style_}

[---------France;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [France]{.style_}

[---------India]{.style_}

[---------Italian,---Italy]{.style_}

[---------Malabar]{.style_}

[---------Russia;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Russia]{.style_}

[---------Semitic]{.style_}

[South-eastern Asia;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Asia]{.style_}

[South-western Asia;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Asia]{.style_}

[Spain, Spaniards, Spanish]{.style_}

[Speckled Book of Mac Egan]{.style_}

[Speculum Alchemiae]{.style_}

[Spelling]{.style_}

[Spells;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Magic(al)]{.style_}

[Spitama Zarathushtra;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Zoroaster]{.style_}

[Split pen]{.style_}

[Sponge]{.style_}

[Spread of Greek;---of Latin]{.style_}

[Square Hebrew Script;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Hebrew]{.style_}

[Ssu-k'u ch'üan-shu]{.style_}

[Ssu-ma Ch'ien]{.style_}

[Stabbed bindings]{.style_}

[Stages of writing]{.style_}

[Stamping pottery]{.style_}

[Statues]{.style_}

[Steel-pen(s)]{.style_}

[Stelae]{.style_}

[Stesichorus of Himera]{.style_}

[Stili, Stilus]{.style_}

[Stimulus-diffusion]{.style_}

[Stobaeus (John of Stobi)]{.style_}

[Stone Age Paintings]{.style_}

[Stones used as writing material]{.style_}

[Stonyhurst College]{.style_}

[Story-tellers;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Bards]{.style_}

[Stowe Missal]{.style_}

[Strabo]{.style_}

[Strasbourg]{.style_}

[Streoneshalch;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Whitby]{.style_}

[St pa]{.style_}

[Subh ti]{.style_}

[Subscription;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Colophon]{.style_}

[Sudan(ese)]{.style_}

[Suetonius (C. Suetonius Tranquillus)]{.style_}

[Suffolk]{.style_}

[Sulpicius Severus]{.style_}

[Sumatra(n)]{.style_}

[Sumer(ian)]{.style_}

[Sun Ch'ang-chih]{.style_}

[Sun Kuo]{.style_}

[Sung Dynasty]{.style_}

[Superstition(s)]{.style_}

[S ra]{.style_}

[Survey of England]{.style_}

[Survival of books;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Preservation of
books]{.style_}

[Susa]{.style_}

[S tra (S tta) Pitaka]{.style_}

[Suttanipâta]{.style_}

[Swahili]{.style_}

[Sweden, Swedish]{.style_}

[Switzerland;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [St. Gall]{.style_}

[Syllabaries, Syllabic writing]{.style_}

[Syllables]{.style_}

[Symbolism]{.style_}

[Symmachus]{.style_}

[Sympathetic inks;---magic;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Magic(al)]{.style_}

[Synagogue;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Bible, Hebrew, Jewish,
etc.]{.style_}

[Synaxary]{.style_}

[Synod of Winchester;---Whitby;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Council]{.style_}

[Synthetic writing]{.style_}

[Syöl Chong]{.style_}

[Syracuse]{.style_}

[Syriac, Syria(n)]{.style_}

[Syrian-Arab influences]{.style_}

[Systems of writing;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [under individual
scripts]{.style_}

[Szechuan]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[TA'AR HA-SOPHER]{.style_}

[Tablets (Wooden---, Writing---, Waxen---, etc.)]{.style_}

[Taccherini (Otto)]{.style_}

[Ta chuan]{.style_}

[Tacitus (Cornelius)]{.style_}

[Tadatala, T dit li ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Palm leaves]{.style_}

[Tadjikistan]{.style_}

[Taeniotica (Papyrus)]{.style_}

[Taffeta]{.style_}

[Tagbanuwá]{.style_}

[Tailpiece;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Colophon(s)]{.style_}

[Táin Bó Cúalnge (Cattle-Raid of Cooley, Story of the)]{.style_}

[Ta-jong]{.style_}

[Takhelgnamba]{.style_}

[Tala, T li ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Palm leaves]{.style_}

[Tale(s);]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Fairy tales]{.style_}
[and]{.style_1} [Short stories]{.style_}

[Talhaern]{.style_}

[Taliesin]{.style_}

[Talipat palm;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Palm leaves]{.style_}

[Tallaght]{.style_}

[Tally sticks]{.style_}

[Talmud]{.style_}

[Tamara]{.style_}

[Tamarisk]{.style_}

[Tamil]{.style_}

[T'ang Dynasty]{.style_}

[Tanganyika Territory]{.style_}

[Tanjore]{.style_}

[Tao]{.style_}

[Taoism, Taoists]{.style_}

[Tarentum]{.style_}

[Targûm (-îm)]{.style_}

[T r ;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Palm leaves]{.style_}

[Tarigach;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Palm leaves]{.style_}

[Tarim (River)]{.style_}

[Tarquinius (Lucius) Superbus]{.style_}

[Ta(r)tar]{.style_}

[Tatian;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Diatessaron]{.style_}

[Taungthu]{.style_}

[Tavernier]{.style_}

[Tebtunis]{.style_}

[Tech-Moling]{.style_}

[Tell Abu Harmel]{.style_}

[Tell el-Amarna]{.style_}

[Tell el-Harîri;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Mari]{.style_}

[Tell el-Muqayyar;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Ur]{.style_}

[Tellicherry]{.style_}

[Telugu]{.style_}

[Temple schools;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Schools]{.style_}

[Templum]{.style_}

[Ten Commandments translated into English]{.style_}

[Tenochtitlan]{.style_}

[Terence (P. Terentius "Afer")]{.style_}

[Terentianus Maurus]{.style_}

[Terpander of Lesbos]{.style_}

[Terryglass]{.style_}

[Tertullian (Q. Septimius Florens Tertullianus, of Carthage)]{.style_}

[Tetragrammaton;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Divine Name]{.style_}

[Teuton(ic)]{.style_}

[Textbooks;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [School texts]{.style_}

[Texcoco, Tezcuco (Lake)]{.style_}

[Textiles;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Cotton, Linen, etc.]{.style_}

[Thai]{.style_}

[Thaletas of Crete]{.style_}

[Thames]{.style_}

[Thanet (Isle of)]{.style_}

[Thebaic]{.style_}

[Theban Recension]{.style_}

[Thebes]{.style_}

[Theocritus]{.style_}

[Theodore of Tarsus]{.style_}

[Theodoric the Great]{.style_}

[Theodorus Ab Kurrah]{.style_}

[Theologians, Theology]{.style_}

[Theophilus (of Alexandria)]{.style_}

[Theophilus (twelfth century A.D.)]{.style_}

[Theophrastus]{.style_}

[Theopompus]{.style_}

[Ther -g tha, Ther -g tha]{.style_}

[Therapeutae]{.style_}

[Thomas à Kempis]{.style_}

[Thomas Aquinas;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Aquinas]{.style_}

[Thomas of Harqel]{.style_}

[Thoth]{.style_}

[Thracian(s)]{.style_}

[Thucydides]{.style_}

[Th lth]{.style_}

[Thutmose III]{.style_}

[Tiberias]{.style_}

[Tiberius]{.style_}

[Tibet]{.style_}

[Tibetan-Mongolian]{.style_}

[Tibeto-Burman]{.style_}

[Tibullus]{.style_}

[T'ien Chu]{.style_}

[T'ien-shan (Mountains)]{.style_}

[Tigernach (St.)]{.style_}

[Tiglath-Pileser I;---III]{.style_}

[Tigris;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Mesopotamia]{.style_}

[Tilia]{.style_}

[Timotheus (of Miletus)]{.style_}

[Tin]{.style_}

[Tinta, Tinte;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Ink]{.style_}

[Title, Titulus]{.style_}

[Tobias (Bishop of Rochester)]{.style_}

[Tokharian]{.style_}

[Tol k p-piyam]{.style_}

[Toltec(s)]{.style_}

[Tomb of Aristotle]{.style_}

[Tones;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Chinese]{.style_}

[Toquz Oghuz;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Uighur]{.style_}

[T rah;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Pentateuch and Scrolls]{.style_}

[Torbach]{.style_}

[Tortoise-shell]{.style_}

[Tours]{.style_}

[Town building]{.style_}

[Toyung]{.style_}

[Tractatus Arianorum]{.style_}

[Tracy (Richard)]{.style_}

[Trade mark]{.style_}

[Tradition(s);]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Local---,
Oral---]{.style_}

[Tragedies (Tragedy)]{.style_}

[Transitional writings]{.style_}

[Translation bureaux, Translations, Translators]{.style_}

[Transversa charta]{.style_}

[Transylvania]{.style_}

[Travancore]{.style_}

[Traveller (The);]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Widsith]{.style_}

[Trees;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Wood,]{.style_} [and]{.style_1}
[under names of trees]{.style_}

[Trent]{.style_}

[Trèves]{.style_}

[Trigonometry]{.style_}

[Trigrams]{.style_}

[Trilingual inscription]{.style_}

[Tripitaka]{.style_}

[Triple Veda]{.style_}

[Tripolis]{.style_}

[Triptych]{.style_}

[Tro y Ortolano (Juan de)]{.style_}

[Trogus]{.style_}

[Trojan War]{.style_}

[Tryphon]{.style_}

[Ts'ao Ts'o's son]{.style_}

[Ts'ê]{.style_}

[Ts'ien-fo-tung;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Caves of the Thousand
Buddhas]{.style_}

[Ts'ui Yüan]{.style_}

[Tudor (House of)]{.style_}

[Tullus Hostilius]{.style_}

[Tulu-Malay lam]{.style_}

[Tunes]{.style_}

[Tun-huang.]{.style_}

[Tunis]{.style_}

[Turco-Tartar]{.style_}

[Turfan]{.style_}

[Turin]{.style_}

[Turkestan, Turki]{.style_}

[Turkey, Turkish]{.style_}

[Turkized Indo-Europeans]{.style_}

[T'u shu chi chêng]{.style_}

[Tutankhamen (Tomb of)]{.style_}

[Tu Yu]{.style_}

[T z;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Bark]{.style_}

[Twelve Prophets (Book of the)Twin monasteries]{.style_}

[Two Brothers (Tale of the)]{.style_}

[Tycho Brahé]{.style_}

[Tyre]{.style_}

[Tyrtaeus]{.style_}

[Tzolkin(s)]{.style_}

[Tzu]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[UGARIT]{.style_}

[Uighur]{.style_}

[Ulpian (Domitius Ulpianus)]{.style_}

[Ulster;---cycle]{.style_}

[Ultra-violet rays]{.style_}

[Ulysses]{.style_}

[Umbilicus; see Rods]{.style_}

[Uncials]{.style_}

[Undeciphered (inscriptions,---scripts)]{.style_}

[Unity of Britain]{.style_}

[Universality (of Culture)]{.style_}

[Universities]{.style_}

[Unknown literary works]{.style_}

[Unrolling (of rolls)]{.style_}

[Upanishads]{.style_}

[Upper Palaeolithic;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Old Stone Age]{.style_}
[and]{.style_1} [Stone Age]{.style_}

[Uppsala]{.style_}

[Ur-Bau]{.style_}

[Ur Kasdim,---of the Chaldees]{.style_}

[Urdu]{.style_}

[Urfa;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Edessa]{.style_}

[Uruk]{.style_}

[U.S.A.;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [America, Brooklyn, New York,
Pennsylvania, Washington, etc.]{.style_}

[Usher (Ussher), Archbishop James]{.style_}

[Uzbekistan]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[VAI syllabary]{.style_}

[Vajracchedita;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Diamond S tra]{.style_}

[Valentinian]{.style_}

[Valerius Maximus]{.style_}

[Vandalism;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Destruction of
books]{.style_}

[Van der Tuuk Collection]{.style_}

[Varnish (White)]{.style_}

[Varro (Marcus Terentius)]{.style_}

[Vatican Library, Galleries and Museums]{.style_}

[Vatteluttu]{.style_}

[Ved ngas]{.style_}

[Vedas, Vedic]{.style_}

[Vellum;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Parchment]{.style_}

[Venice]{.style_}

[Vercelli;---Codex]{.style_}

[Vergil;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Virgil]{.style_}

[Vernaculars]{.style_}

[Version(s); see Bible version(s), Translations]{.style_}

[Verso]{.style_}

[Vertere stilum]{.style_}

[Vertical lines]{.style_}

[Vespasian]{.style_}

[Vesuvius (Mt.)]{.style_}

[Vetus Latina]{.style_}

[Victor II (Pope)]{.style_}

[Victoria and Albert Museum]{.style_}

[Victorius (Aquitanian scholar)]{.style_}

[Vienna]{.style_}

[Vienna (Gaul)]{.style_}

[Vikings]{.style_}

[Villa dei papiri (Villa of the Papyri); ---Ercolanese dei
Pisoni]{.style_}

[Vinaya]{.style_}

[Virgil]{.style_}

[Vision (The) of Piers the Plowman]{.style_}

[Visogothic]{.style_}

[Vitae Sanctorum Hiberniae;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Lives of the
Saints (of Ireland)]{.style_}

[Vitalian (Pope)]{.style_}

[Vitruvius]{.style_}

[Vitulinum; see Vellum]{.style_}

[Vivarium]{.style_}

[Vocabularies;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Dictionaries,
Lexicography]{.style_}

[Voeroes Patak]{.style_}

[Volador]{.style_}

[Volume]{.style_}

[Votive inscriptions]{.style_}

["Vulgar" languages;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1}
[Vernaculars]{.style_}

[Vulgate (version);---: its best copy]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[WADI Maraba'at]{.style_}

[Waldburg (St.)]{.style_}

[Waldensian literature]{.style_}

[Wales;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Welsh;---, National Library
of]{.style_}

[Wall-paintings]{.style_}

[Water Map]{.style_}

[Wang Chieh]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---Ch'ung]{.style_}

[---Hsi-chih]{.style_}

[---Hsien-chih]{.style_}

[---Jên]{.style_}

[---Ying-lin]{.style_}

[Wani]{.style_}

[Wan-shin]{.style_}

[Wâqf]{.style_}

[War between the Children of Light and the Children of Darkness (Book of
the)]{.style_}

[War-cries]{.style_}

[Warka;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Uruk]{.style_}

[Wars of the Gael with the Gaill (Book of the)]{.style_}

[Wash (River)]{.style_}

[Washington, Freer Collection;---, Library of Congress]{.style_}

[Watt]{.style_}

[Waverley Abbey]{.style_}

[Wax, Waxed, Waxen tablets]{.style_}

[Wearmouth]{.style_}

[Weber (Charles)]{.style_}

[Weber Collection]{.style_}

[Wei]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---Po-Yang]{.style_}

[---Shuo]{.style_}

[Welsh]{.style_}

[Wenamûn (Story of)]{.style_}

[Werferth (Bishop)]{.style_}

[Wessex]{.style_}

[West, and]{.style_} [passim; see also]{.style_1} [West(ern)
Europe]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[---Africa;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Africa]{.style_}

[---(ern) Asia]{.style_}

[---Christianity]{.style_}

[---Europe]{.style_}

[---Hind]{.style_}

[---India]{.style_}

[---Isles (Scotland)]{.style_}

[---Midland]{.style_}

[---Saxon(s)]{.style_}

[---Syrians;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Jacobites]{.style_}

[---Turki dialect]{.style_}

[Westminster Abbey---(City of)]{.style_}

[Whalebone used as writing material]{.style_}

[Wheel (The use of)]{.style_}

[Whitby]{.style_}

[White Monastery]{.style_}

[Widsith]{.style_}

[Width of columns]{.style_}

[Wilfred (St.)]{.style_}

[Willehald (St.)]{.style_}

[William of Malmesbury]{.style_}

[William the Conqueror;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Norman
Conquest]{.style_}

[Williams (Archbishop)]{.style_}

[Williamson (P.)]{.style_}

[Willibald (St.)]{.style_}

[Willibrord (St.)]{.style_}

[Winchester;---school]{.style_}

[Winter-count chronicles]{.style_}

[Wisdom (Book of)]{.style_}

[Wisdom literature]{.style_}

[Wise]{.style_}

[Witches]{.style_}

[Wood, Wooden diptychs,---slips, ---stationery,---tablets (Pugillares),
---writing materials, etc.;----block books;----blocks,----cuts]{.style_}

[Worcester]{.style_}

[Word-for-word translation]{.style_}

[Word-signs]{.style_}

[Wrapper for scrolls]{.style_}

[Write (The word)]{.style_}

[Writing, and]{.style_} [passim;]{.style_1} [---box;---brush;]{.style_}
[see also]{.style_1} [Brush;---case;---ink;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1}
[Ink;---materials and---tools;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Leather,
Palm leaves, Paper, Parchment; ---palettes;---school]{.style_}

[Wu Chao-li]{.style_}

[Wuerzburg]{.style_}

[Wulfilas]{.style_}

[Wulfsige (Bishop)]{.style_}

[Wulfstan (Archbishop)]{.style_}

[Wu Tao-hsüan]{.style_}

[Wu-ti]{.style_}

[Wycliffe (John),---Bible]{.style_}

[Wynbald (St.)]{.style_}

[Wynfrith; see Boniface (St.)]{.style_}

[Wyrta]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[XENOPHON]{.style_}

[Xicalanca]{.style_}

[Xiphilinus]{.style_}

[Xochun]{.style_}

[Xylographica;]{.style_} [see also]{.style_1} [Wood-blocks,
----cuts]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[YAGHNA B]{.style_}

[Yajur-Veda]{.style_}

[Yanktonnai]{.style_}

[Yao]{.style_}

[Yellow Book of Lecan]{.style_}

[Yezidi]{.style_}

[YHWH;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Divine Name]{.style_}

[Yin ("seal", "printing")]{.style_}

[York(shire)]{.style_}

[Yucatan, Yucatec]{.style_}

[Yüeh Shih]{.style_}

[Yugo-Slavia]{.style_}

[Yu Hai]{.style_}

[Yukaghir]{.style_}

[Yung-lo ta-tien]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Zagreb (Archaeological Museum)]{.style_}

[Zapotec(s)]{.style_}

[Zarathushtra;]{.style_} [see]{.style_1} [Zoroaster]{.style_}

[Zealots]{.style_}

[Zenodotus]{.style_}

[Zero (Sign for---).]{.style_}

[Zodiac]{.style_}

[Zoroaster, Zoroastrian]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[N. B.---I express my gratitude to a few friends---particularly Mrs. R.
Singer and Mr. W. C. Ivory---who helped me in the preparation of this
index.---D. D.]{.style_}
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: {#calibre_link-285 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-20}

::: calibre7
:::

### [A CATALOG OF SELECTED DOVER BOOKS IN ALL FIELDS OF INTEREST]{.style_2} {#a-catalog-of-selected-dover-books-in-all-fields-of-interest .calibre10}

::: calibre5
:::

::: img_container
![](images/000107.jpg){.calibre2}
:::

::: calibre5
:::

[]{#calibre_link-663}

## [A CATALOG OF SELECTED DOVER BOOKS IN ALL FIELDS OF INTEREST]{.style_2} {#a-catalog-of-selected-dover-books-in-all-fields-of-interest-1 .calibre12}

::: calibre5
:::

[100 BEST-LOVED POEMS, Edited by Philip Smith. "The Passionate Shepherd
to His Love," "Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?" "Death, be not
proud," "The Raven," "The Road Not Taken," plus works by Blake,
Wordsworth, Byron, Shelley, Keats, many others. 96pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-28553-7]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[100 SMALL HOUSES OF THE THIRTIES, Brown-Blodgett Company. Exterior
photographs and floor plans for 100 charming structures. Illustrations
of models accompanied by descriptions of interiors, color schemes,
closet space, and other amenities. 200 illustrations. 112pp. 8 x
11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-44131-8]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[1000 TURN-OF-THE-CENTURY HOUSES: With Illustrations and Floor Plans,
Herbert C. Chivers. Reproduced from a rare edition, this showcase of
homes ranges from cottages and bungalows to sprawling mansions. Each
house is meticulously illustrated and accompanied by complete floor
plans. 256pp. 9 x 12¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45596-3]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[101 GREAT AMERICAN POEMS, Edited by The American Poetry & Literacy
Project. Rich treasury of verse from the 19th and 20th centuries
includes works by Edgar Allan Poe, Robert Frost, Walt Whitman, Langston
Hughes, Emily Dickinson, T. S. Eliot, other notables. 96pp. x
8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-40158-8]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[101 GREAT SAMURAI PRINTS, Utagawa Kuniyoshi. Kuniyoshi was a master of
the warrior woodblock print---and these 18th-century illustrations
represent the pinnacle of his craft. Full-color portraits of renowned
Japanese samurais pulse with movement, passion, and remarkably fine
detail. 112pp. 8% x 11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46523-3 ABC OF BALLET, Janet Grosser. Clearly worded, abundantly
illustrated little guide defines basic ballet-related terms: arabesque,
battement, pas de chat, relevé, sissonne, many others. Pronunciation
guide included. Excellent primer. 48pp. x 5¾.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-40871-X]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ACCESSORIES OF DRESS: An Illustrated Encyclopedia, Katherine Lester and
Bess Viola Oerke. Illustrations of hats, veils, wigs, cravats, shawls,
shoes, gloves, and other accessories enhance an engaging commentary that
reveals the humor and charm of the many-sided story of accessorized
apparel. 644 figures and 59 plates. 608pp. 6 x 9¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-43378-1]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN, Mark Twain. Join Huck and Jim as their
boyhood adventures along the Mississippi River lead them into a world of
excitement, danger, and self-discovery. Humorous narrative, lyrical
descriptions of the Mississippi valley, and memorable characters. 224pp.
x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-28061-6]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ALICE STARMORE'S BOOK OF FAIR ISLE KNITTING, Alice Starmore. A noted
designer from the region of Scotland's Fair Isle explores the history
and techniques of this distinctive, stranded-color knitting style and
provides copious illustrated instructions for 14 original knitwear
designs. 208pp. 8 x 10 .]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-47218-3]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[Browse over 9,000 books at
[www.doverpublications.com](http://www.doverpublications.com){.calibre6
target="_new"}]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ALICE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND, Lewis Carroll. Beloved classic about
a little girl lost in a topsy-turvy land and her encounters with the
White Rabbit, March Hare, Mad Hatter, Cheshire Cat, and other
delightfully improbable characters. 42 illustrations by Sir John
Tenniel. 96pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-27543-4]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[AMERICA'S LIGHTHOUSES: An Illustrated History, Francis Ross Holland.
Profusely illustrated fact-filled survey of American lighthouses since
1716. Over 200 stations---East, Gulf, and West coasts, Great Lakes,
Hawaii, Alaska, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and the Mississippi and
St. Lawrence Rivers. 240pp. 8 x 10¾.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-25576-X]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[AN ENCYCLOPEDIA OF THE VIOLIN, Alberto Bachmann. Translated by
Frederick H. Martens. Introduction by Eugene Ysaye. First published in
1925, this renowned reference remains unsurpassed as a source of
essential information, from construction and evolution to repertoire and
technique. Includes a glossary and 73 illustrations. 496pp. 6 x
9¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46618-3]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ANIMALS: 1,419 Copyright-Free Illustrations of Mammals, Birds, Fish,
Insects, etc., Selected by Jim Harter. Selected for its visual impact
and ease of use, this outstanding collection of wood engravings presents
over 1,000 species of animals in extremely lifelike poses. Includes
mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, fish, insects, and other
invertebrates. 284pp. 9 x 12.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-23766-4]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE ANNALS, Tacitus. Translated by Alfred John Church and William
Jackson Brodribb. This vital chronicle of Imperial Rome, written by the
era's great historian, spans A.D. 14-68 and paints incisive
psychological portraits of major figures, from Tiberius to Nero. 416pp.
x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45236-0]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ANTIGONE, Sophocles. Filled with passionate speeches and sensitive
probing of moral and philosophical issues, this powerful and
often-performed Greek drama reveals the grim fate that befalls the
children of Oedipus. Footnotes. 64pp. x 8 ¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-27804-2]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ART DECO DECORATIVE PATTERNS IN FULL COLOR, Christian Stoll. Reprinted
from a rare 1910 portfolio, 160 sensuous and exotic images depict a
breathtaking array of florals, geometrics, and abstracts - all elegant
in their stark simplicity. 64pp. 8% x 11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-44862-2]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE ARTHUR RACKHAM TREASURY: 86 Full-Color Illustrations, Arthur
Rackham. Selected and Edited by Jeff A. Menges. A stunning treasury of
86 full-page plates span the famed English artist's career,
from]{.style_} [Rip Van Winkle]{.style_1} [(1905) to masterworks such
as]{.style_} [Undine, A Midsummer Night's Dream, and Wind in the
Willows]{.style_1} [(1939). 96pp. 8% x 11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-44685-9]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE AUTHENTIC GILBERT & SULLIVAN SONGBOOK, W. S. Gilbert and A. S.
Sullivan. The most comprehensive collection available, this songbook
includes selections from every one of Gilbert and Sullivan's light
operas. Ninety-two numbers are presented uncut and unedited, and in
their original keys. 410pp. 9 x 12.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-23482-7]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE AWAKENING, Kate Chopin. First published in 1899, this controversial
novel of a New Orleans wife's search for love outside a stifling
marriage shocked readers. Today, it remains a first-rate narrative with
superb characterization. New introductory Note. 128pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-86-27786-0]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[BASIC DRAWING, Louis Priscilla. Beginning with perspective, this
commonsense manual progresses to the figure in movement, light and
shade, anatomy, drapery, composition, trees and landscape, and outdoor
sketching. Black-and-white illustrations throughout. 128pp. 8 x
11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45815-6]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE BATTLES THAT CHANGED HISTORY, Fletcher Pratt. Historian profiles 16
crucial conflicts, ancient to modern, that changed the course of Western
civilization. Gripping accounts of battles led by Alexander the Great,
Joan of Arc, Ulysses S. Grant, other commanders. 27 maps. 352pp. 5 x
8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-41129-X]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[BEETHOVEN'S LETTERS, Ludwig van Beethoven. Edited by Dr. A. C.
Kalischer. Features 457 letters to fellow musicians, friends, greats,
patrons, and literary men. Reveals musical thoughts, quirks of
personality, insights, and daily events. Includes 15 plates. 410pp. 5 x
8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-22769-3]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[BERNICE BOBS HER HAIR AND OTHER STORIES, F. Scott Fitzgerald. This
brilliant anthology includes 6 of Fitzgerald's most popular stories:
"The Diamond as Big as the Ritz," the title tale, "The Offshore Pirate,"
"The Ice Palace," "The Jelly Bean," and "May Day." 176pp. 5 x
8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-47049-0]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[BESLER'S BOOK OF FLOWERS AND PLANTS: 73 Full-Color Plates from Hortus
Eystettensis, 1613, Basilius Besler. Here is a selection of magnificent
plates from the]{.style_} [Hortus Eystettensis,]{.style_1} [which
vividly illustrated and identified the plants, flowers, and trees that
thrived in the legendary German garden at Eichstätt. 80pp. 8 x
11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46005-3]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE BOOK OF KELLS, Edited by Blanche Cirker. Painstakingly reproduced
from a rare facsimile edition, this volume contains full-page
decorations, portraits, illustrations, plus a sampling of textual leaves
with exquisite calligraphy and ornamentation. 32 full-color
illustrations. 32pp. 9 x 12¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-24345-1]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE BOOK OF THE CROSSBOW: With an Additional Section on Catapults and
Other Siege Engines, Ralph Payne-Gallwey. Fascinating study traces
history and use of crossbow as military and sporting weapon, from Middle
Ages to modern times. Also covers related weapons: balistas, catapults,
Turkish bows, more. Over 240 illustrations. 400pp. 7¼ x 10 .]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-28720-3]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE BUNGALOW BOOK: Floor Plans and Photos of 112 Houses, 1910, Henry L.
Wilson. Here are 112 of the most popular and economic blueprints of the
early 20th century---plus an illustration or photograph of each
completed house. A wonderful time capsule that still offers a wealth of
valuable insights. 160pp. 8% x 11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45104-6]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE CALL OF THE WILD, Jack London. A classic novel of adventure, drawn
from London's own experiences as a Klondike adventurer, relating the
story of a heroic dog caught in the brutal life of the Alaska Gold Rush.
Note. 64pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-26472-6]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[CANDIDE, Voltaire. Edited by Francois-Marie Arouet. One of the world's
great satires since its first publication in 1759. Witty, caustic
skewering of romance, science, philosophy, religion, government - nearly
all human ideals and institutions. 112pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-26689-3]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[CELEBRATED IN THEIR TIME: Photographic Portraits from the George
Grantham Bain Collection, Edited by Amy Pastan. With an Introduction by
Michael Carlebach. Remarkable portrait gallery features 112 rare images
of Albert Einstein, Charlie Chaplin, the Wright Brothers, Henry Ford,
and other luminaries from the worlds of politics, art, entertainment,
and industry. 128pp. 8% x 11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46754-6]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[CHARIOTS FOR APOLLO: The NASA History of Manned Lunar Spacecraft to
1969, Courtney G. Brooks, James M. Grimwood, and Loyd S. Swenson, Jr.
This illustrated history by a trio of experts is the definitive
reference on the Apollo spacecraft and lunar modules. It traces the
vehicles' design, development, and operation in space. More than 100
photographs and illustrations. 576pp. 6¾ x 9¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46756-2]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A CHRISTMAS CAROL, Charles Dickens. This engrossing tale relates
Ebenezer Scrooge's ghostly journeys through Christmases past, present,
and future and his ultimate transformation from a harsh and grasping old
miser to a charitable and compassionate human being. 80pp. x
8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-26865-9]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[COMMON SENSE, Thomas Paine. First published in January of 1776, this
highly influential landmark document clearly and persuasively argued for
American separation from Great Britain and paved the way for the
Declaration of Independence. 64pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-29602-4]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE COMPLETE SHORT STORIES OF OSCAR WILDE, Oscar Wilde. Complete texts
of "The Happy Prince and Other Tales," "A House of Pomegranates," "Lord
Arthur Savile's Crime and Other Stories," "Poems in Prose," and "The
Portrait of Mr. W. H." 208pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-48&45216-6]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[COMPLETE SONNETS, William Shakespeare. Over 150 exquisite poems deal
with love, friendship, the tyranny of time, beauty's evanescence, death,
and other themes in language of remarkable power, precision, and beauty.
Glossary of archaic terms. 80pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-26686-9]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE COUNT OF MONTE CRISTO: Abridged Edition, Alexandre Dumas. Falsely
accused of treason, Edmond Dantès is imprisoned in the bleak Chateau
d'If. After a hair-raising escape, he launches an elaborate plot to
extract a bitter revenge against those who betrayed him. 448pp. x
8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45643-9]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[CRAFTSMAN BUNGALOWS: Designs from the Pacific Northwest, Yoho &
Merritt. This reprint of a rare catalog, showcasing the charming
simplicity and cozy style of Craftsman bungalows, is filled with photos
of completed homes, plus floor plans and estimated costs. An
indispensable resource for architects, historians, and illustrators.
112pp. 10 x 7.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46875-5]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[CRAFTSMAN BUNGALOWS: 59 Homes from "The Craftsman," Edited by Gustav
Stickley. Best and most attractive designs from Arts and Crafts Movement
publication ---1903---1916---includes sketches, photographs of homes,
floor plans, descriptive text. 128pp. 8¼ x 11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-25829-7]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[CRIME AND PUNISHMENT, Fyodor Dostoyevsky. Translated by Constance
Garnett. Supreme masterpiece tells the story of Raskolnikov, a student
tormented by his own thoughts after he murders an old woman. Overwhelmed
by guilt and terror, he confesses and goes to prison. 480pp. x
8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-41587-2]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE AND OTHER GREAT DOCUMENTS OF AMERICAN
HISTORY: 1775-1865, Edited by John Grafton. Thirteen compelling and
influential documents: Henry's "Give Me Liberty or Give Me Death,"
Declaration of Independence, The Constitution, Washington's First
Inaugural Address, The Monroe Doctrine, The Emancipation Proclamation,
Gettysburg Address, more. 64pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-41124-9]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE DESERT AND THE SOWN: Travels in Palestine and Syria, Gertrude Bell.
"The female Lawrence of Arabia," Gertrude Bell wrote captivating,
perceptive accounts of her travels in the Middle East. This intriguing
narrative, accompanied by 160 photos, traces her 1905 sojourn in
Lebanon, Syria, and Palestine. 368pp. 5% x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46876-3]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A DOLL'S HOUSE, Henrik Ibsen. Ibsen's best-known play displays his
genius for realistic prose drama. An expression of women's rights, the
play climaxes when the central character, Nora, rejects a smothering
marriage and life in "a doll's house." 80pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-27062-9]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[DOOMED SHIPS: Great Ocean Liner Disasters, William H. Miller, Jr.
Nearly 200 photographs, many from private collections, highlight tales
of some of the vessels whose pleasure cruises ended in catastrophe:
the]{.style_} [Morro Castle, Normandie, Andrea Doria, Europa,]{.style_1}
[and many others. 128pp. 8 x 11¾.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45366-9]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE DORÉ BIBLE ILLUSTRATIONS, Gustave Doré. Detailed plates from the
Bible: the Creation scenes, Adam and Eve, horrifying visions of the
Flood, the battle sequences with their monumental crowds, depictions of
the life of Jesus, 241 plates in all. 241pp. 9 x 12.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-23004-X]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[DRAWING DRAPERY FROM HEAD TO TOE, Cliff Young. Expert guidance on how
to draw shirts, pants, skirts, gloves, hats, and coats on the human
figure, including folds in relation to the body, pull and crush, action
folds, creases, more. Over 200 drawings. 48pp. 8¼ x 11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45591-2]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[DUBLINERS, James Joyce. A fine and accessible introduction to the work
of one of the 20th century's most influential writers, this collection
features 15 tales, including a masterpiece of the short-story genre,
"The Dead." 160pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-26870-5]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[EASYTO-MAKE POP-UPS, Joan Irvine. Illustrated by Barbara Reid. Dozens
of wonderful ideas for three-dimensional paper fun - from holiday
greeting cards with moving parts to a pop-up menagerie. Easy-to-follow,
illustrated instructions for more than 30 projects. 299 black-and-white
illustrations. 96pp. 8% x 11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-44622-0]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[EASYTO-MAKE STORYBOOK DOLLS: A "Novel" Approach to Cloth Dollmaking,
Sherralyn St. Clair. Favorite fictional characters come alive in this
unique beginner's dollmaking guide. Includes patterns for Pollyanna,
Dorothy from]{.style_} [The Wonderful Wizard of Oz,]{.style_1} [Mary
of]{.style_} [The Secret Garden,]{.style_1} [plus easy-to-follow
instructions, 263 black-and-white illustrations, and an 8-page color
insert. 112pp. 8¼ x 11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-47360-0]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[EINSTEIN'S ESSAYS IN SCIENCE, Albert Einstein. Speeches and essays in
accessible, everyday language profile influential physicists such as
Niels Bohr and Isaac Newton. They also explore areas of physics to which
the author made major contributions. 128pp. 5 x 8.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-47011-3]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[EL DORADO: Further Adventures of the Scarlet Pimpernel, Baroness Orczy.
A popular sequel to]{.style_} [The Scarlet Pimpernel,]{.style_1} [this
suspenseful story recounts the Pimpernel's attempts to rescue the
Dauphin from imprisonment during the French Revolution. An irresistible
blend of intrigue, period detail, and vibrant characterizations. 352pp.
x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-44026-5]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ELEGANT SMALL HOMES OF THE TWENTIES: 99 Designs from a Competition,
Chicago Tribune. Nearly 100 designs for five- and six-room houses
feature New England and Southern colonials, Normandy cottages, stately
Italianate dwellings, and other fascinating snapshots of American
domestic architecture of the 1920s. 112pp. 9 x 12.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46910-7]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE: The Original Edition, William Strunk, Jr. This
is the book that generations of writers have relied upon for timeless
advice on grammar, diction, syntax, and other essentials. In concise
terms, it identifies the principal requirements of proper style and
common errors. 64pp. 5 x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-44798-7]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE ELUSIVE PIMPERNEL, Baroness Orczy. Robespierre's revolutionaries
find their wicked schemes thwarted by the heroic Pimpernel---Sir
Percival Blakeney. In this thrilling sequel, Chauvelin devises a plot to
eliminate the Pimpernel and his wife. 272pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45464-9]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[AN ENCYCLOPEDIA OF BATTLES: Accounts of Over 1,560 Battles from 1479
B.C. to the Present, David Eggenberger. Essential details of every major
battle in recorded history from the first battle of Megiddo in 1479 B.C.
to Grenada in 1984. List of battle maps. 99 illustrations. 544pp. 6½ x
9¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-24913-1]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ENCYCLOPEDIA OF EMBROIDERY STITCHES, INCLUDING CREWEL, Marion Nichols.
Precise explanations and instructions, clearly illustrated, on how to
work chain, back, cross, knotted, woven stitches, and many more---178 in
all, including Cable Outline, Whipped Satin, and Eyelet Buttonhole. Over
1400 illustrations. 219pp. 8 x 11¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-22929-7]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ENTER JEEVES: 15 Early Stories, P. G. Wodehouse. Splendid collection
contains first 8 stories featuring Bertie Wooster, the deliciously dim
aristocrat and Jeeves, his brainy, imperturbable manservant. Also, the
complete Reggie Pepper (Bertie's prototype) series. 288pp. 5% x
8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-29717-9]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ERIC SLOANE'S AMERICA: Paintings in Oil, Michael Wigley. With a
Foreword by Mimi Sloane. Eric Sloane's evocative oils of America's
landscape and material culture shimmer with immense historical and
nostalgic appeal. This original hardcover collection gathers nearly a
hundred of his finest paintings, with subjects ranging from New England
to the American Southwest. 128pp. 10 x 9.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46525-X]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ETHAN FROME, Edith Wharton. Classic story of wasted lives, set against
a bleak New England background. Superbly delineated characters in a
hauntingly grim tale of thwarted love. Considered by many to be
Wharton's masterpiece. 96pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-26690-7]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE EVERLASTING MAN, G. K. Chesterton. Chesterton's view of
Christianity---as a blend of philosophy and mythology, satisfying
intellect and spirit - applies to his brilliant book, which appeals to
readers' heads as well as their hearts. 288pp. 5 x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46036-3]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE FIELD AND FOREST HANDY BOOK, Daniel Beard. Written by a co-founder
of the Boy Scouts, this appealing guide offers illustrated instructions
for building kites, birdhouses, boats, igloos, and other fun projects,
plus numerous helpful tips for campers. 448pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46191-2]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[FINDING YOUR WAY WITHOUT MAP OR COMPASS, Harold Gatty. Useful,
instructive manual shows would-be explorers, hikers, bikers, scouts,
sailors, and survivalists how to find their way outdoors by observing
animals, weather patterns, shifting sands, and other elements of nature.
288pp. 5 x 8½. 0-486-40613-X]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[FIRST FRENCH READER: A Beginner's Dual-Language Book, Edited and
Translated by Stanley Appelbaum. This anthology introduces 50 legendary
writers---Voltaire, Balzac, Baudelaire, Proust, more---through passages
from]{.style_} [The Red and the Black, Les Misérables, Madame
Bovary,]{.style_1} [and other classics. Original French text plus
English translation on facing pages. 240pp. 5 x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46178-5]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[FIRST GERMAN READER: A Beginner's Dual-Language Book, Edited by Harry
Steinhauer. Specially chosen for their power to evoke German life and
culture, these short, simple readings include poems, stories, essays,
and anecdotes by Goethe, Hesse, Heine, Schiller, and others. 224pp. 5% x
8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46179-3]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[FIRST SPANISH READER: A Beginner's Dual-Language Book, Angel Flores.
Delightful stories, other material based on works of Don Juan Manuel,
Luis Taboada, Ricardo Palma, other noted writers. Complete faithful
English translations on facing pages. Exercises. 176pp. 5 x
8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-25810-6]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[FIVE ACRES AND INDEPENDENCE, Maurice G. Kains. Great back-to-the-land
classic explains basics of self-sufficient farming. The one book to get.
95 illustrations. 397pp. 5 x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-20974-1]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[FLAGG'S SMALL HOUSES: Their Economic Design and Construction, 1922,
Ernest Flagg. Although most famous for his skyscrapers, Flagg was also a
proponent of the well-designed single-family dwelling. His classic
treatise features innovations that save space, materials, and cost. 526
illustrations. 160pp. 9% x 12¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45197-6]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[FLATLAND: A Romance of Many Dimensions, Edwin A. Abbott. Classic of
science (and mathematical) fiction---charmingly illustrated by the
author---describes the adventures of A. Square, a resident of Flatland,
in Spaceland (three dimensions), Lineland (one dimension), and Pointland
(no dimensions). 96pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-27263-X]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[FRANKENSTEIN, Mary Shelley. The story of Victor Frankenstein's
monstrous creation and the havoc it caused has enthralled generations of
readers and inspired countless writers of horror and suspense. With the
author's own 1831 introduction. 176pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-28211-2]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE GARGOYLE BOOK: 572 Examples from Gothic Architecture, Lester
Burbank Bridaham. Dispelling the conventional wisdom that French Gothic
architectural flourishes were born of despair or gloom, Bridaham reveals
the whimsical nature of these creations and the ingenious artisans who
made them. 572 illustrations,. 224pp. 8 x 11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-44754-5]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE GIFT OF THE MAGI AND OTHER SHORT STORIES, O. Henry. Sixteen
captivating stories by one of America's most popular storytellers.
Included are such classics as "The Gift of the Magi," "The Last Leaf,"
and "The Ransom of Red Chief." Publisher's Note. 96pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-27061-0]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE GOETHE TREASURY: Selected Prose and Poetry, Johann Wolfgang von
Goethe. Edited, Selected, and with an Introduction by Thomas Mann. In
addition to his lyric poetry, Goethe wrote travel sketches,
autobiographical studies, essays, letters, and proverbs in rhyme and
prose. This collection presents outstanding examples from each genre.
368pp. 5 x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-44780-4]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[GREAT EXPECTATIONS, Charles Dickens. Orphaned Pip is apprenticed to the
dirty work of the forge but dreams of becoming a gentleman---and one day
finds himself in possession of "great expectations." Dickens' finest
novel. 400pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-41586-4]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[GREAT WRITERS ON THE ART OF FICTION: From Mark Twain to Joyce Carol
Oates, Edited by James Daley. An indispensable source of advice and
inspiration, this anthology features essays by Henry James, Kate Chopin,
Willa Cather, Sinclair Lewis, Jack London, Raymond Chandler, Raymond
Carver, Eudora Welty, and Kurt Vonnegut, Jr. 192pp. 5 x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45128-3]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[HAMLET, William Shakespeare. The quintessential Shakespearean tragedy,
whose highly charged confrontations and anguished soliloquies probe
depths of human feeling rarely sounded in any art. Reprinted from an
authoritative British edition complete with illuminating footnotes.
128pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-27278-8]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE HAUNTED HOUSE, Charles Dickens. A Yuletide gathering in an eerie
country retreat provides the backdrop for Dickens and his
friends---including Elizabeth Gaskell and Wilkie Collins---who take
turns spinning supernatural yarns. 144pp. 5 x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46309-5]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[HEART OF DARKNESS, Joseph Conrad. Dark allegory of a journey up the
Congo River and the narrator's encounter with the mysterious Mr. Kurtz.
Masterly blend of adventure, character study, psychological penetration.
For many, Conrad's finest, most enigmatic story. 80pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-26464-5]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[HENSON AT THE NORTH POLE, Matthew A. Henson. This thrilling memoir by
the heroic African-American who was Peary's companion through two
decades of Arctic exploration recounts a tale of danger, courage, and
determination. "Fascinating and exciting." -]{.style_}
[Commonweal.]{.style_1} [128pp. 5 x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45472-X]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[HISTORIC COSTUMES AND HOW TO MAKE THEM, Mary Fernald and E. Shenton.
Practical, informative guidebook shows how to create everything from
short tunics worn by Saxon men in the fifth century to a lady's bustle
dress of the late 1800s. 81 illustrations. 176pp. 5 x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-44906-8]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE HOUND OF THE BASKERVILLES, Arthur Conan Doyle. A deadly curse in
the form of a legendary ferocious beast continues to claim its victims
from the Baskerville family until Holmes and Watson intervene. Often
called the best detective story ever written. 128pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-28214-7]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE HOUSE BEHIND THE CEDARS, Charles W. Chesnutt. Originally published
in 1900, this groundbreaking novel by a distinguished African-American
author recounts the drama of a brother and sister who "pass for white"
during the dangerous days of Reconstruction. 208pp. 5 x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0486-46144-0]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE HUMAN FIGURE IN MOTION, Eadweard Muybridge. The 4,789 photographs
in this definitive selection show the human figure---models almost all
undraped---engaged in over 160 different types of action: running,
climbing stairs, etc. 390pp. 7 x 10 .]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-20204-6]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING EARNEST, Oscar Wilde. Wilde's witty and buoyant
comedy of manners, filled with some of literature's most famous
epigrams, reprinted from an authoritative British edition. Considered
Wilde's most perfect work. 64pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-26478-5]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE INFERNO, Dante Alighieri. Translated and with notes by Henry
Wadsworth Longfellow. The first stop on Dante's famous journey from Hell
to Purgatory to Paradise, this 14th-century allegorical poem blends
vivid and shocking imagery with graceful lyricism. Translated by the
beloved 19th-century poet, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. 256pp. x
8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-44288-8]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[JANE EYRE, Charlotte Brontë. Written in 1847,]{.style_} [Jane
Eyre]{.style_1} [tells the tale of an orphan girl's progress from the
custody of cruel relatives to an oppressive boarding school and its
culmination in a troubled career as a governess. 448pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-42449-9]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[JAPANESE WOODBLOCK FLOWER PRINTS, Tanigami Kônan. Extraordinary
collection of Japanese woodblock prints by a well-known artist features
120 plates in brilliant color. Realistic images from a rare edition
include daffodils, tulips, and other familiar and unusual flowers.
128pp. 11 x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0486-46442-3]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[JEWELRY MAKING AND DESIGN, Augustus F. Rose and Antonio Cirino.
Professional secrets of jewelry making are revealed in a thorough,
practical guide. Over 200 illustrations. 306pp. 5 x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-21750-7]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[JULIUS CAESAR, William Shakespeare. Great tragedy based on Plutarch's
account of the lives of Brutus, Julius Caesar and Mark Antony. Evil
plotting, ringing oratory, high tragedy with Shakespeare's incomparable
insight, dramatic power. Explanatory footnotes. 96pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-26876-4]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE JUNGLE, Upton Sinclair. 1906 bestseller shockingly reveals
intolerable labor practices and working conditions in the Chicago
stockyards as it tells the grim story of a Slavic family that emigrates
to America full of optimism but soon faces despair. 320pp. x
8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-41923-1]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS WITHIN YOU, Leo Tolstoy. The soul-searching book
that inspired Gandhi to embrace the concept of passive resistance,
Tolstoy's 1894 polemic clearly outlines a radical, well-reasoned
revision of traditional Christian thinking. 352pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45138-0]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE LADY OR THE TIGER?: and Other Logic Puzzles, Raymond M. Smullyan.
Created by a renowned puzzle master, these whimsically themed challenges
involve paradoxes about probability, time, and change; metapuzzles; and
self-referentiality. Nineteen chapters advance in difficulty from
relatively simple to highly complex. 1982 edition. 240pp. 5 x
8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-47027-X]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[LEAVES OF GRASS: The Original 1855 Edition, Walt Whitman. Whitman's
immortal collection includes some of the greatest poems of modern times,
including his masterpiece, "Song of Myself." Shattering standard
conventions, it stands as an unabashed celebration of body and nature.
128pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45676-5]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[LES MISÉRABLES, Victor Hugo. Translated by Charles E. Wilbour. Abridged
by James K. Robinson. A convict's heroic struggle for justice and
redemption plays out against a fiery backdrop of the Napoleonic wars.
This edition features the excellent original translation and a sensitive
abridgment. 304pp. 6 x 9¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45789-3]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[LILITH: A Romance, George MacDonald. In this novel by the father of
fantasy literature, a man travels through time to meet Adam and Eve and
to explore humanity's fall from grace and ultimate redemption. 240pp. 5
x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46818-6]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE LOST LANGUAGE OF SYMBOLISM, Harold Bayley. This remarkable book
reveals the hidden meaning behind familiar images and words, from the
origins of Santa Claus to the fleur-de-lys, drawing from mythology,
folklore, religious texts, and fairy tales. 1,418 illustrations. 784pp.
5 x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-44787-1]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[MACBETH, William Shakespeare. A Scottish nobleman murders the king in
order to succeed to the throne. Tortured by his conscience and fearful
of discovery, he becomes tangled in a web of treachery and deceit that
ultimately spells his doom. 96pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-27802-6]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[MAKING AUTHENTIC CRAFTSMAN FURNITURE: Instructions and Plans for 62
Projects, Gustav Stickley. Make authentic reproductions of handsome,
functional, durable furniture: tables, chairs, wall cabinets, desks, a
hall tree, and more. Construction plans with drawings, schematics,
dimensions, and lumber specs reprinted from 1900s]{.style_} [The
Graftsman]{.style_1} [magazine. 128pp. 8 x 11. 0-486-25000-8]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[MATHEMATICS FOR THE NONMATHEMATICIAN, Morris Kline. Erudite and
entertaining overview follows development of mathematics from ancient
Greeks to present. Topics include logic and mathematics, the fundamental
concept, differential calculus, probability theory, much more. Exercises
and problems. 641pp. 5 x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-24823-2]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[MEMOIRS OF AN ARABIAN PRINCESS FROM ZANZIBAR, Emily Ruete. This
19th-century autobiography offers a rare inside look at the society
surrounding a sultan's palace. A real-life princess in exile recalls her
vanished world of harems, slave trading, and court intrigues. 288pp. 5 x
8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-47121-7]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE METAMORPHOSIS AND OTHER STORIES, Franz Kafka. Excellent new English
translations of title story (considered by many critics Kafka's most
perfect work), plus "The Judgment," "In the Penal Colony," "A Country
Doctor," and "A Report to an Academy." Note. 96pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-29030-1]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[MICROSCOPIC ART FORMS FROM THE PLANT WORLD, R. Anheisser. From
undulating curves to complex geometries, a world of fascinating images
abound in this classic, illustrated survey of microscopic plants.
Features 400 detailed illustrations of nature's minute but magnificent
handiwork. The accompanying CD-ROM includes all of the images in the
book. 128pp. 9 x 9.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46013-4]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM, William Shakespeare. Among the most popular
of Shakespeare's comedies, this enchanting play humorously celebrates
the vagaries of love as it focuses upon the intertwined romances of
several pairs of lovers. Explanatory footnotes. 80pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-27067-X]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE MONEY CHANGERS, Upton Sinclair. Originally published in 1908, this
cautionary novel from the author of]{.style_} [The Jungle]{.style_1}
[explores corruption within the American system as a group of power
brokers joins forces for personal gain, triggering a crash on Wall
Street. 192pp. 5% x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46917-4]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE MOST POPULAR HOMES OF THE TWENTIES, William A. Radford. With a New
Introduction by Daniel D. Reiff. Based on a rare 1925 catalog, this
architectural showcase features floor plans, construction details, and
photos of 26 homes, plus articles on entrances, porches, garages, and
more. 250 illustrations, 21 color plates. 176pp. 8 x 11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-47028-8]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[MY 66 YEARS IN THE BIG LEAGUES, Connie Mack. With a New Introduction by
Rich Westcott. A Founding Father of modern baseball, Mack holds the
record for most wins---and losses---by a major league manager. Enhanced
by 70 photographs, his warmhearted autobiography is populated by many
legends of the game. 288pp. 5 x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-47184-5]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE OF FREDERICK DOUGLASS, Frederick Douglass.
Douglass's graphic depictions of slavery, harrowing escape to freedom,
and life as a newspaper editor, eloquent orator, and impassioned
abolitionist. 96pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-28499-9]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE NIGHTLESS CITY: Geisha and Courtesan Life in Old Tokyo, J. E. de
Becker. This unsurpassed study from 100 years ago ventured into Tokyo's
red-light district to survey geisha and courtesan life and offer
meticulous descriptions of training, dress, social hierarchy, and erotic
practices. 49 black-and-white illustrations; 2 maps. 496pp. 5 x
8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45563-7]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE ODYSSEY, Homer. Excellent prose translation of ancient epic
recounts adventures of the homeward-bound Odysseus. Fantastic cast of
gods, giants, cannibals, sirens, other supernatural creatures - true
classic of Western literature. 256pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-40654-7]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[OEDIPUS REX, Sophocles. Landmark of Western drama concerns the
catastrophe that ensues when King Oedipus discovers he has inadvertently
killed his father and married his mother. Masterly construction,
dramatic irony. Explanatory footnotes. 64pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-26877-2]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ONCE UPON A TIME: The Way America Was, Eric Sloane. Nostalgic text and
drawings brim with gentle philosophies and descriptions of how we used
to live - self-sufficiently - on the land, in homes, and among the
things built by hand. 44 line illustrations. 64pp. 8% x 11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-44411-2]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ONE OF OURS, Willa Cather. The Pulitzer Prize-winning novel about a
young Nebraskan looking for something to believe in. Alienated from his
parents, rejected by his wife, he finds his destiny on the bloody
battlefields of World War I. 352pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45599-8]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ORIGAMI YOU CAN USE: 27 Practical Projects, Rick Beech. Origami models
can be more than decorative, and this unique volume shows how! The 27
practical projects include a CD case, frame, napkin ring, and dish. Easy
instructions feature 400 two-color illustrations. 96pp. 8¼ x
11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-47057-1]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[OTHELLO, William Shakespeare. Towering tragedy tells the story of a
Moorish general who earns the enmity of his ensign lago when he passes
him over for a promotion. Masterly portrait of an archvillain.
Explanatory footnotes. 112pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-29097-2]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[PARADISE LOST, John Milton. Notes by John A. Himes. First published in
1667,]{.style_} [Paradise Lost]{.style_1} [ranks among the greatest of
English literature's epic poems. It's a sublime retelling of Adam and
Eve's fall from grace and expulsion from Eden. Notes by John A. Himes.
480pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-44287-X]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[PASSING, Nella Larsen. Married to a successful physician and
prominently ensconced in society, Irene Redfield leads a charmed
existence---until a chance encounter with a childhood friend who has
been "passing for white." 112pp. 5 x 8½. 0-486-43713-2]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[PERSPECTIVE DRAWING FOR BEGINNERS, Len A. Doust. Doust carefully
explains the roles of lines, boxes, and circles, and shows how
visualizing shapes and forms can be used in accurate depictions of
perspective. One of the most concise introductions available. 33
illustrations. 64pp. 5 x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45149-6]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[PERSPECTIVE MADE EASY, Ernest R. Norling. Perspective is easy; yet,
surprisingly few artists know the simple rules that make it so. Remedy
that situation with this simple, step-by-step book, the first devoted
entirely to the topic. 256 illustrations. 224pp. 5 x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-40473-0]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE PICTURE OF DORIAN GRAY, Oscar Wilde. Celebrated novel involves a
handsome young Londoner who sinks into a life of depravity. His body
retains perfect youth and vigor while his recent portrait reflects the
ravages of his crime and sensuality. 176pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-27807-7]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[PRIDE AND PREJUDICE, Jane Austen. One of the most universally loved and
admired English novels, an effervescent tale of rural romance
transformed by Jane Austen's art into a witty, shrewdly observed satire
of English country life. 272pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-28473-5]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE PRINCE, Niccolò Machiavelli. Classic, Renaissance-era guide to
acquiring and maintaining political power. Today, nearly 500 years after
it was written, this calculating prescription for autocratic rule
continues to be much read and studied. 80pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-27274-5]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[QUICK SKETCHING, Carl Cheek. A perfect introduction to the technique of
"quick sketching." Drawing upon an artist's immediate emotional
responses, this is an extremely effective means of capturing the
essential form and features of a subject. More than 100 black-and-white
illustrations throughout. 48pp. 11 x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46608-6]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[RANCH LIFE AND THE HUNTING TRAIL, Theodore Roosevelt. Illustrated by
Frederic Remington. Beautifully illustrated by Remington, Roosevelt's
celebration of the Old West recounts his adventures in the Dakota
Badlands of the 1880s, from roundups to Indian encounters to hunting
bighorn sheep. 208pp. 6¼ x 9¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-47340-6]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE, Stephen Crane. Amid the nightmarish chaos of
a Civil War battle, a young soldier discovers courage, humility, and,
perhaps, wisdom. Uncanny re-creation of actual combat. Enduring landmark
of American fiction. 112pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-26465-3]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[RELATIVITY SIMPLY EXPLAINED, Martin Gardner. One of the subject's
clearest, most entertaining introductions offers lucid explanations of
special and general theories of relativity, gravity, and spacetime,
models of the universe, and more. 100 illustrations. 224pp. 5 x
8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-29315-7]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[REMBRANDT DRAWINGS: 116 Masterpieces in Original Color, Rembrandt van
Rijn. This deluxe hardcover edition features drawings from throughout
the Dutch master's prolific career. Informative captions accompany these
beautifully reproduced landscapes, biblical vignettes, figure studies,
animal sketches, and portraits. 128pp. 8 x 11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46149-1]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE ROAD NOT TAKEN AND OTHER POEMS, Robert Frost. A treasury of Frost's
most expressive verse. In addition to the tide poem: "An Old Man's
Winter Night," "In the Home Stretch," "Meeting and Passing," "Putting in
the Seed," many more. All complete and unabridged. 64pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-27550-7]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[ROMEO AND JULIET, William Shakespeare. Tragic tale of star-crossed
lovers, feuding families and timeless passion contains some of
Shakespeare's most beautiful and lyrical love poetry. Complete,
unabridged text with explanatory footnotes. 96pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-27557-4]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[SANDITON AND THE WATSONS: Austen's Unfinished Novels, Jane Austen. Two
tantalizing incomplete stories revisit Austen's customary milieu of
courtship and venture into new territory, amid guests at a seaside
resort. Both are worth reading for pleasure and study. 112pp. 5 x
8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45793-1]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE SCARLET LETTER, Nathaniel Hawthorne. With stark power and emotional
depth, Hawthorne's masterpiece explores sin, guilt, and redemption in a
story of adultery in the early days of the Massachusetts Colony. 192pp.
x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-28048-9]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE SEASONS OF AMERICA PAST, Eric Sloane. Seventy-five illustrations
depict cider mills and presses, sleds, pumps, stump-pulling equipment,
plows, and other elements of America's rural heritage. A section of old
recipes and household hints adds additional color. 160pp. 8 x
11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-44220-9]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[SELECTED CANTERBURY TALES, Geoffrey Chaucer. Delightful collection
includes the General Prologue plus three of the most popular tales: "The
Knight's Tale," "The Miller's Prologue and Tale," and "The Wife of
Bath's Prologue and Tale." In modern English. 144pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-28241-4]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[SELECTED POEMS, Emily Dickinson. Over 100 best-known, best-loved poems
by one of America's foremost poets, reprinted from authoritative early
editions. No comparable edition at this price. Index of first lines.
64pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-26466-1]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[SIDDHARTHA, Hermann Hesse. Classic novel that has inspired generations
of seekers. Blending Eastern mysticism and psychoanalysis, Hesse
presents a strikingly original view of man and culture and the arduous
process of self-discovery, reconciliation, harmony, and peace. 112pp. x
8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-40653-9]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[SKETCHING OUTDOORS, Leonard Richmond. This guide offers beginners
step-by-step demonstrations of how to depict clouds, trees, buildings,
and other outdoor sights. Explanations of a variety of techniques
include shading and constructional drawing. 48pp. 11 x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46922-0]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[SMALL HOUSES OF THE FORTIES: With Illustrations and Floor Plans, Harold
E. Group. 56 floor plans and elevations of houses that originally cost
less than \$15,000 to build. Recommended by financial institutions of
the era, they range from Colonials to Cape Cods. 144pp. 8% x
11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45598-X]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[SOME CHINESE GHOSTS, Lafcadio Hearn. Rooted in ancient Chinese legends,
these richly atmospheric supernatural tales are recounted by an expert
in Oriental lore. Their originality, power, and literary charm will
captivate readers of all ages. 96pp. 5 x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46306-0]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[SONGS FOR THE OPEN ROAD: Poems of Travel and Adventure, Edited by The
American Poetry & Literacy Project. More than 80 poems by 50 American
and British masters celebrate real and metaphorical journeys. Poems by
Whitman, Byron, Millay, Sandburg, Langston Hughes, Emily Dickinson,
Robert Frost, Shelley, Tennyson, Yeats, many others. Note. 80pp. x
8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-40646-6]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[SPOON RIVER ANTHOLOGY, Edgar Lee Masters. An American poetry classic,
in which former citizens of a mythical midwestern town speak touchingly
from the grave of the thwarted hopes and dreams of their lives. 144pp. x
8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-27275-3]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[STAR LORE: Myths, Legends, and Facts, William Tyler Olcott. Captivating
retellings of the origins and histories of ancient star groups include
Pegasus, Ursa Major, Pleiades, signs of the zodiac, and other
constellations. "Classic."---]{.style_}[Sky & Telescope.]{.style_1} [58
illustrations. 544pp. 5 x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-43581-4]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE STRANGE CASE OF DR. JEKYLL AND MR. HYDE, Robert Louis Stevenson.
This intriguing novel, both fantasy thriller and moral allegory, depicts
the struggle of two opposing personalities---one essentially good, the
other evil---for the soul of one man. 64pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-26688-5]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[SURVIVAL HANDBOOK: The Official U.S. Army Guide, Department of the
Army. This special edition of the Army field manual is geared toward
civilians. An essential companion for campers and all lovers of the
outdoors, it constitutes the most authoritative wilderness guide. 288pp.
x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46184-X]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[A TALE OF TWO CITIES, Charles Dickens. Against the backdrop of the
French Revolution, Dickens unfolds his masterpiece of drama, adventure,
and romance about a man falsely accused of treason. Excitement and
derring-do in the shadow of the guillotine. 304pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-40651-2]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[TEN PLAYS, Anton Chekhov.]{.style_} [The Sea Gull, Uncle Vanya, The
Three Sisters, The Cherry Orchard,]{.style_1} [and]{.style_}
[Ivanov,]{.style_1} [plus 5 one-act comedies:]{.style_} [The
Anniversary, An Unwuilling Martyr, The Wedding The Bear,]{.style_1}
[and]{.style_} [The Proposal.]{.style_1} [336pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46560-8]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE FLYING INN, G. K. Chesterton. Hilarious romp in which pub owner
Humphrey Hump and friend take to the road in a donkey cart filled with
rum and cheese, inveighing against Prohibition and other "oppressive
forms of modernity." 320pp. 5 x 8½. 0-486-41910-X]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THIRTY YEARS THAT SHOOK PHYSICS: The Story of Quantum Theory, George
Gamow. Lucid, accessible introduction to the influential theory of
energy and matter features careful explanations of Dirac's
anti-particles, Bohr's model of the atom, and much more. Numerous
drawings. 1966 edition. 240pp. 5% x 8½.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-24895-X]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[TREASURE ISLAND, Robert Louis Stevenson. Classic adventure story of a
perilous sea journey, a mutiny led by the infamous Long John Silver, and
a lethal scramble for buried treasure - seen through the eyes of cabin
boy Jim Hawkins. 160pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-27559-0]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE TRIAL, Franz Kafka. Translated by David Wyllie. From its gripping
first sentence onward, this novel exemplifies the term "Kafkaesque." Its
darkly humorous narrative recounts a bank clerk's entrapment in a
bureaucratic maze, based on an undisclosed charge. 176pp. x
8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-47061-X]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE TURN OF THE SCREW, Henry James. Gripping ghost story by great
novelist depicts the sinister transformation of 2 innocent children into
flagrant liars and hypocrites. An elegantly told tale of unspoken horror
and psychological terror. 96pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-26684-2]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[UP FROM SLAVERY, Booker T. Washington. Washington (1856-1915) rose to
become the most influential spokesman for African-Americans of his day.
In this eloquently written book, he describes events in a remarkable
life that began in bondage and culminated in worldwide recognition.
160pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-28738-6]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[VICTORIAN HOUSE DESIGNS IN AUTHENTIC FULL COLOR: 75 Plates from the
"Scientific American --- Architects and Builders Edition," 1885-1894,
Edited by Blanche Cirker. Exquisitely detailed, exceptionally handsome
designs for an enormous variety of attractive city dwellings, spacious
suburban and country homes, charming "cottages" and other
structures---all accompanied by perspective views and floor plans. 80pp.
9¼ x 12¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-29438-2]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[VILLETTE, Charlotte Brontë. Acclaimed by Virginia Woolf as "Brontë's
finest novel," this moving psychological study features a remarkably
modern heroine who abandons her native England for a new life as a
schoolteacher in Belgium. 480pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45557-2]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[THE VOYAGE OUT, Virginia Woolf. A moving depiction of the thrills and
confusion of youth, Woolf's acclaimed first novel traces a shipboard
journey to South America for a captivating exploration of a woman's
growing self-awareness. 288pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-45005-8]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[WALDEN; OR, LIFE IN THE WOODS, Henry David Thoreau. Accounts of
Thoreau's daily life on the shores of Walden Pond outside Concord,
Massachusetts, are interwoven with musings on the virtues of
self-reliance and individual freedom, on society, government, and other
topics. 224pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-28495-6]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[WILD PILGRIMAGE: A Novel in Woodcuts, Lynd Ward. Through startling
engravings shaded in black and red, Ward wordlessly tells the story of a
man trapped in an industrial world, struggling between the grim reality
around him and the fantasies his imagination creates. 112pp. 6 x
9¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46583-7]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[WILLY POGÁNY REDISCOVERED, Willy Pogány. Selected and Edited by Jeff A.
Menges. More than 100 color and black-and-white Art Nouveau-style
illustrations from fairy tales and adventure stories include scenes from
Wagner's "Ring" cycle,]{.style_} [The Rime of the Ancient Mariner,
Gulliver's Travels,]{.style_1} [and]{.style_} [Faust.]{.style_1} [144pp.
8 x 11.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-86-47046-6]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[WOOLLY THOUGHTS: Unlock Your Creative Genius with Modular Knitting, Pat
Ashforth and Steve Plummer. Here's the revolutionary way to knit---easy,
fun, and foolproof! Beginners and experienced knitters need only master
a single stitch to create their own designs with patchwork squares. More
than 100 illustrations. 128pp. 6½ x 9¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-46084-3]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[WUTHERING HEIGHTS, Emily Brontë. Somber tale of consuming passions and
vengeance---played out amid the lonely English moors---recounts the
turbulent and tempestuous love story of Cathy and Heathcliff. Poignant
and compelling. 256pp. x 8¼.]{.style_}

::: calibre5
:::

[0-486-29256-8]{.style_}
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
