---
title: "Tools for Conviviality"
author: "Ivan Illich"
voice: "Ivan Illich"
voice_role: "Technology Critic - Convivial Tools Theory"
tradition: "Social Criticism"
period: "20th Century"
region: "Austria/Mexico"
genre: "Social Theory"
form: "Critical Analysis"
mode: "Institutional Critique"
work_type: "Primary Source"
source_type: "Complete Work"
source_quality: "Original Text"
chamber_integration: "June 2025"
significance: "Foundational critique of industrial tools vs. convivial tools, essential for technology philosophy"
tags:
  - technology-criticism
  - convivial-tools
  - institutional-critique
  - human-scale-technology
  - deschooling
  - social-transformation
  - appropriate-technology
related_voices:
  - Lewis Mumford
  - Jacques Ellul
  - E.F. Schumacher
  - Christopher Alexander
chamber_position: "Second Ring - Foundation Stones - Technology Philosophy"
amphitheatre_status: "New voice - expands technology criticism"
status: "source-aware"
---

# Tools for Conviviality

*Ivan Illich*

---

*Chamber Note: Adds essential technology criticism voice to the Chamber, providing foundational thinking on convivial vs. industrial tools and human-scale technology. Critical for evaluating technological choices in Chamber protocols.*me and my deceased friend Greer Taylor as the basis for our
participation in the Canadian Conference on the Law in January 1972 in
Ottawa. Comments by David Weisstub, Nils Christie, Allen M. Linden, J.
G. Castel, H. w. Arthurs, José Antonio Viera-Gallo, J. C. Smith, and
Bonaventura de Sousa Santos, and other critical papers by jurists, will
be published in mid-1973 in Toronto. During the summer of 1972,
participants in my CIDOC seminar contributed very helpful papers. I\'m
especially grateful for the assistance of John Bradley, John Brewer,
Jos? Maria and Veronica Bulnes, Martin Cohen, Irene Curbelo de Diaz,
Dennis Detzel, Joseph Fitzpatrick, Amnon Goldworth, Conrad Johnson,
Hartmut von Hentig, John MacKnight, Michael Maccoby, Leslie Marcus,
Francisco Mir6 Quesada, Marie-No\'lle Monteil, William Ophuls, Marta H.
Reed, Everett Reimer, Francisco Varela, Etienne Verne, Jacques Vidal and
German Zabala. Dennis Sullivan has patiently and critically assisted me
in editing the final version. After I had delivered this manuscript to
the publisher, I received valuable suggestions from J.P. Naik and his
friends in India. These have seeped into thetext to the extent this can
happen in the correction of proofs. Second only to Valentina Borremans
and Greer Taylor, Heinz von Foerster, Erich Fromm, Hermann Schwember and
Abrahàn Diaz Gonzales have exerted the most decisive influence on the
formulation of my ideas.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-2 .calibre4}
## Introduction {#introduction .calibre1}

During the next several years I intend to work on an epilogue to the
industrial age. I want to trace the changes in language, myth, ritual,
and law which took place in the current epoch of pack-aging and of
schooling. I want to describe the fading monopoly of the industrial mode
of production and the vanishing of the industrially generated
professions this mode of production serves.

Above all I want to show that two-thirds of mankind still can avoid
passing through the industrial age, by choosing right now a
postindustrial balance in their mode of production which the
hyperindustrial nations will be forced to adopt as an alternative to
chaos. To prepare for this task I submit this essay for critical
comment.

In its present form this book is the result of conversations at CIDOC in
Cuernavaca during the summer of 1972. Participants in my seminar will
recognize their ideas, and often their words. I ask my collaborators to
accept my sincere thanks, especially for their written contributions.

This essay has become too long to appear as an article and too intricate
to be read in several installments. It is a progressreport. I
respectfully thank Ruth Nanda Anshen for issuing this tract as a volume,
in World Perspectives, published by Harper & Row.

For several years at CIDOC in Cuernavaca we have conducted critical
research on the monopoly of the industrial mode of production and have
tried to define conceptually alternative modes that would fit a
postindustrial age. During tine late sixties this research centered on
educational devices. By 1970 we had found that:

1\. Universal education through compulsory schooling is not possible.

2\. Alternative devices for the production and marketing of mass
education are technically more feasible and ethically less tolerable
than compulsory graded schools. Such new educational arrangements are
now on the verge of replacing traditional school systems in rich and in
poor countries. They are potentially more effective in the conditioning
of job-holders and consumers in an industrial economy. They are
therefore more attractive for the management of present societies, more
seductive for the people, and insidiously destructive of fundamental
values.

3\. A society committed to high levels of shared learning and critical
personal intercourse must set pedagogical limits on industrial growth.

I have published the results of this research in a previous volume of
World Perspectives, entitled Deschooling Society. I clarified some of
the points left ill defined in that book by writing an article published
in the Saturday Review of April 19, 1971.

Our analysis of schooling has led us to recognize the mass production of
education as a paradigm for other industrial enterprises, each producing
a service commodity, each organized as a public utility, and each
defining its output as a basic necessity. At first our attention was
drawn to the compulsory insurance of professional health care, and to
systems of public transport, which tend to become compulsory once
traffic rolls above a certain speed. We found that the industrialization
of any service agency leads to destructive side effects analogous to the
unwanted secondary results well known from the overproduction of goods.
we had to face a set of limits to growth in the service sector Of any
society as inescapable as the limits inherent in the industrial
production of artifacts. we concluded that a set of limits to industrial
growth is well formulated only if these limits apply both to goods and
to services which are produced in an industrial mode. So we set out to
clarify these limits.

I here submit the concept of a multidimensional balance of human life
which can serve as a framework for evaluating man\'s relation to his
tools. In each of several dimensions of this balance it is possible to
identify a natural scale. When an enterprise grows beyond a certain
point on this scale, it first frustrates the end for which it was
originally designed, and then rapidly becomes a threat to society
itself. These scales must be identified and the parameters of human
endeavors within which human life remains viable must be explored.

Society can be destroyed when further growth of mass production renders
the milieu hostile, when it extinguishes the free use of the natural
abilities of society\'s members, when it isolates people from each other
and locks them into a man-made shell, when it undermines the texture of
community by promoting extreme social polarization and splintering
specialization, or when cancerous acceleration enforces social change at
a rate that rules out legal, cultural, and political precedents as
formal guidelines to present behavior. Corporate endeavors which thus
threaten society cannot be tolerated. At this point it becomes
irrelevant whether an enterprise is nominally owned by individuals,
corporations, or the slate, because no form of management can make such
fundamental destruction serve a social purpose.

Our present ideologies are useful to clarify the contradictions which
appear in a society which relies on the capitalist control of industrial
production; they do not, however, provide the necessary framework for
analyzing the crisis in the industrial mode of production itself. I hope
that one day a general theory of industrialization will be stated with
precision, that it will be formulated in terms compelling enough to
withstand the test of criticism. Its concepts ought to provide a common
language for people in opposing parties who need to engage in the
assessment of social programs or technologies, and who want to restrain
the power of man\'s tools when they tend to overwhelm man and his goals.
Such a theory should help people invert the present structure of major
institutions. I hope that this essay will enhance the formulation of
such a theory.

It is now difficult to imagine a modern society in which industrial
growth is balanced and kept in check by several complementary, distinct,
and equally scientific modes of production. Our vision of the possible
and the feasible is so restricted by industrial expectations that any
alternative to more mass production sounds like a return to past
oppression or like a Utopian design for noble savages. In fact, however,
the vision of new possibilities requires only the recognition that
scientific discoveries can be useful in at least two opposite ways. The
first leads to specia- lization of functions, institutionalization of
values and centralization of power and turns people into the accessories
of bureaucracies or machines. The second enlarges the range of each
person\'s competence, control, and initiative, limited only by other
individuals\' claims to an equal range of power and freedom.

To formulate a theory about a future society both very modern and not
dominated by industry, it will be necessary to recognize natural scales
and limits. We must come to admit that only within limits can machines
take the place of slaves; beyond these limits they lead to a new kind of
serfdom. Only within limits can education fit people into a man-made
environment: beyond these limits lies the universal schoolhouse,
hospital ward, or prison. Only within limits ought politics to be
concerned with the distribution of maximum industrial outputs, rather
than with equal inputs of either energy or information. Once these
limits are recognized, it becomes possible to articulate the triadic
relationship between persons, tools, and a new collectivity. Such a
society, in which modern technologies serve politically interrelated
individuals rather than managers, I will call \"convivial.\"

After many doubts, and against the advice of friends whom I respect, I
have chosen \"convivial\" as a technical term to designate a modern
society of responsibly limited tools. In part this choice was
conditioned by the desire to continue a discourse which had started with
its Spanish cognate. The French cognate has been given technical meaning
(for the kitchen) by Brillat-Savarin in his Physiology of Taste:
Meditations on Transcendental Gastronomy. This specialized use of the
term in French might explain why it has already proven effective in the
unmistakably different and equally specialized context in which it will
appear in this essay. I am aware that in English \"convivial\" now seeks
the company of tipsy jollyness, which is distinct from that indicated by
the OED and opposite to the austere meaning of modern \"eutrapelia,\"
which I intend. By applying the term \"convivial\" to tools rather than
to people, I hope to forestall confusion.

\"Austerity,\" which says something about people, has also been degraded
and has acquired a bitter taste, while for Aristotle or Aquinas it
marked the foundation of friendship. In the Summa Theologica, II, II, in
the 186th question, article 5, Thomas deals with disciplined and
creative playfulness. In his third response he defines \"austerity\" as
a virtue which does not exclude all enjoyments, but only those which are
distracting from or destructive of personal relatedness. For Thomas
\"austerity\" is a complementary part of a more embracing virtue, which
he calls friendship or joyfulness. It is the fruit of an apprehension
that things or tools could destroy rather than enhance eutrapelia (or
graceful playfulness) in personal relations.\*

\* Hugo v. Rahner, Man at Play, New York, 1972.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-3 .calibre4}
## I. Two Watersheds {#i.-two-watersheds .calibre1}

The year 1913 marks a watershed in the history of modern medicine.
Around that year a patient began to have more than a fifty-fifty chance
that a graduate of a medical school would provide him with a
specifically effective treatment (if, ofcourse, he was suffering from
one of the standard diseases recognized by the medical science of the
time). Many shamans and herb doctors familiar with local diseases and
remedies and trusted by their clients had always had equal or better
results.

Since then medicine has gone on to define what constitutes disease and
its treatment. The Westernized public learned to demand effective
medical practice as defined by the progress of medical science. For the
first time in history doctors could measure their efficiency against
scales which they themselves had devised. This progress was due to a new
perspective of the origins of some ancient scourges; water could be
purified and infant mortality lowered; rat control could disarm the
plague; treponemas could be made visible under the microscope and
Salvarsan could eliminate them with statistically defined risks of
poisoning the patient; syphilis could be avoided, or recognized and
cured by rather simple procedures; diabetes could be diagnosed and
self-treatment with insulin could prolong the life of the patient.
Paradoxically, the simpler the tools became, the more the medical
profession insisted on a monopoly of their application, the longer
became the training demanded before a medicine man was initiated into
the legitimate use of the simplest tool, and the more the entire
population felt dependent on the doctor. Hygiene turned from being a
virtue into a professionally organized ritual at the altar of a science.

Infant mortality was lowered, common forms of infection were prevented
or treated, some forms of crisis intervention became quite effective.
The spectacular decline in mortality and morbidity was due to changes in
sanitation, agriculture, marketing, and general attitudes toward life.
But though these changes were sometimes influenced by the attention that
engineers paid to new facts discovered by medical science, they could
only occasionally be ascribed to the intervention of doctors.

Indirectly, industrialization profited from the new effectiveness
attributed to medicine; work attendance was raised, and with it the
claim to efficiency on the job. The destructiveness of new tools was
hidden from public view by new techniques of providing spectacular
treatments for those who fell victims to industrial violence such as the
speed of cars, tension on the job, and poisons in the environment.

The sickening side effects of modern medicine became obvious after World
War II, but doctors needed time to diagnose drug resistant microbes or
genetic damage caused by prenatal X-rays as new epidemics. The claim
made by George Bernard Shaw a generation earlier, that doctors had
ceased to be healers and were assuming control over the patient\'s
entire life, could still be regarded as a caricature. Only in the
mid-fifties did it become evident that medicine had passed a second
watershed and had itself created new kinds of disease.

Foremost among iatrogenic (doctor-induced) diseases was the pretense of
doctors that they provided their clients with superior health. First,
social planners and doctors became its victims. Soon this epidemic
aberration spread to society at large. Then, during the last fifteen
years, professional medicine became a major threat to health. Huge
amounts of money were spent to stem immeasurable damage caused by
medical treatments. The cost of healing was dwarfed by the cost of
extending sick life; more people survived longer months with their lives
hanging on a plastic tube, imprisoned in iron lungs, or hooked onto
kidney machines. New sickness was defined and institutionalized; the
cost of enabling people to survive in unhealthy cities and in sickening
jobs skyrocketed. The monopoly of the medical profession was extended
over an increasing range of everyday occurrences in every man\'s life.

The exclusion of mothers, aunts, and other nonprofessionals from the
care of their pregnant, abnormal, hurt, sick, or dying relatives and
friends resulted in new demands for medical services at a much faster
rate than the medical establishment could deliver. As the value of
services rose, it became almost impossible for people to care.
Simultaneously, more conditions were defined as needing treatment by
creating new specializations or paraprofessions to keep the tools under
the control of the guild.

At the time of the second watershed, preservation of the sick life of
medically dependent people in an unhealthy environment became the
principal business of the medical profession. Costly prevention and
costly treatment became increasingly the privilege of those individuals
who through previous consumption of medical services had established a
claim to more of it. Access to specialists, prestige hospitals, and
life-machines goes preferentially to those people who live in large
cities, where the cost of basic disease prevention, as of water
treatment and pollution control, is already exceptionally high. The
higher the per capita cost of prevention, the higher, paradoxically,
became the per capita cost of treatment. The prior consumption of costly
prevention and treatment establishes a claim for even more extraordinary
care. Like the modern school system, hospital-based health care fits the
principle that those who have will receive even more and those who have
not will be taken for the little that they have. In schooling this means
that high consumers of education will get postdoctoral grants, while
dropouts learn that they have failed. In medicine the same principle
assures that suffering will increase with increased medical care; the
rich will be given more treatment for iatrogenic diseases and the poor
will just suffer from them.

After this second turning point, the unwanted hygienic by-products of
medicine began to affect entire populations rather than just individual
men. In rich countries medicine began to sustain the middle-aged until
they became decrepit and needed more doctors and increasingly complex
medical tools. In poor countries, thanks to modern medicine, a larger
percentage of children began to survive into adolescence and more women
survived more pregnancies. Populations increased beyond the capacities
of their environments and the restraints and efficiencies of their
cultures to nurture them. Western doctors abused drugs for the treatment
of diseases with which native populations had learned to live. As a
result they bred new strains of disease with which modern treatment,
natural immunity, and traditional culture could not cope. On a
world-wide scale, but particularly in the U.S.A., medical care
concentrated on breeding a human stock that was fit only for
domesticated life within an increasingly more costly, man-made,
scientifically controlled environment. One of the main speakers at the
1970 AMA convention exhorted her pediatric colleagues to consider each
newborn baby as a patient until the child could be certified as healthy.
Hospital-born, formula-fed, antibiotic-stuffed children thus grow into
adults who can breathe the air, eat the food, and survive the
lifelessness of a modern city, who will breed and raise at almost any
cost a generation even more dependent on medicine.

Bureaucratic medicine spread over the entire world. In 1968, after
twenty years of Mao\'s regime, the Medical College ofShanghai had to
conclude that it was engaged in the training of \"so-called first-rate
doctors \... who ignore five million peasants and serve only minorities
in cities. They create large expenses for routine laboratory
examinations . . . Describe huge amounts of antibiotics unnecessarily .
. . and in the absence of hospital or laboratory facilities have to
limit themselves to explaining the mechanisms of the disease to people
for whom they cannot do anything, and to whom this explanation is
irrelevant.\" In China this recognition led to a major institutional
inversion. Today, the same college reports that one million health
workers have reached acceptable levels of competence. These health
workers are laymen who in periods of low agricultural manpower needs
have attended short courses, starting with the dissection of pigs, gone
on to the performance of routine lab tests, the study of the elements of
bacteriology, pathology, clinical medicine, hygiene, and acupuncture,
and continued in apprenticeship with doctors or previously trained
colleagues. These \"barefoot doctors\" remain at their work places but
are excused occasionally when fellow workers require their assistance.
They have responsibility for environmental sanitation, for health
education, immunization, first aid, primary medical care, post illness
follow-up, as well as for gynecological assistance, birth control, and
abortion education. Ten years after the second watershed of Western
medicine had been acknowledged, China intends to have one fully
competent health worker for every hundred people. China has proved that
a sudden inversion of a major institution is possible. It remains to be
seen if this deprofessionalization can be sustained against the
overweening ideology of unlimited progress and pressures from classical
doctors to incorporate their barefoot homonym as part-time professionals
on the bottom rung of a medical hierarchy.

In the West during the sixties dissatisfaction with medicine grew in
proportion to its cost, reaching the greatest intensity in the U.S.A.
Rich foreigners flocked to the medical centers of Boston, Houston, and
Denver to seek exotic repair jobs, while the infant mortality of the
U.S. poor remained comparable to that in some tropical countries of
Africa and Asia. Only the very rich in the United States can now afford
what all people in poor countries have: personal attention around the
deathbed. An American can now spend in two days of private nursing the
median yearly cash income of the world\'s population.

Instead of exposing the systemic disorder, however, only the symptoms of
\"sick\" medicine are now publicly indicted in the United States.
Spokesmen for the poor object to the capitalist prejudices of the AMA
and the income of doctors. Community leaders object to the lack of
community control over the delivery systems of professional health
maintenance or of sick care, believing that laymen on hospital boards
can harness professional medics. Black spokesmen object to the
concentration of research grants on the types of disease which tend to
strike the white, elderly, overfed foundation official who approves
them. They ask for research on sickle-cell anemia, which strikes only
the black. The general voter hopes that the end of the war in Vietnam
will make more funds available for an increase of medical production.
This general concern with symptoms, however, distracts attention from
the malignant expansion of institutional health care which is at the
root of the rising costs and demands and the decline in wellbeing.

The crisis of medicine lies on a much deeper level than its symptoms
reveal and is consistent with the present crisis of all industrial
institutions. It results from the development of a professional complex
supported and exhorted by society to provide increasingly \"better\"
health, and from the willingness of clients to serve as guinea pigs in
this vain experiment. People have lost the right to declare themselves
sick; society now accepts their claims to sickness only after
certification by medical bureaucrats.

It is not strictly necessary to this argument to accept 1913 and 1955 as
the two watershed years in order to understand that early in the century
medical practice emerged into an era of scientific verification of its
results. And later medical science itself became an alibi for the
obvious damage caused by the medical professional. At the first
watershed the desirable effects of new scientific discoveries were
easily measured and verified. Germ-free water reduced infant mortality
related to diarrhea, aspirin reduced the pain of rheumatism, and malaria
could be controlled by quinine. Some traditional cures were recognized
as quackery, but, more importantly, the use of some simple habits and
tools spread widely. People began to understand the relationship between
health and a balanced diet, fresh air, calisthenics, pore water and
soap. New devices ranging from toothbrushes to Band-Aids and condoms
became widely available. The positive contribution of modern medicine to
individual health during the early part of the twentieth century can
hardly be questioned.

But then medicine began to approach the second watershed. Every year
medical science reported a new breakthrough. Practitioners of new
specialties rehabilitated some individuals suffering from rare diseases.
The practice of medicine became centered on the performance of
hospital-based staffs. Trust in miracle cures obliterated good sense and
traditional wisdom on healing and health care. The irresponsible use of
drugs spread from doctors to the general public. The second watershed
was approached when the marginal utility of further professionalization
declined, at least insofar as it can be expressed in terms of the
physical well-being of the largest number of people. The second
watershed was superseded when the marginal disutility increased as
further monopoly by the medical establishment became an indicator of
more suffering for larger numbers of people. After the passage of this
second watershed, medicine still claimed continued progress, as measured
by the new landmarks doctors set for them-selves and then reached: both
predictable discoveries and costs. For instance, a few patients survived
longer with transplants of various organs. On the other hand, the total
social cost exacted by medicine ceased to be measurable in conventional
terms. Society can have no quantitative standards by which to add up the
negative value of illusion, social control, prolonged suffering,
loneliness, genetic deterioration, and frustration produced by medical
treatment.

Other industrial institutions have passed through the same two
watersheds. This is certainly true for the major social agencies that
have been reorganized according to scientific criteria during the last
150 years. Education, the mails, social work, transportation, and even
civil engineering have followed this evolution. At first, new knowledge
is applied to the solution of a clearly stated problem and scientific
measuring sticks are applied to account for the new efficiency. But at a
second point, the progress demonstrated in a previous achievement is
used as a rationale for the exploitation of society as a whole in the
service of a value which is determined and constantly revised by an
element of society, by one of its self-certifying professional élites.

In the case of transportation it has taken almost a century to pass from
an era served by motorized vehicles to the era in which society has been
reduced to virtual enslavement to the car. During the American Civil War
steam power on wheels became effective. The new economy in
transportation enabled many people to travel by rail at the speed of a
royal coach, and to do so with a comfort kings had not dared dream of.
Gradually, desirable locomotion was associated and finally identified
with high vehicular speeds. But when transportation had passed through
its second watershed, vehicles had created more distances than they
helped to bridge; more time was used by the entire society for the sake
of traffic than was \"saved.\"

It is sufficient to recognize the existence of these two watersheds in
order to gain a fresh perspective on our present social crisis. In one
decade several major institutions have moved jointly over their second
watershed. Schools are losing their claim to be effective tools to
provide education; cars have ceased to be effective tools for mass
transportation; the assembly line has ceased to be an acceptable mode of
production.

The characteristic reaction of the sixties to the growing frustration
was further technological and bureaucratic escalation. Self-defeating
escalation of power became the core-ritual practiced in highly
industrialized nations. In this context the Vietnam war is both
revealing and concealing. It makes this ritual visible for the entire
world in a narrow theatre of war, yet it also distracts attention from
the same ritual being played out in many so-called peaceful arenas. The
conduct of the war proves that a convivial army limited to bicycle
speeds is served by the opponent\'s escalation of anonymous power. And
yet many Americans argue that the resources squandered on the war in the
Far East could be used effectively to overwhelm poverty at home. Others
are anxious to use the \$20 billion the war now costs for increasing
international development assistance from its present low of \$2
billion. They fail to grasp the underlying institutional structure
common to a peaceful war on poverty and a bloody war on dissidence. Both
escalate what they are meant to eliminate.

While evidence shows that more of the same leads to utter defeat,
nothing less than more and more seems worthwhile in a society infected
by the growth mania. The desperate plea is not only for more bombs and
more police, more medical examinations and more teachers, but also for
more information and research. The editor-in-chief of the Bulletin of
Atomic Scientists claims that most of our present problems are the
result of recently acquired knowledge badly applied, and concludes that
the only remedy for the mess created by this information is more of it.
It has become fashionable to say that where science and technology have
created problems, it is only more scientific understanding and better
technology that can carry us past them.

The cure for bad management is more management. The cure for specialized
research is more costly interdisciplinary research, just as the cure for
polluted rivers is more costly nonpolluting detergents. The pooling of
stores of information, the building up of a knowledge stock, the attempt
to overwhelm present problems by the introduction of more science is the
ultimate attempt to solve a crisis by escalation.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-4 .calibre4}
## II. Convivial Reconstruction {#ii.-convivial-reconstruction .calibre1}

The symptoms of accelerated crisis are widely recognized. Multiple
attempts have been made to explain them. I believe that this crisis is
rooted in a major twofold experiment which has failed, and I claim that
the resolution of the crisis begins with a recognition of the failure.
For a hundred years we have tried to make machines work for men and to
school men for life in their service. Now it turns out that machines do
not \"work\" and that people cannot be schooled for a life at the
service of machines. The hypothesis on which the experiment was built
must now be discarded. The hypothesis was that machines can replace
slaves. The evidence shows that, used for this purpose, machines enslave
men. Neither a dictatorial proletariat nor a leisure mass can escape the
dominion of constantly expanding industrial tools.

The crisis can be solved only if we learn to invert the present deep
structure of tools; if we give people tools that guarantee their right
to work with high, independent efficiency, thus simultaneously
eliminating the need for either slaves ormasters and enhancing each
person\'s range of freedom. People need new tools to work with rather
than tools that \"work\" for them. They need technology to make the most
of the energy and imagination each has, rather than more well-programmed
energy slaves.

I believe that society must be reconstructed to enlarge the contribution
of autonomous individuals and primary groups to the total effectiveness
of a new system of production designed to satisfy the human needs which
it also determines. In fact, the institutions of industrial society do
just the opposite. As the power of machines increases, the role of
persons more and more decreases to that of mere consumers.

Individuals need tools to move and to dwell. They need remedies for
their diseases and means to communicate with one another. People cannot
make all these things for themselves. They depend on being supplied with
objects and services which vary from culture to culture. Some people
depend on the supply of food and others on the supply of ball bearings.

People need not only to obtain things, they need above all the freedom
to make things among which they can live, to give shape to them
according to their own tastes, and to put them to use in caring for and
about others. Prisoners in rich countries often have access to more
things and services than members of their families, but they have no say
in how things are to be made and cannot decide what to do with them.
Their punishment consists in being deprived of what I shall call
\"conviviality.\" They are degraded to the status of mere consumers.

I choose the term \"conviviality\" to designate the opposite of
industrial productivity. I intend it to mean autonomous and creative
intercourse among persons, and the intercourse of persons with their
environment; and this in contrast with the conditioned response of
persons to the demands made upon them by others, and by a man-made
environment. I consider conviviality to be individual freedom realized
in personal interdependence and, as such, an intrinsic ethical value. I
believe that, in any society, as conviviality is reduced below a certain
level, no amount of industrial productivity can effectively satisfy the
needs it creates among society\'s members.

Present institutional purposes, which hallow industrial productivity at
the expense of convivial effectiveness, are a major factor in the
amorphousness and meaninglessness that plague contemporary society. The
increasing demand for products has come to define society\'s process. I
will suggest how this present trend can be reversed and how modern
science and technology can be used to endow human activity with
unprecedented effectiveness. This reversal would permit the evolution of
a life style and of a political system which give priority to the
protection, the maximum use, and the enjoyment of the one resource that
is almost equally distributed among all people: personal energy under
personal control. I will argue that we can no longer live and work
effectively without public controls over tools and institutions that
curtail or negate any person\'s right to the creative use of his or her
energy. For this purpose we need procedures to ensure that controls over
the tools of society are established and governed by political process
rather than by decisions by experts.

The transition to socialism cannot be effected without an inversion of
our present institutions and the substitution of convivial for
industrial tools. At the same time, the retooling of society will remain
a pious dream unless the ideals of socialist justice prevail. I believe
that the present crisis of our major institutions ought to be welcomed
as a crisis of revolutionary liberation because our present institutions
abridge basic human freedom for the sake of providing people with more
institutional outputs. This world-wide crisis of world-wide institutions
can lead to a new consciousness about the nature of tools and to
majority action for their control. If tools are not controlled
politically, they will be managed in a belated technocratic response to
disaster. Freedom and dignity will continue to dissolve into an
unprecedented enslavement of man to his tools.

As an alternative to technocratic disaster, I propose the vision of a
convivial society. A convivial society would be the result of social
arrangements that guarantee for each member the most ample and free
access to the tools of the community and limit this freedom only in
favor of another member\'s equal freedom.

At present people tend to relinquish the task of envisaging the future
to a professional élite. They transfer power to politicians who promise
to build up the machinery to deliver this future. They accept a growing
range of power levels in society when inequality is needed to maintain
high outputs. Political institutions themselves become draft mechanisms
to press people into complicity with output goals. What is right comes
to be subordinated to what is good for institutions. Justice is debased
to mean the equal distribution of institutional wares.

The individual\'s autonomy is intolerably reduced by a society that
defines the maximum satisfaction of the maximum number as the largest
consumption of industrial goods. Alternate political arrangements would
have the purpose of permitting all people to define the images of their
own future. New politics would aim principally to exclude the design of
artifacts and rules that are obstacles to the exercise of this personal
freedom. Such politics would limit the scope of tools as demanded by the
protection of three values: survival, justice, and self-defined work. I
take these values to be fundamental to any convivial society, however
different one such society might be from another in practice,
institutions, or rationale.

Each of these three values imposes its own limits on tools. The
conditions for survival are necessary but not sufficient to ensure
justice; people can survive in prison. The conditions for the just
distribution of industrial outputs are necessary, but not sufficient to
promote convivial production. People can be equally enslaved by their
tools. The conditions for convivial work are structural arrangements
that make possible the just distribution of unprecedented power. A
postindustrial society must and can be so constructed that no one
person\'s ability to express him- or herself in work will require as a
condition the enforced labor or the enforced learning or the enforced
consumption of another.

In an age of scientific technology, the convivial structure of tools is
a necessity for survival in full justice which is both distributive and
participatory. This is so because science has opened new energy sources.
Competition for inputs must lead to destruction, while their central
control in the hands of a Leviathan would sacrifice equal control over
inputs to the semblance of an equal distribution of outputs. Rationally
designed convivial tools have become the basis for participatory
justice.

But this does not mean that the transition from our present to a
convivial mode of production can be accomplished without serious threats
to the survival of many people. At present the relationship between
people and their tools is suicidally distorted. The survival of
Pakistanis depends on Canadian grain, and the survival of New Yorkers on
world-wide exploitation of natural resources. The birth pangs of a
convivial world society will inevitably be violently painful for hungry
Indians and for helpless New Yorkers. I will later argue that the
transition from the present mode of production, which is Overwhelmingly
industrial, toward conviviality may start suddenly. But for the sake of
the survival of many people it will be desirable that the transition
does not happen all at once. I argue that survival in justice is
possible only at the cost of those sacrifices implicit in the adoption
of a convivial mode of production and the universal renunciation of
unlimited progeny, affluence, and power on the part of both individuals
and groups. This price cannot be extorted by some despotic Leviathan,
nor elicited by social engineering. People will rediscover the value of
joyful sobriety and liberating austerity only if they relearn to depend
on each other rather than on energy slaves. The price for a convivial
society will be paid only as the result of a political process which
reflects and promotes the society-wide inversion of present industrial
consciousness. This political process will find its concrete expression
not in some taboo, but in a series of temporary agreements on one or the
other concrete limitation of means, constantly adjusted under the
pressure of conflicting insights and interests.

In this volume I want to offer a methodology by which to recognize means
which have turned into ends. My subject is tools and not intentions. The
choice of this subject makes it impossible to undertake several related,
relevant, and tempting tasks because:

1\. It would not serve my purpose to describe in detail any fictional
community of the future. I want to provide guidelines for action, not
for fantasy. A modern society, bounded for convivial living, could
generate a new flowering of surprises far beyond anyone\'s imagination
and hope. I am not proposing a Utopia, but a procedure that provides
each community with the choice of its unique social arrangements.

2\. I do not want to contribute to an engineering manual for the design
of convivial institutions or tools, nor do I want to engage in a sales
campaign for what would be obviously a better technology. My purpose is
to lay down criteria by which the manipulation of people for the sake of
their tools can be immediately recognized, and thus to exclude those
artifacts and institutions which inevitably extinguish a convivial life
style. Paradoxically, a society of simple tools that allows men to
achieve purposes with energy fully under their own control is now
difficult to imagine. Our imaginations have been industrially deformed
to conceive only what can be molded into an engineered system of social
habits that fit the logic of large-scale production. We have almost lost
the ability to frame in fancy a world in which sound and shared
reasoning sets limits to everybody\'s power to interfere with anybody\'s
equal power to shape the world.

The present world is divided into those who do not have enough and those
who have more than enough, those who are pushed off the road by cars and
those who drive them. The have-nots are miserable and the rich anxious
to get more. A society whose members know what is enough might be poor,
but its members would be equally free. Men with industrially distorted
minds cannot grasp the rich texture of personal accomplishments within
the range of modern though limited tools. There is no room in their
imaginations for the qualitative change that the acceptance of a
stable-state industry would mean; a society in which members are free
from most of the multiple restraints of schedules and therapies now
imposed for the sake of growing tools. Much less do most of our
contemporaries experience the sober joy of life in this voluntary though
relative poverty which lies within our grasp.

3\. I will focus on the structure of tools, not on the character
structure of their users. The use of industrial tools stamps in an
identical way the landscape of cities each having its own history and
culture. Highways, hospital wards, classrooms, office buildings,
apartments, and stores look everywhere the same. Identical tools also
promote the development of the same character types. Policemen in patrol
cars or accountants at computers look and act alike all over the world,
while their poor cousins using nightstick or pen are different from
region to region. The progressive homogenization of personalities and
personal relationships cannot be stemmed without a retooling of society.
Research on the social character traits that make retooling difficult or
doubtful is complementary to what I propose. But I am not postulating
the creation of a new man as a condition for a new society, nor am I
pretending to know how either social character or cultures will change.
A pluralism of limited tools and of convivial commonweals would of
necessity encourage a diversity of life styles.

4\. It would distract from the core of my argument if I were to deal
with political strategies or tactics. With the possible exception of
China under Mao, no present government could restructure society along
convivial lines. The managers of our major tools-nations, corporations,
parties, structured movements, professions-hold power. This power is
vested in the maintenance of the growth-oriented structures which they
manipulate. These managers have the power to make major decisions; they
can generate new demands for the output of their tools and enforce the
creation of new social labels to fit them. They can even go so far as to
limit the output of tools in the interest of maximizing benefits. But
they have no power to reverse the basic structure of the institutional
arrangements which they manage.

The major institutions now optimize the output of large tools for
lifeless people. Their inversion implies institutions that would foster
the use of individually accessible tools to support the meaningful and
responsible deeds of fully awake people. Turning basic institutions
upside down and inside out is what the adoption of a convivial mode of
production would require. Such an inversion of society is beyond the
managers of present institutions.

Today\'s managers form a new class of men, selected for their character,
competence, and interest-which enable them to both expand the productive
society and promote the further operant conditioning of their clients.
They hold and manage power no matter who lives in the illusion that he
owns the tools. This class of power-holders must be eliminated, but this
cannot be done by mass slaughter or replacement. The new élite would
only claim more legitimacy in the manipulation of the inherited
structured power. Management can be done away with only by eliminating
the machinery that makes it necessary and, therefore, the demands for
output that give it sway. In a convivial society there is little need
for replacing the chairman of the board.

In a society in which power-both political and physical-is bounded and
spread by political decision there is place not onlyfor a new flowering
of products and characters, but also for a variety in forms of
governance. Certainly, new tools would provide new options. Convivial
tools rule out certain levels of power, compulsion, and programming,
which are precisely those features that now tend to make all governments
look more or less alike. But the adoption of a convivial mode of
production does not of itself mean that one specific form of government
would be more fitting than another, nor does it rule out a world
federation, or agreements between nation-states, or communes, or many of
the most traditional forms of governance. I restrict myself to the
description of basic structural criteria within which the retooling of
society can be achieved.

5\. A methodology by which to recognize when corporate tools become
destructive of society itself requires the recognition of the value of
distributory and participatory justice. I believe that my succinct
statement will be sufficient to identify necessary restraints on tools,
but it will also preclude that in this essay I reach any conclusion
about a desirable degree of subordination of means to ends.

6\. The economics applicable to a postindustrial and convivial society
can neither be ignored nor taken for granted. In a society that accepts
politically defined limits on all types of industrial growth, many
accepted terms will have to be redefined, but it is certain that in such
a society inequality will not be excluded. In fact, each individual\'s
power to make effective changes would be greater than in preindustrial
or in industrial times. Though they would be bounded, common tools would
be incomparably more efficient than primitive, and more widely
distributed than industrial, devices. Their products would accrue more
to some than to others. The task of keeping net transfer of power within
bounds requires the use of traditional as well as new economic devices.
It will be argued that the limitation of tools cannot be effected before
a corresponding new economic theory has been elaborated and has become
operational. This is correct. I do propose that we use a dimensional
analysis to obtain information about the major variables which can upset
the balance of life, and that we rely on political process to identify
the significant dimensions which man can control. I therefore propose an
approach to the relationship between man\'s ends and his means in which
the key units of economics come to signify a dimensionless set of
factors. Economics useful for the inversion of our present institutional
structure starts out from politically defined limiting criteria. It is
on these negative design criteria for technological devices that I want
to focus attention.

A methodology, by which to recognize the public perversion of tools into
purposes, encounters resistance on the part of people who are used to
measuring what is good in terms of dollars. Plato knew that the bad
statesman is he who believes that the art of measurement is universal,
and who jumbles together what is greater or smaller and what is more fit
to the purpose. Our present attitudes toward production have been formed
over the centuries. Increasingly, institutions have not only shaped our
demands but also in the most literal sense our logic, or sense of
proportion. Having come to demand what institutions can produce, we soon
believe that we cannot do without it.

The invention of education is an example of what I mean. We often forget
that education acquired its present sense only recently. It was unknown
before the Reformation, except as that part of early upbringing which is
common to piglets, ducks, and men. It was clearly distinguished from the
instruction needed by the young, and from the study in which some
engaged later on in life and for which a teacher was needed. Voltaire
still called it a presumptuous neologism, used only by pretentious
schoolmasters.

The endeavor to put all men through successive stages of enlightenment
is rooted deeply in alchemy, the Great Art of the waning Middle Ages.
John Amos Comenius, a Moravian bishop of the seventeenth century, a
self-styled pansophist and pedagogue, is rightly considered one of the
founders of the modern school. He was among the first to propose seven
or twelve grades of compulsory learning. In his Magna Didactica he
described schools as devices to \"teach everybody everything\" and
outlined a blueprint for the assembly-line production of knowledge,
which according to his method would make education cheaper and better
and make growth into full humanity possible for all. But Comenius was
not only an early theoretician of mass production, he was an alchemist
who adapted the technical language of his craft to describe the art of
rearing children. The alchemist sought to refine base elements by
graduating their spirits through twelve stages of successive
enlightenment, so that for their own and all the world\'s benefit they
might be transformed into gold. Of course, alchemists failed no matter
how often they tried, but each time their \"science\" yielded new
reasons for their failure, and they tried again.

The industrial mode of production was first fully rationalized in the
manufacture of a new invisible commodity, called \"education.\" Pedagogy
opened a new chapter in the history of the Ars Magna Education became
the search for an alchemic process that would bring forth a new type of
man who would fit into an environment created by scientific magic. But
no matter how much each generation spent on its schools, it always
turned out that the majority of people were certified as unfit for
higher grades of enlightenment and had to be discarded as unprepared for
the good life in a man-made world.

Not only has the redefinition of learning as schooling made schools seem
necessary, it has also compounded the poverty of the unschooled with
discrimination against the uneducated. People who have climbed up the
ladder of schooling know where they dropped out and how uneducated they
are. Once they accept the authority of an agency to define and measure
their level of knowledge, they easily go on to accept the authority of
other agencies to define for them their level of appropriate health or
mobility. It is difficult for them to identify the structural corruption
of our major institutions. Just as they come to believe in the value of
the \"knowledge stock\" they acquired in school, so they come to believe
that higher speeds save time and that income levels define well-being
or, as an alternative, that the production of more services rather than
more goods increases the quality of life.

The commodity called \"education\" and the institution called \"school\"
make each other necessary. The circle can be broken only by a widely
shared insight that the institution has come to define the purpose.
Values abstractly stated are reduced to mechanical processes that
enslave men. This serfdom can be broken only by the joyful
self-recognition of the fool who assumes personal responsibility for his
folly.

The institutional definition of values has made it difficult to focus
our attention on the deep structure of social means. It is hard to
imagine that the division of sciences, of labor, and of professions has
gone too far. It is difficult to conceive of higher social effectiveness
with lower industrial efficiency. To recognize the nature of desirable
limits to specialization and output, we must focus our attention on the
industrially determined shape of our expectations. Only then can we
recognize that the emergence of a convivial and pluralist mode of
production will follow the limitation of industrial institutions.

In the past, convivial life for some inevitably demanded the servitude
of others. Labor efficiency was low before the steel ax, the pump, the
bicycle, and the nylon fishing line. Between the High Middle Ages and
the Enlightenment, the alchemic dream misled many otherwise authentic
Western humanists. The illusion prevailed that the machine was a
laboratory-made homunculus, and that it could do our labor instead of
slaves. It is now time to correct this mistake and shake off the
illusion that men are born to be slaveholders and that the only thing
wrong in the past was that not all men could be equally so. By reducing
our expectations of machines, however, we must guard against falling
into the equally damaging rejection of all machines as if they were
works of the devil.

A convivial society should be designed to allow all its members the most
autonomous action by means of tools least controlled by others. People
feel joy, as opposed to mere pleasure, to the extent that their
activities are creative; while the growth of tools beyond a certain
point increases regimentation, dependence, exploitation, and impotence.
I use the term \"tool\" broadly enough to include not only simple
hardware such as drills, pots, syringes, brooms, building elements, or
motors, and not just large machines like cars or power stations; I also
include among tools productive institutions such as factories that
produce tangible commodities like corn flakes or electric current, and
productive systems for intangible commodities such as those which
produce \"education,\" \"health,\" \"knowledge,\" or \"decisions.\" I
use this term because it allows me to subsume into one category all
rationally designed devices, be they artifacts or rules, codes or
operators, and to distinguish all these planned and engineered
instrumentalities from other things such as basic food or implements,
which in a given culture are not deemed to be subject to
rationalization. School curricula or marriage laws are no less purposely
shaped social devices than road networks.

Tools are intrinsic to social relationships. An individual relates
himself in action to his society through the use of tools that he
actively masters, or by which he is passively acted upon. To the degree
that he masters his tools, he can invest the world with his meaning; to
the degree that he is mastered by his tools, the shape of the tool
determines his own self-image. Convivial tools are those which give each
person who uses them the greatest opportunity to enrich the environment
with the fruits of his or her vision. Industrial tools deny this
possibility to those who use them and they allow their designers to
determine the meaning and expectations of others. Most tools today
cannot be used in a convivial fashion.

Hand tools are those which adapt man\'s metabolic energy to a specific
task. They can be multipurpose, like some primitive hammers or good
modern pocket knives, or again they can be highly specific in design
such as spindles, looms, or pedal-driven sewing machines, and dentists\'
drills. They can also be complex such as a transportation system built
to get the most in mobility out of human energy-for instance, a bicycle
system composed of a series of man-powered vehicles, such as pushcarts
and three-wheel rickshas, with a corresponding road system equipped with
repair stations and perhaps even covered roadways. Hand tools are mere
transducers of the energy generated by man\'s extremities and fed by the
intake of air and of nourishment.

Power tools are moved, at least partially, by energy converted outside
the human body. Some of them act as amplifiers of human energy: the oxen
pull the plow, but man works with the oxen-the result is obtained by
pooling the powers of beast and man. Power saws and motor pulleys are
used in the same fashion. On the other hand, the energy used to steer a
jet plane has ceased to be a significant fraction of its power output.
The pilot is reduced to a mere operator guided by data which a computer
digests for him. The machine needs him for lack of a better computer; or
he is in the cockpit because the social control of unions over airplanes
imposes his presence.

Tools foster conviviality to the extent to which they can be easily
used, by anybody, as often or as seldom as desired, for the
accomplishment of a purpose chosen by the user. The use of such tools by
one person does not restrain another from using them equally. They do
not require previous certification of the user. Their existence does not
impose any obligation to use them. They allow the user to express his
meaning in action.

Some institutions are structurally convivial tools. The telephone is an
example. Anybody can dial the person of his choice if he can afford a
coin. If untiring computers keep the lines occupied and thereby restrict
the number of personal conversations, this is a misuse by the company of
a license given so that persons can speak. The telephone lets anybody
say what he wants to the person of his choice; he can conduct business,
express love, or pick a quarrel. It is impossible for bureaucrats to
define what people say to each other on the phone, even though they can
interfere with-or protect-the privacy of their exchange.

Most hand tools lend themselves to convivial use unless they are
artificially restricted through some institutional arrangements. They
can be restricted by becoming the monopoly of one profession, as happens
with dentist drills through the requirement of a license and with
libraries or laboratories by placing them within schools. Also, tools
can be purposely limited when simple pliers and screwdrivers are
insufficient to repair modern cars. This institutional monopoly or
manipulation usually constitutes an abuse and changes the nature of the
tool as little as the nature of the knife is changed by its abuse for
murder.

In principle the distinction between convivial and manipulatory tools is
independent of the level of technology of the tool. What has been said
of the telephone could be repeated point by point for the mails or for a
typical Mexican market. Each is an institutional arrangement that
maximizes liberty, even though in a broader context it can be abused for
purposes of manipulation and control. The telephone is the result of
advanced engineering; the mails require in principle little technology
and considerable organization and scheduling; the Mexican market runs
with minimum planning along customary patterns.

Any institution that moves toward its second watershed tends to become
highly manipulative. For instance, it costs more to make teaching
possible than to teach. The cost of roles exceeds the cost of
production. Increasingly, components intended for the accomplishment of
institutional purposes are redesigned so that they cannot be used
independently. People without cars have no access to planes) and people
without plane tickets have no access to convention hotels. Alternate
tools which are fit to accomplish the same purposes with fewer claims
are pushed off the market. For instance, civilized correspondence
becomes a lost art. During the last several years this barring of
alternatives has usually coincided with the increased power of the tool
and the development of more complex tool systems.

It is possible that not every means of desirable production in a
postindustrial society would fit the criteria of conviviality. It is
probable that even in an overwhelmingly convivial world some communities
would choose greater affluence at the cost of some restrictions on
creativity. It is almost certain that in a period of transition from the
present to the future mode of production in certain countries
electricity would not commonly be produced in the backyard. It is also
true that trains must run on tracks and stop on schedule at a limited
number of points. Oceangoing vessels are built for one purpose; if they
were sailing clippers, they might be even more specialized for one route
than are present tankers. Telephone systems are highly determined for
the transmission of messages of a certain band width and must be
centrally administered even if they are limited to the service of only
one area. It is a mistake to believe that all large tools and all
centralized production would have to be excluded from a convivial
society. It would equally be a mistake to demand that for the sake of
conviviality the distribution of industrial goods and services be
reduced to the minimum consistent with survival in order to protect the
maximum equal right to self-determined participation. Different balances
between distributive justice and participatory justice can prevail in
societies equally striving for post-industrial conviviality, depending
on the history, political ideals, and physical resources of a community.

What is fundamental to a convivial society is not the total absence of
manipulative institutions and addictive goods and services, but the
balance between those tools which create the specific demands they are
specialized to satisfy and those complementary, enabling tools which
foster self-realization. The first set of tools produces according to
abstract plans for men in general; the other set enhances the ability of
people to pursue their own goals in their unique way.

The criteria by which anticonvivial or manipulative tools are recognized
cannot be used to exclude every tool that meets them. These criteria,
however, can be applied as guidelines for structuring the totality of
tools by which a society desires to define the style and level of its
conviviality. A convivial society does not exclude all schools. It does
exclude a school system which has been perverted into a compulsory tool,
denying privileges to the dropout. A convivial society does not exclude
some high-speed intercity transport, as long as its layout does not in
fact impose equally high speeds on all other routes. Not even television
must be ruled out-although it permits very few programmers and speakers
to define what their viewers may see-as long as the over-all structure
of society does not favor the degradation of everyone into a compulsory
voyeur. The criteria of conviviality are to be considered as guidelines
to the continuous process by which a society\'s members defend their
liberty, and not as a set of prescriptions which can be mechanically
applied.

At present the reverse guideline prevails, even in societies where the
producer is told that he is in the saddle. The socialist planner
competes with the free-market advocate in claiming that a society run on
his principles is more productive. In 1931 Stalin translated \"control
over the means of production\" to mean the increase of productivity by
new methods used to control the producer. In the midst of the U.S.
Depression he launched Russia on an industrial race. Since then a
socialist policy has been considered one which serves the industrially
organized productivity of a socialist country. Stalin\'s
reinterpretation of Marxism has since then served as a form of blackmail
against socialists and the left. It remains to be seen if after Mao\'s
death China will also trade productive conviviality for institutional
productivity. The Stalinist interpretation of socialism has made it
possible for socialists and capitalists alike to agree on how to measure
the level of development a society has achieved. Societies in which most
people depend for most of their goods and services on the personal whim,
kindness, or skill of another are called \"underdeveloped,\" while those
in which living has been transformed into a process of ordering from an
all-encompassing store catalogue are called \"advanced.\" Stalinism
makes it possible to interpret as revolutionary whatever increases the
amount of schooling, expands the road systems, or increases the
productivity of extraction and manufacture. To be revolutionary has come
to mean either to champion the nation that lags in production and to
make its members keenly aware of the lag, or to inflame the frantic and
frustrated attempts of underconsuming minorities in rich countries to
catch up.

Every aspect of industrial societies has become part of a larval system
for escalating production and increasing the demand necessary to justify
the total social cost. For this reason, criticism of bad management,
official dishonesty, insufficient research, or technological lag
distracts public attention from the one issue that counts: careful
analysis of the basic structure of tools as means. It is equally
distracting to suggest that the present frustration is primarily due to
the private ownership of the means of production, and that the public
ownership of these same factories under the tutelage of a planning board
could protect the interest of the majority and lead society to an
equally shared abundance. As long as Ford Motor Company can be condemned
simply because it makes Ford rich, the illusion is bolstered that the
same factory could make the public rich. As long as people believe that
the public can profit from cars, they will not condemn Ford for making
cars. The issue at hand is not the juridical ownership of tools, but
rather the discovery of the characteristic of some tools which make it
impossible for anybody to \"own\" them. The concept of ownership cannot
be applied to a tool that cannot be controlled.

The issue at hand, therefore, is what tools can be controlled in the
public interest. Only secondarily does the question arise whether
private control of a potentially useful tool is in the public interest.

Certain tools are destructive no matter who owns them, whether it be the
Mafia, stockholders, a foreign company, the state, or even a workers\'
commune. Networks of multilane highways, long. range, wide-band-width
transmitters, strip mines, or compulsory school systems are such tools.
Destructive tools must inevitably increase regimentation, dependence,
exploitation, or impotence, and rob not only the rich but also the poor
of conviviality, which is the primary treasure in many so-called
\"underdeveloped\" areas.

It has become difficult for contemporary man to imagine development and
modernization in terms of lower rather than higher energy use. High
technology has been mistakenly identified with powerful intervention in
physical, psychological, and social processes. The illusion that a high
culture is one that uses the highest possible quantities of energy must
be overcome if we are to get tools into focus. In classical societies
power sources were very equally distributed. Each man was born with the
potential to use most of the power he would need in a lifetime if his
organism was properly maintained. Control over larger amounts of
physical energy was the result of psychic manipulation or of political
domination.

Men did not need power tools to build the Mexican pyramids of Teotihucàn
or the Philippine rice terraces of Ibagu?. Their muscles provided the
force to raise St. Peter\'s and to dig the channels of Angkor Vat.
Runners carried the messages between Caesar\'s generals and between
village chiefs and Inca planners. Hands and feet moved the spindle and
the loom, the pottery wheel and the saw. Human metabolism provided the
energy that powered classical agriculture, manufacture, and war.
Individual skills were the controls that shaped animal energy into
socially defined work. The energy that rulers could control was the sum
of the performance their subjects voluntarily or involuntarily conceded.

I do not claim that human metabolism provided all useful power, but I do
claim that in most cultures it was the main source of power. Men knew
how to harness some of the forces of the environment. They steered
barges down the Nile: they gentled beasts to draw the plow; they caught
the wind in their sails: they became experts in the construction of
simple machines which combined the power of men and of rain and of
gravity. They also tamed fire in the forge and the kitchen, but the
total output of these sources remained secondary. Even Mongols who lived
on their mounts provided more energy with their muscles than with their
horsepower. All the energy tapped from the environment to build Athens
and Florence did not contribute as much controlled power to these
classical societies as did their men. Only when man lit fires to turn
cities into ruins or jungles into swiddens did he release\--but
certainly not control\--energies that overwhelmed the power of the
people who used them.

The amount of physical power available to old societies can be
estimated. It can be expressed in multiples of the average man\'s
working time and metabolic energy. lie can burn 2,500 calories a day,
four-fifths of them just to stay alive. They go into making his heart
beat and his brain pulse. The remainder can be externalized, but this
does not mean that all of it can be transformed into work. A large
portion of the lifetime capacity of a man to act on his physical and
social environment is burnt running around while he grows up. More is
spent for chores that lie beyond his personal choice-but also beyond
other men\'s reach. He consumes energy in getting tip, in preparing
food, in seeking protection from the cold, or in avoiding the
slavedriver\'s whip. If man is deprived of the use of this power, hue
becomes useless for work. Society can give shape to these personal
activities, but it cannot appropriate the energy used on them for other
tasks. Custom, language, and law can determine the form of the slave\'s
pottery, but the master cannot take the last pots or the roof away from
his slaves, not if he wants them to go on slaving for him. A small
energy parcel from each man was the major sourceof physical power with
which temples were built, mountains were moved, cloth was woven, wars
were waged, and kings were carried around or amused.

Power was limited. It was proportional to the population. Its major
source was the muscles of individual men. Its efficient use depended on
the stage of development which hand tools had reached and the
distribution of necessary tools throughout the population. Tools all
matched the impedance of manpower to the task. Except by redirecting the
forces of gravity and wind they did not and could not act as amplifiers
of this power. To control more power than others in his society, a man
had to lord it over his fellows. If a ruler could draw power from
sources other than men, his control over this power still depended on
his control over men. Each pair of oxen required a man to lead them.
Even the forge needed a boy to blow into the fire. Political control co
incided with the control over physical power, and the control of power
depended entirely on authority.

Equal power and equal direct control of power were both features of
preindustrial societies, but this did not guarantee an equal autonomy in
the exercise of this control. On a very primi tive level the physical
predominance of one person made him into the lord of others. A slight
advantage in organization or weaponry made one people the master of
another. The appropria tion of resources and tools created the basis of
class societies and fostered the rituals and myths that shaped men to
fit into the class to which they were assigned.

In a preindustrial society political control could extend only over the
excess power that people could produce. As soon as a population became
efficient enough to produce more power than was required to maintain it,
people could be deprived of control over this energy. They could be
compelled to cede their power to the decisions of others. They could be
either taxed or enslaved. Part of what they produced on their own could
be taken from them, or they could be put to work for the king or the
village. Ideology, economic structure, and life style tended to favor
this concentration of excess energy under the control of a few.

The degree to which this concentration of control polarized social
benefits varied from one culture to another. At best it improved the
range within which most members of society could employ their remaining
energies. High peasant cultures offer good examples. While all shared in
the tasks of defending their land from enemies or floods, each was also
better dressed, housed, and fed. At worst, the concentration of
decisions over power led to the establishment of empires which were
expanded by merce naries and fed from plantations worked by slaves.

The total energy available to socieq increased rapidly toward the end of
the Iron Age, that is, between the time of Agrippa and the time of Watt.
Most of the radical technical mutations that came into existence before
the scientific discoveries in the field of electricity in fact came
about early in the Middle Ages. Because they used windpower far more
effectively than any previous in vention, three-masted sailing ships
made world-wide transporta tion possible. Speedy transportation with
regular deliveries was made possible by the building of canals in
Europe, a millen nium after the same discovery was implemented in
Southeast Asia. A vastly increased application of nonhuman energy to in
dustries like brewing, dyeing, pottery-making, brick-making,
sugar-refining, salt manufacture, and transportation went parallel with
the construction of vastly improved water wheels and wind mills.

From the High Middle Ages to the late Renaissance, new social tools
developed that ensured the protection of the worker\'s self image and
dignity, although he was now sometimes dwarfed by the size of machines.
The guild system did indeed give the worker a new claim to the monopoly
over tools specific to his trade. But the mill had not yet grown out of
proportion to the miller. His monopoly over grain-processing protected
the guildsman, pro vided him with extra holidays, and still maximized
the services that he could render to his town. Guilds were neither
unions nor professional associations.

Lewis Mumford in his The Myth of the Machine: The Penta gon of Power
points out that one particular enterprise, namely mining,

set the pattern for later modes of mechanizadon by its callous disregard
for human factors, by its indifference to the pollution and destruction
of the neighboring environment, by its concentration upon the physico
chemical process for obtaining the desired metal or fuel, and abo\~re
all by its topographic and mental isolation from the organic world of
the farmer and the craftsman, and tbe spiritual world of the Church, the
University and the Ciq. In its destruction of the environment and its
indifference to the risks to human life, mining closely resembles
warfare\--through likewise it often, through its confrontation of danger
and death, brings into existence a tough, self-respecting personality .
. . the soldier at his best. But the destructive animus of mining and
its punishing routine of work, along with its environmental poverty and
disorder were passed on to the new industries that used its products.
These negative social results offset the mechanical gains.

This new attitude toward gainful activity is well reflected in the
introduction of a new term to designate it. Tripaliare meant to torture
on the trepalium, which was first mentioned in the sixth century as an
instrument of impalement made out of three wooden sticks. By the twelfth
century the word in both French and Spanish expressed a painful
experience to which man is subjected; only in the sixteenth century did
it become possible to use the verb trabajar interchangeably with laborar
and sudar on the job. Equally significant is what happened in the
English language. Things began to work\--first medicines (1600) and then
physical tools (1650), even though these were not yet tools driven by
any outside power. The alchemist\'s dream of making a homunculus in the
test tube slowly took the shape of creating robots to work for man, and
to educate men to work alongside them. The ideology of an industrial
organization of tools and a capitalist organization of the economy
preceded by many centuries what is usually called the Industrial
Revolution. On Baconian premises Europeans began, according to Mumford,
to save time, shrink space, augment power, multiply goods, over-throw
organic norms and displace real organisms with mechanisms that
stimulated them or vastly magnified some single function they performed.
All these imperatives, which have become the groundwork of science as
technology in our present society, seem axiomatic and absolute only
because they remain unexamined. The same change of mind appears also in
a transfer from ritual regularity to mechanical regularity with an
emphasis on time-keeping, space-measuring, account-keeping, thus
translating concrete objects and complex events into abstract
quantities. According to Mumford, it was this capitalistic devotion to
repetitive order that helped undermine the unmeasurable personal balance
between the workman and his tools.

New power meant a new relation to time. The lending of money against
interest was considered \"against nature\" by the Church: money
naturally was a means of exchange to buy necessities, not a capital that
could work or bear fruits. During the seventeenth century even the
Church abandoned this view-though reluctantly\--to accept the fact that
Christians had become capitalist merchants. Time became like money: I
now can have a few hours before lunch; how shall I spend time? . . I am
short of time so I can\'t afford to spend that much time on a committee;
it\'s not worth the time . . . It world be a waste of time; I\'d rather
save an hour.

Scientists began to consider man as a power source. They sought to
measure the maximum daily exertion that might be expected from a man and
compare both his maintenance and his power to those of a horse. Man was
reinvented as a source of mechanical power. Prisoners condemned to the
galleys were not much use most of the time, since galleys were most of
the time in port. Prisoners condemned to the treadmills produced rotary
power to which any of the new machines could be hooked. Up to the early
nineteenth century men in English prisons actually labored on the
treadmills to make machines work.

The new attitude of man to his tools during the Industrial Revolution,
which began as capitalism did in the fifteenth century, finally called
for the invention of new sources of power. The steam engine was a
product of the Industrial Revolution rather than the cause of it. Power
plants soon became mobile, and with the railroad the Iron Age and the
Industrial Revolution came to an end. Industrial ways became the status
quo.

Immense new sources of power were tapped during the twentieth century,
and much of this power became self-governing. Man has now been almost
replaced by machines and reduced to being their operator. Fewer men are
needed as gang workers in the fields: slavery has become uneconomical.
But also fewer men are needed on the assembly line, as engineers have
designed machines to perform the tasks that mass production and
industrialization had created in the centuries before the steam engine.
More power has become available, so more power is used, The human
slaveowner is replaced by the operant conditioning of men in the
mega-machine.

We have all grown up as children of our time, and therefore it is
extremely difficult to envisage a postindustrial yet human type of
\"work.\" To reduce industrial tools seems equivalent to a return to the
tortured labor of the mine and the factory, or to the labor of the U.S.
farm hand who has to compete with his mechanical neighbor. The worker
who had to dip a heavy tire into a solution of hot sulfur each time the
machine asked for it was literally hooked onto his apparatus.
Agricultural labor also ceased to be what it was for a slave or a
farmer. For the slave it was labor at the service and behest of a
master; for the peasant it was his own work which be could organize and
shape in accordance with the demands of growing plants, hungry animals,
and unpredictable weather. The modern farmhand in the United States
today who is deprived of power tools is under a double pressure quite
different from that of the classical slave: he must measure up to
performance standards set by farm hands elsewhere who use machines, and
he is constantly aware that he is underprivileged, exploited, and abused
because in an age of the megamachine he feels that he is used like a
component. The prospect that moving toward a convivial society might
imply a society with low power tools would seem to him like a return to
the exploitation of manpower by inefficient industrial machines in the
early periods of steam.

I have described three types of institutional arrangements within which
tools can be used. Certain tools can be used effectively within only one
of these arrangements. There are tools which can be used normally for
fully satisfying, imaginative, and independent work; others tend to be
used primarily in activities best labeled as labor; and, finally,
certain machines can only be operated. The same can be said about
physical artifacts and about the set of rules that define formal
institutional arrangements. Cars are machines that call for highways,
and highways pretend to be public utilities while in fact they are
discriminatory devices. Compulsory schools constitute a huge
bureaucratic system; no matter how convivially a teacher tries to
conduct his class, his pupils learn through him to which class they
belong.

Cars operate on highways as teachers operate in schools. Only in a very
limited sense can what the truck driver and the teacher do be called
labor. Only exceptionally will a teacher feel that his operations within
the school system do not directly interfere with his work.

The market characteristics of these three types of human activity help
to clarify the distinction among them. Labor can be purchased or sold in
the marketplace. Not work as an activity, but only the result of
convivial work can be marketed. Finally, the right to operate machines
and to obtain the scarce privileges that go with employment must be
earned through the previous consumption of certified treatments, which
take the form of a curriculum of schooling and testing along with
successive jobs.

Tools for a convivial and yet efficient society could not have been
designed at an earlier stage of history. We now can design the machinery
for eliminating slavery without enslaving man to the machine. Science
and technology are not bound to the peculiar notion, seemingly
characteristic of the last 150 years of their application to production,
that new knowledge of nature\'s laws has to be locked into increasingly
more specialized and highly capitalized preparation of men to use them.
The sciences, which specialized out of philosophy, have become the
rationale for an increasing division of operations. The division of
labor has finally led to the labor-saving division of tools. New
technology is now used to amplify supply funnels for commodities. Public
utilities are turned from facilities for persons into arenas for the
owners of expensive tools. The use of science and technology constantly
supports the industrial mode of production, and thereby crowds off the
scene all tool shops for independent enterprise. But this is not the
necessary result of new scientific discoveries or of their useful
application. It is rather the result of a total prejudice in favor of
the future expansion of an industrial mode of production. Research teams
are organized to remedy minor inefficiencies that hold up the further
growth of a specific production process. These planned discoveries are
then heralded as costly breakthroughs in the interest of further public
service. Research is now mostly oriented toward industrial development.

This unqualified identification of scientific advance with the
replacement of human initiative by programmed tools springs from an
ideological prejudice and is not the result of scientific analysis.
Science could be applied for precisely the opposite purpose. Advanced or
\"high\" technology could become identified with labor-sparing,
work-intensive decentralized productivity. Natural and social science
can be used for the creation of tools, utilities, and rules available to
everyone, permitting individuals and transient associations to
constantly recreate their mutual relationships and their environment
with unenvisaged freedom and self-expression.

New understanding of nature can now be applied to our tools either for
the purpose of propelling us into a hyperindustrialage of electronic
cybernetics or to help us develop a wide range of truly modern and yet
convivial tools. Limited resources can be used to provide millions of
viewers with the color image of one performer or to provide many people
with free access to the records of their choice. In the first case,
technology will be used for the further promotion of the specialized
worker, be lie a plumber, surgeon, or TV performer. More and more
bureaucrats will study the market, consult their balance sheets, and
decide for more people on more occasions about the range of products
among which they may choose. There will be a further increase of useful
things for useless people. But science can also be used to simplify
tools and to enable the layman to shape his immediate environment to his
taste. The time has come to take the syringe out of the hand of the
doctor, as the pen was taken out of the band of the scribe during the
Reformation in Europe.

Most curable sickness can now be diagnosed and treated by laymen. People
find it so difficult to accept this statement because the complexity of
medical ritual has hidden from them the simplicity of its basic
procedures. It took the example of the barefoot doctor in China to show
how modern practice by simple workers in their spare time could, in
three years, catapult health care in China to levels unparalleled
elsewhere. In most other countries health care by laymen is considered a
crime. A seventeen-year-old friend of mine was recently tried for having
treated some 130 of her high-school colleagues for VD. She was acquitted
on a technicality by the judge when expert counsel compared her
performance with that of the U.S. Health Service. Nowhere in the U.S.A.
can her achievement be considered \"standard,\" because she succeeded in
making retests on all her patients six weeks after their first
treatment. Progress should mean growing competence in self-care rather
than growing dependence.

The possibilities of lay therapy also run up against our commitment to
\"better\" health, and have blinded us to the distinction between
curable and incurable sickness. This is a crucial distinction because as
soon as a doctor treats incurable sickness, he perverts his craft from a
means to an end. He becomes a charlatan set on providing scientific
consolation in a ceremony in which the doctor takes on the patient\'s
struggle against death. The patient becomes the object of his
ministrations instead of a sick subject who can be helped in the process
of healing or dying. Medicine ceases to be a legitimate profession when
it cannot provide each man or his next of kin with the tool to make this
one crucial differential diagnosis for himself.

New opportunities for the progressive expansion of lay therapy and the
parallel progressive reduction of professional medicine are rejected
because life in an industrial society has made us place such exaggerated
value on standard products, uniformity, and certified quality.
Industrialized expectations have blurred the distinction between
personal vocation and standard profession. Of course, any layman can
grow up to become a general healer, but this (hoes not mean that every
layman must be taught how to heal. It simply means that in a society in
which people can and must take care of their neighbors and do so on
their own, some people will excel at using the best available tools. In
a society in which people can once again be born in their homes and die
in their homes and in which there is a place for cripples and idiots in
the street, and where a distinction is made between plumbing and
healing, quite a few people would grow up capable of assisting others to
heal, to suffer, or to die.

Just as with proper social arrangements most people would grow up as
readers without having to be schooled and without having to recreate the
pre-Gutenberg profession of the scribe, so a sufficient number would
grow up competent with medical tools. This would make healing so
plentiful that it would be difficult to turn this competence into a
monopoly or to sell it as a commodity. Deprofessionalization means a
renewed distinction between the freedom of vocation and the occasional
boost sick people derive from the quasi-religious authority of the
certified doctor.

Of course the deprofessionalization of most ordinary medicine could
sometimes substitute a quack for today\'s impostor, but the threat of
quackery becomes less convincing as professionally caused damage grows.
There just is no substitute for the self-correcting judgment of the
layman in socializing the tools invented or use(l by the professional.
Lifelong familiarity with the specific dangers of a specific remedy is
the best preparation for accepting or rejecting it in time of crisis.

Take another tool\--transportation\--as an example. Under President
Càrdenas in the early thirties, Mexico developed a modern system of
transportation. Within a few years about 80 percent of the population
had gained access to the advantages of the automobile. Most important,
villages had been connected by dirt roads or tracks. Heavy, simple, and
tough trucks traveled over them every now and then, moving at speeds far
below twenty miles per hour. People were crowded together on rows of
wooden benches nailed to the floor to make place for merchandise loaded
in the back and on the roof. Over short distances the vehicle could not
compete with people, who had been used to walking and to carrying their
merchandise, but long-distance travel had become possible for all.
instead of a man driving his pig to market, man and pig could go
together in a truck. Any Mexican could now reach any point in his
country in a few days.

Since 1945 the money spent on roads has increased every year. It has
been used to build highways between a few major centers. Fragile cars
now move at high speeds over smooth roads. Large, specialized trucks
connect factories. The old, all-purpose tramp truck has been pushed back
into the mountains or swamps. In most areas either the peasant must take
a bus to go to the market to buy industrially packaged commodities, or
he sells his pig to the trucker in the employ of the meat merchant. He
can no longer go to town with his pig. He pays taxes for the roads which
serve the owners of various specialized monopolies and does so under the
illusion that the benefits will ultimately spread to him.

In exchange for an occasional ride on an upholstered seat in an
air-conditioned bus, the common man has lost much of the mobility the
old system gave him, without gaining any new freedom. Research done in
two typical large states of Mexico-one dominated by deserts, the other
by mountains and lush growth\--confirms this conclusion. Less than one
percent of the population in either state traveled a distance of over
fifteen miles in any one hour during 1970. More appropriate pushcarts
and bicycles, both motorized when needed, would have presented a
technologically much more efficient solution for 99 percent of the
population than the vaunted highway development. Such pushcarts could
have been built and maintained by people trained on the job, and
operated on roadbeds built to Inca standards, yet covered to diminish
drag. The usual rationale given for the investment in standard roads and
cars is that it is a condition for development and that without it a
region cannot be integrated into the world market. Both claims are true,
but can be considered as desirable only if monetary integration is the
goal of development.

During the last few years tire promoters of development have come to
admit that cars, as operated now, are inefficient. This inefficiency is
blamed on the fact that modern vehicles are designed for private
ownership, not for the public good. In fact, modern personnel transport
is inefficient not because an individual capsule rather than a cabin is
the model for the largest number of vehicles, or because these vehicles
are now owned by their drivers. It is inefficient because of the
obsessive identification of higher speed with better transport. Just as
the demand for better health at all costs is a form of mental sickness,
so is the pretense of higher speed.

The railroads reflected the class societies they served simply by
putting different fares on the same speed. But when a society commits
itself to higher speeds, the speedometer becomes an indicator of social
class. Any peasant could accompany Làzaro Càrdenas on horseback. Today
only his personal staff can accompany a modern governor in his private
helicopter. In capitalist countries how often you can cover great
distances is determined by what your can pay. In socialist countries
your velocity depends on the social importance the bureaucracy attaches
to you. In both cases the particular speed at which you travel puts you
into your class and company. Speed is one of the means by which an
efficiency-oriented society is stratified.

Fostered addiction to speed is also a means of social control.
Transportation in its various forms now swallows 23 percent of the U.S.
gross expenditures. The United States may be rich enough to allocate
one-fourth of its energy resources and human time to time enterprise of
getting somewhere. Under Khufu, Egyptians might have spent that much
during a few years to build the Great Pyramid and to get their ruler to
the underworld. Unfortunately, however, transportation exacts an ever
higher percentage of the cash spent in a given year within many a
Latin-American municipality. The road degrades the subsistence farmer
and artisan, integrates the village into time money economy, and
swallows much of the available cash. Pt is true that modern
transportation does incorporate a region into the world market. It also
trains the inhabitants for the consumption of foreign goods and the
acceptance of foreign values. For example, throughout history Thailand
was known for its klongs. These canals crisscrossed the country; people,
rice, and tax collectors all moved easily along them. Some villages were
cut off during the dry season, but their seasonal rhythm of life turned
this periodic isolation into an occasion for meditation and festivities.
A society that can afford long holidays and fill them with activities is
certainly not poor. During time Past half-decade major klongs were
filled in to build roads. Since bus drivers are paid by the number of
miles they can cover in a day, and since cars are still few, the Thais
for a short while will be able to circulate in their country at
world-record bus speeds. They will pay with the destruction of waterways
that took millennia to build. The economists argue that busses and
trucks pump more money per year through the economy. They do, but at the
cost of depriving most Thais of the independence which their sleek rice
boats once granted each family. Of course, car owners could never have
competed with rice boats unless time World Bank had financed roads for
them and time Thai government had made new laws that permitted them to
profane the klongs.

The building trades are another example of an industry that modern
nation-states impose on their societies, thereby modernizing the poverty
of their citizens. The legal protection and financial support granted
the industry reduces and cancels opportunities for the otherwise much
more efficient self-builder. Quite recently Mexico launched a major
program with the aim of providing all workers with proper housing. As a
first step, new standards were set for the construction of dwelling
units. These standards were intended to protect the little man who
purchases a house from exploitation by the industry producing it.
Paradoxically, these same standards deprived many more people of the
traditional opportunity to house themselves. The code specifies minimum
requirements that a man who builds his own house in his spare time
cannot meet. Besides that, the real rent for industrially built quarters
is more than the total income of 80 percent of the people. \"Better
housing,\" then, can be occupied only by those who are well-off or by
those on whom the law bestows direct rent subsidies.

Once dwellings that fall below industrial standards are defined as
improper, public funds are denied to the overwhelming majority of people
who cannot buy housing but could \"house\" themselves. The tax funds
meant to improve the living quarters of the poor are monopolized for the
building of new towns next to the provincial and regional capitals where
government employees, unionized workers, and people with good
connections can live. These are all people who are employed in the
modern sector of the economy, that is, people who hold jobs. They can be
easily distinguished from other Mexicans because they have learned to
speak about their trabajo as a noun, while the unemployed or the
occasionally employed or those who live near the subsistence level do
not use the noun form when they go to work.

These people, who have work, not only get subsidies for the building of
their homes; the entire public-service sector is rearranged and
developed to serve them. In Mexico City it has been estimated that 10
percent of the people use 50 percent of the household water, and on tire
high plain water is very scarce indeed. The building code has standards
far below those of rich countries, but by prescribing certain ways in
which houses must be built, it creates a rising scarcity of housing. The
pretense of a society to provide ever better housing is the same kind of
abberation we have met in the pretense of doctors to provide better
health and of engineers to provide higher speeds. The setting of
abstract impossible goals turns the means by which these are t9 be
achieved into ends.

What happened in Mexico happened all over Latin America during the
decade of the Alliance for Progress, including Cuba under Castro. It
also happened in Massachusetts. In 1945, 32 percent of all one-family
housing units in Massachusetts were still self-built: either built by
their owners from foundation to roof or constructed under the full
responsibility of the owner. By 1970 the proportion had gone down to 11
percent. Meanwhile, housing had been discovered as a major problem. The
technological capability to produce tools and materials that favor
self-building had increased in the intervening decades, but social
arrangements\--like unions, codes, mortgage rules, and markets-had
turned against this choice.

Most people do not feel at home unless a significant proportion of the
value of their houses is the result of the input of their own labor.
Convivial policies would define what people who want to house themselves
cannot get, and thereby make sure that all can get access to some
minimum of physical space, to water, some basic building elements, some
convivial tools ranging from power drills to mechanized pushcarts, and,
probably, to some limited credit. Such an inversion of the present
policy could give a post-industrial society modern homes almost as
desirable for its members as those which were standard for the old Mayas
and are still the rule in Yucatàn.

Our present tools are engineered to deliver professional energies. Such
energies come in quanta. Less than a quantum cannot be delivered. Less
than four years of schooling is worse than none. It only defines the
former pupil as a dropout. This is equally true in medicine,
transportation, and housing, as in agriculture and in the administration
of justice. Mechanical transportation is worthwhile only at certain
speeds. Conflict resolution is effective only when the issue is of
sufficient weight to justify the costs of court action. The planting of
new grains is productive only if the acreage and capital of the farmer
are beyond a certain size. Powerful tools created to achieve abstractly
conceived social goals inevitably deliver their output in quanta that
are beyond the reach of a majority. What is more, these tools are
integrated. Access to key positions in government or industry is
reserved to those who are certified consumers of high quanta of
schooling. They are the individuals chosen to run the plantation of
mutant rubber trees, and they need a car to rush from meeting to
meeting. Productivity demands the output of packaged quanta of
institutionally defined values, and productive management demands the
access of an individual to all these packages at once.

Professional goal-setting produces goods for an environment produced by
other professions. Life that depends on high speed and apartment houses
makes hospitals inevitable. By definition all these are scarce, and get
even scarcer as they approach the standards set more recently by an
ever-evolving profession; thereby each unit or quantum appearing on the
market frustrates more people than it satisfies.

A just society would be one in which liberty for one person is
constrained only by the demands created by equal liberty for another.
Such a society requires as a precondition an agreement excluding tools
that by their very nature prevent such liberty. This is true for tools
that are fundamentally purely social arrangements, such as the school
system, as well as for tools that are physical machines. In a convivial
society compulsory and open-ended schooling would have to be excluded
for the sake of justice. Age-specific, compulsory competition on an
unending ladder for lifelong privileges cannot increase equality but
must favor those who start earlier, or who are healthier, or who are
better equipped outside the classroom. Inevitably, it organizes society
into many layers of failure, with each layer inhabited by dropouts
schooled to believe that those who have consumed more education deserve
more privilege because they are more valuable assets to society as a
whole. A society constructed so that education by means of schools is a
necessity for its functioning cannot be a just society. Power tools
having certain structural characteristics are inevitably manipulative
and must also be eliminated for the sake of justice. In a modern
society, energy inputs represent one of the major new liberties. Each
man\'s ability to produce change depends on his ability to control
low-entropy energy. On this control of energy depends his right to give
his meaning to the physical environment. His ability to act toward the
future lie chooses depends on his control of the energy that gives shape
to that future. Equal freedom in a society that uses large amounts of
environmental energy means equal control over the transformation of that
energy and not just an equal claim to what has been done with it.

Most of the power tools now in use favor centralization of control.
industrial plants with their highly specialized tools give neither the
worker nor most engineers a choice over what use will be made of the
energy they manage. This is equally true, though less evident, of the
high-powered consumer tools that dominate our society. Most of them,
such as cars and air conditioners, are too costly to be available on an
equal basis outside a few superrich societies. Others, such as
mechanical household devices, are so specialized in nature that they in
no way offer more freedom than much simpler hand tools. The monopoly of
industrial production deprives even privileged clients of control over
what they may get. Few people get the cars that most people want, and GM
designers can only build vehicles to fit the existing roads.

Nations and multinational corporations have become means for the
spreading empire of international professions. Professional imperialism
triumphs even where political and economic domination has been broken.
Schools everywhere are governed by pedagogues who read the same books on
learning theory and curriculum-planning. In a given year, schools
produce more or less the same model of pupils in every nation.
Nineteen-fifty graduates are as obsolete in Dakar as they are in Paris.
The same iatrogenic sicknesses are produced all over the world by
doctors who administer chloromycin or steroid pills. Every country tends
to select those productive processes which are more capital-intensive
and promise greater cost-benefit ratios, so that the same kind of
technological unemployment is produced everywhere. Basic needs are
defined as those that international professions can meet. Since the
local production of these wares is to the advantage of highly schooled
national élites, a country\'s doctors, teachers, and engineers will
defend it as an antidote to foreign domination. The knowledge capitalism
of professional imperialism subjugates people more imperceptibly than
and as effectively as international finance or weaponry.

The principal source of injustice in our epoch is political approval for
the existence of tools that by their very nature restrict to a very few
the liberty to use them in an autonomous way. The pompous rituals by
which each man is given a vote to choose between factions only cover up
the fact that the imperialism of industrial tools is both arbitrary and
growing. Statistics which prove increased outputs and high per capita
consumption of professionally defined quanta only veil the enormously
high invisible costs. People get better education, better health, better
transportation, better entertainment, and often even better nourishment
only if the experts\' goals are taken as the measurement of what
\"better\" means. The possibility of a convivial society depends
therefore on a new consensus about time destructiveness of imperialism
on three levels: the pernicious spread of one nation beyond its
boundaries; the omnipresent influence of multinational corporations; and
the mushrooming of professional monopolies over production. Politics for
convivial reconstruction of society must especially face imperialism on
this third level, where it takes the form of professionalism. The public
owner-ship of resources and of the means of production, arid public
control over the market and over net transfers of power, must be
complemented by a public determination of the tolerable basic structure
of modern tools. This means that politics in a postindustrial society
must be mainly concerned with the development of design criteria for
tools rather than as now with the choice of production goals. These
politics would mean a structural inversion of the institutions now
providing and defining new manmade essentials.

To invert politics, it will not be enough to show that a convivial life
style is possible, or even to demonstrate that it is more attractive
than life in a society ruled by industrial productivity. We cannot rest
with the claim that this inversion would bring society closer to meeting
the goals now stated as those of our major institutions. It is not even
enough to show that a just or socially equal order can become a reality
only through a convivial reconstruction of tools and the consequent
redefinition of ownership and power. We need a way to recognize that the
inversion of present political purpose is necessary for the survival of
all people.

Most people have staked their self-images in the present structure and
are unwilling to lose their ground. They have found security in one of
the several ideologies that support further industrialization. They feel
compelled to push the illusion of progress on which they are hooked.
They long for and expect increase(h satisfaction, with less input of
human energy and with more division of competence. They value handicraft
and personal care as luxuries, but the ideal of a more labor-intensive,
yet modern, production process seems to them quixotic and anachronistic.

It seems absurd to prepare politicians who have pledged themselves to
increased outputs and better distribution of goodsand services among
their constituents for the day when a majority of voters will choose
limits for all rather than promises of equal consumption. It appears
equally hopeless to expect inverse insight from humanitarian liberals
who have come to feel that feeding the starving millions is their
vocation. They forget that people eat, amid that people die when they
are fed. These self-appointed keepers of their brothers make other
people\'s survival depend on their own growing efficiency. By shifting
from the production of guns to the production of grains they reduce
their sense of guilt amid increase their sense of power. They are blind
to the convergence of population growth and the failure of the green
revolution, which guarantees that feeding people now will escalate
starvation by 1985. Their hubris distracts them from understanding that
only the renunciation of industrial expansion can bring food and
population into a balance in the so-called backward countries. The
attempt to feed people and to control their increase are two mutually
reinforcing, and very dangerous, illusions. Nor can economists foresee
institutional inversion when for them all institutions must be evaluated
according to the increase in their planned output and their ability to
externalize internal dis-economics in an unobtrusive way. The terms and
frameworks of economics have been shaped by the ideology of an
irresistible institutionalization of values that overarches otherwise
opposed economic creeds.

To translate the theoretical possibility of a postindustrial convivial
life style into a political program for new tools, it must soon be shown
that the prevailing fundamental structure of our present tools menaces
the survival of mankind. It must be shown that this menace is imminent
and that the effects of compulsive efficiency do more damage than good
to most people in our generation. For this purpose we must identify the
range within which our present institutions have become frustrating, and
we must recognize another range within which our tools become
destructive of society as a whole.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-5 .calibre4}
## III. The Multiple Balance {#iii.-the-multiple-balance .calibre1}

The human equilibrium is open. It is capable of shifting within flexible
but finite parameters. People can change, but only within bounds. In
contrast, the present industrial system is dynamically unstable. It is
organized for indefinite expansion and the concurrent unlimited creation
of new needs, which in an industrial environment soon become basic
necessities.

Once the industrial mode of production has become dominant in a society,
it may still admit shifts from one type of output to another, but it
does not admit limits to the further institutionalization of values.
Such growth makes the incongruous demand that man seek his satisfaction
by submitting to the logic of his tools.

The demands made by tools on people become increasingly costly. This
rising cost of fitting man to the service of his tools is reflected in
the ongoing shift from goods to services in over-all production.
Increasing manipulation of man becomes necessary to overcome the
resistance of his vital equilibrium to the dynamic of growing
industries; it takes the form of educational, medical, and
administrative therapies. Education turns out competitive consumers;
medicine keeps them alive in the engineered environment they have come
to require; bureaucracy reflects the necessity of exercising social
control over people to do meaningless work. The parallel increase in the
cost of the defense of new levels of privilege through: military,
police, and insurance measures reflects the fact that in a consumer
society there are inevitably two kinds of slaves: the prisoners of
addiction and the prisoners of envy.

Political debate must now be focused on the various ways in which
unlimited production threatens human life. This political debate will be
misled by those who insist on prescribing palliatives which only
disguise the deep reasons why the systems of health, transport,
education, housing, and even politics and law are not working. The
environmental crisis, for example, is rendered superficial if it is not
pointed out that antipollution devices can only beeffective if the total
output of production decreases. Otherwise they tend to shift garbage out
of sight, push it into the future, or dump it onto the poor. The total
removal of the pollution created locally by a large-scale industry
requires equipment, material, and energy that can create several times
the damage elsewhere. Making antipollution devices compulsory only
increases the unit cost of the product. This may conserve some fresh air
for all, because fewer people can afford to drive cars or sleep in
air-conditioned homes or fly to a fishing ground on the weekend, but it
replaces damage to the physical environment with further social
disintegration. To shift from coal to atomic power replaces smog now
with higher radiation levels tomorrow. To relocate refineries overseas,
where pollution controls are less stringent, preserves Americans-not
Venezuelans-from unpleasant odors at the cost of higher levels of
world-wide poisoning.

The overgrowth of tools threatens persons in ways which are profoundly
new, though they are also analogous to traditional forms of nuisance and
tort. These threats are of a new kind, because their perpetrators and
victims are the same people: both operators and clients of inexorably
destructive tools. Though some people may cash in on the game at first,
ultimately all lose everything they have.

I will identify six ways in which all people of the world are threatened
by industrial development after passage through the second watershed:
(i) Overgrowth threatens the right to the fundamental physical structure
of the environment with which man has evolved. (2) Industrialization
threatens the right to convivial work. (3) The overprogramming of man
for the new environment deadens his creative imagination. (4) New levels
of productivity threaten the right to participatory politics. (5)
Enforced obsolescence threatens the right to tradition: the recourse to
precedent in language, myth, morals, and judgment. I will describe these
five threats as distinct though interrelated categories all having in
common a destructive inversion of means into ends. (6) Pervasive
frustration by means of compulsory though engineered satisfaction
constitutes a sixth and more subtle threat.

I am typifying the hazards created by the overgrowth of tools in six
categories chosen so the damages can be recognized in traditional terms.
That impersonal tools placed at the service of the injured party should
inevitably inflict the injury is new, but the damage which threatens
each person is not. These six categories can serve in the recovery of
procedural principles by which people can expose and redress the present
imbalance in the functioning of tools. These underlying principles of
moral, political, and juridical procedure I assume to be three:
recognition of the legitimacy of personal conflict, the dialectic
authority of history over present procedures, and the recourse to laymen
or peers for binding policy decisions. The radical functional inversion
of our major institutions constitutes a revolution much more profound
than the shifts in ownership or power usually proposed. It can be
neither envisaged nor enacted unless a basic structure of procedure is
recovered and clearly agreed upon. This structure can even now be
discussed in concrete terms. I will therefore refer to formal juristic
concepts in illustrating my argument.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-6 .calibre4}
### 1. Biological Degradation {#biological-degradation .calibre6}

The precarious balance between man and the biosphere has been recognized
and has suddenly begun to worry many people. The degradation of the
environment is dramatic and highly visible. For years car traffic in
Mexico City increased steadily under a sparkling sky. Then, within a
couple of years, smog descended and soon became worse than in Los
Angeles. This phenomenon can be easily discussed and appreciated by
people who have never studied science. Poisons of unknown potency are
discharged into the biotic system of the earth. There is no way to
retrieve some of them, nor any means to predict how some of them may
suddenly combine their action so that the whole earth, like Lake Erie or
Baikal, will die. Man has evolved to fit into one niche in the universe.
The earth is his home. This home is now threatened by the impact of man.

Overpopulation, excessive affluence, and faulty technology are usually
identified as the three trends which combine and threaten to break the
environmental balance. Paul Ehrlich points out that to face honestly the
need for population control and stabilized consumption may \"expose one
to the painful criticism of being both anti-people and anti-poor,\" but
he also emphasizes that \"these unpopular measures offer mankind\'s only
hope for averting unprecedented misery.\" Ehrlich wants to implement
birth control with industrial efficiency. Barry Commoner insists that
faulty technology, the third element in the equation, accounts for most
of the recent deterioration in the quality of the environment. He
exposes himself to the criticism of being an antitechnological
demagogue. Commoner wants to retool industry rather than invert the
basic structure of our tools.

Fascination with the environmental crisis has forced the debate about
survival to focus on only one balance threatened by tools. A
one-dimensional dispute is futile. Three trends have indeed been
identified, each of them tending to upset the balance between man and
the physical environment. Overpopulation makes more people dependent on
limited resources. Affluence compels each person to use more energy.
Faulty technology degrades energy in an inefficient way.

If these three trends are considered to be the only significant threats,
and the physical environment is considered as the only fundamental
milieu that is threatened, only two central issues must be discussed:
(i) To decide which factor or trend has degraded the environment most,
and which factor will impose the greatest burden on the environment
during the next few years. (2) To decide which factor merits most
attention because we can in some way reduce or invert it. One party
claims it is easier to do away with people, the other that it is more
feasible to reduce entropy-producing production.

Honesty requires that we each recognize the need to limit procreation,
consumption, and waste, but equally we must radically reduce our
expectations that machines will do our work for us or that therapists
can make us learned or healthy. The only solution to the environmental
crisis is the shared insight of people that they would be happier if
they could work together and care for each other. Such an inversion of
the current world view requires intellectual courage for it exposes us
to the unenlightened yet painful criticism of being not only antipeople
and against economic progress, but equally against liberal education and
scientific and technological advance. We must face the fact that the
imbalance between man and the environment is just one of several
mutually reinforcing stresses, each distorting the balance of life in a
different dimension. In this view, overpopulation is the result of a
distortion in the balance of learning, dependence on affluence is the
result of a radical monopoly of institutional over personal values, and
faulty technology is inexorably consequent upon a transformation of
means into ends.

The one-dimensional debate among proponents of various panaceas for the
ecological imbalance will only inspire the false expectation that
somehow human action can be engineered to fit into the requirements of
the world conceived as a technological totality. Bureaucratically
guaranteed survival under such circumstances means the expansion of
industrial economics to the point where a centrally planned system of
production and reproduction is identified with the guided evolution of
the Earth. If such an industrially minded solution becomes generally
accepted as the only way of preserving a viable environment, the
preservation of the physical milieu can become the rationale for a
bureaucratic Leviathan at the levers which regulate levels of human
reproduction, expectation, production, and consumption. Such a
technological response to growing population, pollution, and affluence
can be founded only on a further development of the presently prevailing
institutionalization of values. The belief in the possibility of this
development is founded on an erroneous supposition, namely, that \"The
historical achievement of science and technology has rendered possible
the translation of values into technical tasks-the materialization of
values. Consequently, what is at stake is the redefinition of values in
technical terms, as elements in technological process. The new ends, as
technical ends, would then operate in the project and in the
construction of the machinery, and not only in its utilization.\" \*
Herbert Marcuse,One-Dimensional Man, Boston, 1970

The re-establishment of an ecological balance depends on the ability of
society to counteract the progressive materialization of values.
Otherwise man will find himself totally enclosed within his artificial
creation, with no exit. Enveloped in a physical, social, and
psychological milieu of his own making, he will be a prisoner in the
shell of technology, unable to find again the ancient milieu to which he
was adapted for hundreds of thousands of years. Theecological balance
cannot be re-established unless we recognize again that only persons
have ends and that only persons can work toward them. Machines only
operate ruthlessly to reduce people to the role of impotent allies in
their destructive progress.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-7 .calibre4}
### 2. Radical Monopoly {#radical-monopoly .calibre6}

When overefficient tools are applied to facilitate man\'s relations with
the physical environment, they can destroy the balance between man and
nature. Overefficient tools corrupt the environment. But tools can also
be made overefficient in quite a different way. They can upset the
relationship between what people need to do by themselves and what they
need to obtain ready-made. In this second dimension overefficient
production results in radical monopoly.

By radical monopoly I mean a kind of dominance by one product that goes
far beyond what the concept of monopoly usually implies. Generally we
mean by \"monopoly\" the exclusive control by one corporation over the
means of producing (or selling) a commodity or service. Coca-Cola can
create a monopoly over the soft-drink market in Nicaragua by being the
only maker of soft drinks which advertises with modern means. Nestl?
might impose its brand of cocoa by controlling the raw material, some
car maker by restricting imports of other makes, a television channel by
licensing. Monopolies of this kind have been recognized for a century as
dangerous by-products of industrial expansion, and legal devices have
been developed in a largely futile attempt to control them. Monopolies
of this kind restrict the choices open to the consumer. They might even
compel him to buy one product on the market, but they seldom
simultaneously abridge his liberties in other domains. A thirsty man
might desire a cold, gaseous, and sweet drink and find himself
restricted to the choice of just one brand. He still remains free to
quench his thirst with beer or water. Only if and when his thirst is
translated without meaningful alternatives into the need for a Coke
would the monopoly become radical. By \"radical monopoly\" I mean the
dominance of one type of product rather than the dominance of one brand.
I speak about radical monopoly when one industrial production process
exercises an exclusive control over the satisfaction of a pressing need,
and excludes nonindustrial activities from competition.

Cars can thus monopolize traffic. They can shape a city into their
image\--practically ruling out locomotion on foot or by bicycle in Los
Angeles. They can eliminate river traffic in Thailand. That motor
traffic curtails the right to walk, not that more people drive Chevies
than Fords, constitutes radical monopoly. What cars do to people by
virtue of this radical monopoly is quite distinct from and independent
of what they do by burning gasoline that could be transformed into food
in a crowded world. It is also distinct from automotive manslaughter. Of
course cars burn gasoline that could be used to make food. Of course
they are dangerous and costly. But the radical monopoly cars establish
is destructive in a special way. Cars create distance. Speedy vehicles
of all kinds render space scarce. They drive wedges of highways into
populated areas, and then extort tolls on the bridge over the remoteness
between people that was manufactured for their sake. This monopoly over
land turns space into car fodder. It destroys the environment for feet
and bicycles. Even if planes and buses could run as nonpolluting,
nondepleting public services, their inhuman velocities would degrade
man\'s innate mobility and force him to spend more time for the sake of
travel.

Schools tried to extend a radical monopoly on learning by redefining it
as education. As long as people accepted the teacher\'s definition of
reality, those who learned outside school were officially stamped
\"uneducated.\" Modern medicine deprives the ailing of care not
prescribed by doctors. Radical monopoly exists where a major tool rules
out natural competence. Radical monopoly imposes compulsory consumption
and thereby restricts personal autonomy. It constitutes a special kind
of social control because it is enforced by means of the imposed
consumption of a standard product that only large institutions can
provide.

The control of undertakers over burial shows how radical monopoly
functions and how it differs from other forms of culturally defined
behavior. A generation ago, in Mexico, only the Opening of the grave and
the blessing of the dead body were performed by professionals: the
gravedigger and the priest. A death in the family created various
demands, all of which could be taken care of within the family. The
wake, the funeral, and the dinner served to compose quarrels, to vent
grief, and to remind each participant of the fatality of death and the
value of life. Most of these were of a ritual nature and carefully
prescribed-different from region to region. Recently, funeral homes were
established in the major cities. At first undertakers had difficulty
finding clients because even in large cities people still knew how to
bury their dead. During the sixties the funeral homes obtained control
over new cemeteries and began offering package deals, including the
casket, church service, and embalming. Now legislation is being passed
to make the mortician\'s ministrations compulsory. Once he gets hold of
the body, the funeral director will have established a radical monopoly
over burial, as medicine is at the point of establishing one over dying.

The current debate over health-care delivery in the United States
clearly illustrates the entrenchment of a radical monopoly. Each
political party in the debate makes sick-care a burning public issue and
thereby relegates health care to an area about which politics has
nothing important to say. Each party promises more funds to doctors,
hospitals, and drugstores. Such promises are not in the interest of the
majority. They only serve to increase the power of a minority of
professionals to prescribe the tools men are to use in maintaining
health, healing sickness, and repressing death. More funds will
strengthen the hold of the health industry over public resources and
heighten its prestige and arbitrary power. Such power in the hands of a
minority will produce only an increase in suffering and a decrease in
personal self-reliance. More money will be invested in tools that only
postpone unavoidable death and in services that abridge even further the
civil rights of those who want to heal each other. More money spent
under the control of the health profession means that more people are
operationally conditioned into playing the role of the sick, a role they
are not allowed to interpret for themselves. Once they accept this role,
their most trivial needs can be satisfied only through commodities that
are scarce by professional definition.

People have a native capacity for healing, consoling, moving, learning,
building their houses, and burying their dead. Each of these capacities
meets a need. The means for the satisfaction of these needs are abundant
so long as they depend primarily on what people can do for themselves,
with only marginal dependence on commodities. These activities have
use-value without having been given exchange-value. Their exercise at
the service of man is not considered labor.

These basic satisfactions become scarce when the social environment is
transformed in such a manner that basic needs can no longer be met by
abundant competence. The establishment of radical monopoly happens when
people give up their native ability to do what they can do for
themselves and for each other, in exchange for something \"better\" that
can be done for them only by a major tool. Radical monopoly reflects the
industrial institutionalization of values. It substitutes the standard
package for the personal response. It introduces new classes of scarcity
and a new device to classify people according to the level of their
consumption. This redefinition raises the unit cost of valuable service,
differentially rations privilege, restricts access to resources, and
makes people dependent. Above all, by depriving people of the ability to
satisfy personal needs in a personal manner, radical monopoly creates
radical scarcity of personal\--as opposed to institutional-service.

Against this radical monopoly people need protection. They need this
protection whether consumption is imposed by the private interests of
undertakers, by the government for the sake of hygiene, or by the
self-destructive collusion between the mortician and the survivors, who
want to do the best thing for their dear departed. They need this
protection even if the majority is now sold on the professional\'s
services. Unless the need for protection from radical monopoly is
recognized, its multiple implementation can break the tolerance of man
for enforced inactivity and passivity.

It is not always easy to determine what constitutes compulsory
consumption. The monopoly held by schools is not established primarily
by a law that threatens punishment to parent or child for truancy. Such
laws exist, but school is established by other tactics: by
discrimination against the unschooled, by centralizing learning tools
under the control of teachers, by restricting public funds earmarked for
baby-sitting to salaries for graduates from normal schools. Protection
against laws that impose education, vaccination, or life prolongation is
important, but it is not sufficient. Procedures must be used that permit
any party who feels threatened by compulsory consumption to claim
protection, whatever form the imposition takes. Like intolerable
pollution, intolerable monopoly cannot be defined in advance. The threat
can be anticipated, but the definition of its precise nature can result
only from people\'s participation in deciding what may not be produced.

Protection against this general monopoly is as difficult as protection
against pollution. People will face a danger that threatens their own
self-interest but not one that threatens society as a whole. Many more
people are against cars than are against driving them. They are against
cars because they pollute and because they monopolize traffic. They
drive cars because they consider the pollution created by one car
insignificant, and because they do not feel personally deprived of
freedom when they drive. It is also difficult to be protected against
monopoly when a society is already littered with roads, schools, or
hospitals, when independent action has been paralyzed for so long that
the ability for it seems to have atrophied, and when simple alternatives
seem beyond the reach of the imagination. Monopoly is hard to get 4d of
when it has frozen not only the shape of the physical world but also the
range of behavior and of imagination. Radical monopoly is generally
discovered only when it is too late.

Commercial monopoly is broken at the cost of the few who profit from it.
Usually, these few manage to evade controls. The cost of radical
monopoly is already borne by the public and will be broken only if the
public realizes that it would be better off paying the costs of ending
the monopoly than by continuing to pay for its maintenance. But the
price will not be paid unless the public learns to value the potential
of a convivial society over the illusion of progress. It will not be
paid voluntarily by those who confuse conviviality with intolerable
poverty.

Some of the symptoms of radical monopoly are reaching public awareness,
above all the degree to which frustration grows faster than output in
even the most highly developed countries and under whatever political
regime. Policies aimed to ease this frustration may easily distract
attention from the general nature of the monopoly at its roots, however.
The more these reforms succeed in correcting superficial abuses, the
better they serve to bolster the monopoly I am trying to describe.

The first palliative is consumer protection. Consumers cannot do without
cars. They buy different makes. They discover that most cars are unsafe
at any speed. So they organize to get safer, better, and more durable
cars and to get more as well as wider and safer roads. Yet when
consumers gain more confidence in cars, the victory only increases
society\'s dependence on high-powered vehicles-public or private-and
frustrates even more those who have to, or would prefer to, walk.

While the organized self-protection of the addict-consumer immediately
raises the quality of the dope and the power of the peddler, it also may
lead ultimately to limits on growth. Cars may finally become too
expensive to purchase and medicines too expensive to test. By
exacerbating the contradictions inherent in this institutionalization of
values, majorities can more easily become aware of them. Discerning
consumers who are discriminatory in their purchasing habits may finally
discover that they can do better by doing things for themselves.

The second palliative proposed to cure growing frustration with growing
output is planning. The illusion is common that planners with socialist
ideals might somehow create a socialist society in which industrial
workers constitute a majority. The proponents of this idea overlook the
fact that anticonvivial and manipulative tools can fit into a socialist
society in only a very limited measure. Once transportation, education,
or medicine is offered by a government free of cost, its use can be
enforced by moral guardians. The underconsumer can be blamed for
sabotage of the national effort. In a market economy, someone who wants
to cure his flu by staying in bed will be penalized only through loss of
income. In a society that appeals to the \"people\" to meet centrally
determined production goals, resistance to the consumption of medicine
becomes an act of public immorality. Protection against radical monopoly
depends on a political consensus opposed to growth. Such a consensus is
diametrically opposed to the issues now raised by political oppositions,
since these converge in the demand to increase growth and to provide
more and better things for more completely disabled people.

Both the balance that defines man\'s need for a hospitable environment
and the balance that defines everyone\'s need for authentic activity are
now close to the breaking point. And still this danger does not concern
most people. It must now beexplained why most people are either blind to
this threat or feel helpless to correct it. I believe that the blindness
is due to the decline in a third balance-the balance of learning-and
that the impotence people experience is the result of yet a fourthupset
in what I call the balance of power.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-8 .calibre4}
### 3. Overprogramming {#overprogramming .calibre6}

The balance of learning is determined by the ratio of two kinds of
knowledge in a society. The first is a result of the creative action of
people on their environment, and the second represents the result of
man\'s \"trivialization\" by his manufactured milieu. Their first kind
of knowledge is derived from the primary involvement of people with each
other and from their use of convivial tools; the second accrues to them
as a result of purposeful and programmed training to which they are
subjected. Speaking the mother tongue is learned in the first way, while
some pupils learn mathematics in the second. No sane person would say
that speaking or walking or nursing a child is primarily the result of
education, while competence in mathematics, ballet dancing, or painting
usually is.

The relation between what can be learned from ordinary living and what
must be learned as a result of intentional teaching differs widely with
place and time. It depends very much on rituals. All Muslims learn some
Arabic as the result of prayer. This learning evolves from interaction
in a context bounded by tradition. In much the same manner, peasants
pick up the folk-lore of their region. Class and caste also generate
opportunities to learn. The rich acquire \"proper\" table manners or
accents and insist that these cannot be taught. The poor learn to fend
in dignity where no education could teach the rich to survive.

Crucial to how much anyone can learn on his own is the structure of his
tools: the less they are convivial, the more they foster teaching. In
limited and well-integrated tribes, knowledge is shared quite equally
among most members. All people know most of what everybody knows. On a
higher level of civilization, new tools are introduced; more people know
more things, but not all know how to execute them equally well. Mastery
of skill does not yet imply a monopoly of understanding. One can
understand fully what a goldsmith does without being one oneself. Men do
not have to be cooks to know how to prepare food. This combination of
widely shared information and competence for using it is characteristic
of a society in which convivial tools prevail. The techniques used are
easily understood by observing the artisan at work, but the skills
employed are complex and usually can be acquired only through lengthy
and programmed apprenticeship. Total learning expands when the range of
spontaneous learning widens along with access to an increasing number of
taught skills and both liberty and discipline flower. This expansion of
the balance of learning cannot go on forever; it is self-limiting. It
can be optimized, but it cannot be forcibly extended. One reason is that
man\'s life span is limited. Another-just as inexorable-is that the
specialization of tools and the division of labor reinforce each other.
When centralization and specialization grow beyond a certain point, they
require highly programmed operators and clients. More of what each man
must know is due to what another man has designed and has the power to
force on him.

The city child is born into an environment made up of systems that have
a different meaning for their designers than for their clients. The
inhabitant of the city is in touch with thousands of systems, but only
peripherally with each. He knows how to operate the TV or the telephone,
but their workings are hidden from him. Learning by primary experience
is restricted to self-adjustment in the midst of packaged commodities.
He feels less and less secure in doing his own thing. Cooking, courtesy,
and sex become subject matters in which instruction is required. The
balance of learning deteriorates: it is skewed in favor of
\"education.\" People know what they have been taught, but learn little
from their own doing. People come to feel that they need
\"\'education.\"

Learning thus becomes a commodity, and, like any commodity that is
marketed, it becomes scarce. The nature of this scarcity is hidden-at a
high cost-by the many forms education takes. Education can be programmed
preparation for life in the future in the form of packaged, serial
instructions produced by schools, or it can be constant communication
about ongoing life through the output of the media and through the
instructions built into consumer goods. Sometimes these instructions are
attached to the item and must be read. In more thoroughly designed
goods, the shape, color, and provoked associations speak to the user
about the way the item must be handled. Education can also become a
periodic remedy for workers whose original training gets left behind by
industrial innovation. When people become obsolete and need constantly
to renew their educational security, when the accountant must be
reprogrammed for each new generation of computers, then learning has
indeed become scarce. Educator becomes the most vulnerable and confusing
issue in the society.

Everywhere the direct cost of training rises faster than the total
output. This has been interpreted in either of two ways. One
interpretation assumes that education is a means to a social end. From
this perspective the capitalization of man through knowledge inputs is a
necessary requirement for higher productivity. The disproportionate
growth rate of the educational sector means total production is nearing
an asymptote. To avoid this, ways must be found to increase the
cost-benefit ratio in education. Schools will be the first victims of a
drive for rationalization in the production of knowledge capital. In my
opinion, this is unfortunate. Although the school is destructive and
quite inefficient, its traditional character protects at least some
rights of the pupil. Educators freed from the restraint of schools could
be much more effective and deadly conditioners.

The second interpretation starts from the opposite assumption. According
to this view, education is the most valuable output of institutional
growth. The transition to a stationary state in the production of goods
and perhaps even of energy will usher in an explosive growth in the
production of invisible commodities such as information, education, and
fun. In this argument the marginal utility of education also decreases,
but this is no reason to limit its production. Some economists go even
further. In the name of a misnamed quality of life they want to put the
breaks on the manufacturing sector when it interferes with the growth of
the service sector, seemingly unaware of the stultifying effects of
escalating treatments. In neither of these two views is a distinction
made between learning by the use of convivial tools and learning through
manipulation. Both views skew the balance of learning by increasing
manipulative teaching and crushing autonomous questions. Those who treat
education as a means for production and those who treat education as the
supreme luxury product agree on the need for more education. They upset
the balance of learning in favor of more teaching. They assume that a
modern world is inevitably so alien that it has passed beyond the reach
of people and can be known only by mystagogues and disciples.

The transformation of learning into education paralyzes man\'s poetic
ability, his power to endow the world with his personal meaning. Man
will wither away just as much if he is deprived of nature, of his own
work, or of his deep need to learn what he wants and not what others
have planned that he should learn. The overdetermination of the physical
environment renders it hostile. Radical monopoly makes people prisoners
of welfare. Men overwhelmed by commodities are rendered impotent and in
their rage either kill or die. The corruption of the balance of learning
makes people into puppets of their tools.

Poets and clowns have always risen up against the oppression of creative
thought by dogma. They expose literal-mindedness with metaphor. They
demonstrate the follies of seriousness in a framework of humor. Their
intimate wonder dissolves certainties, banishes fears, and undoes
paralysis. The prophet can denounce creeds and expose superstitions and
mobilize persons to use their lights and wits. Poetry, intuition, and
theory can offer intimations of the advance of dogma against wit that
may lead to a revolution in awareness. Only the separation of Church and
State, of compulsory knowledge from political action, can redress the
balance of learning. The law has been used, and can be used again, to
this purpose. The law has protected societies against the exaggerated
claims of its priests, and can protect it against the claims of
educators. Compulsory school attendance or other compulsory treatment is
analogous to compulsory attendance at a religious ritual. The law can
disestablish it. The law can be used against the rising cost of
education, and against the use of education in the reproduction of a
class society.

To understand the rising cost of education, we must recognize two facts:
first, that nonconvivial tools create educational side effects which at
some point become intolerable and, second, that education which employs
nonconvivial tools is economically unfeasible. The first recognition
opens our eyes to the possibility of a society where work and leisure
and politics would favor learning and that could function with less
formal education; the second recognition permits us to set up
educational arrangements that favor self-initiated, self-chosen
learning, and that relegate programmed teaching to limited, clearly
specified occasions.

Throughout the world, highly capitalized tools require highly
capitalized men. Following the Second World War, economic development
penetrated even \"backward\" areas. Spot industrialization created an
intense demand for schools to program people not only to operate but
also to live with their new tools. The establishment of more schools in
Malaysia or Brazil teaches people the accountant\'s view of the value of
time, the bureaucrat\'s view of the value of promotion, the salesman\'s
view of the value of increased consumption, and the union leader\'s view
of the purpose of work. People are taught all this not by the teacher
but by the curriculum hidden in the structure of school. It does not
matter what the teacher teaches so long as the pupil has to attend
hundreds of hours of age-specific assemblies to engage in a routine
decreed by the curriculum and is graded according to his ability to
submit to it. People learn that they acquire more value in the market if
they spend more hours in class. They learn to value progressive
consumption of curricula. They learn that whatever a major institution
produces has value, even invisible things such as education or health.
They learn to value grade advancement, passive submission, and even the
standard misbehavior that teachers like to interpret as a sign of
creativity. They learn disciplined competition for the favor of the
bureaucrat who presides over their daily sessions, who is called their
teacher as long as they are in class and their boss when they go to
work. They learn to define themselves as holders of knowledge stock in
the specialty in which they have made investments of their time. They
learn to accept their place in society precisely in the class and career
corresponding to the level at which they leave school and to the field
of their academic specialization.

Industrial jobs are arranged so that the better-schooled fit into the
scarcer slots. Scarce jobs are defined as more productive, so people
with less schooling are barred from access to the more desirable goods
produced in the new industries. Industrially produced shoes, bags,
clothes, frozen foods, and soft drinks drive off the market equivalent
goods that had been convivially produced. As production becomes more
centralized and more capital-intensive, the screening process performed
by tax-supported schools not only costs more for those who get through
it, but double-charges those who do not.

Education becomes necessary not only to grade people for jobs but to
upgrade them for consumption. As industrial output rises, it pushes the
education system to exercise the social control necessary for its
efficient use. The housing industry in Latin-American countries is a
good example of the educational diseconomies produced by architects. All
the major cities in such countries are surrounded by vast tracts of
self-built favelas, barriadas, or poblac\'ones. Components for new
houses and utilities could be made very cheaply and designed for
self-assembly. People could build more durable, more comfortable, and
more sanitary dwellings, as well as learn about new materials and
systems. But instead of supporting the ability of people to shape their
own environment, the government deposits in these shantytowns public
utilities designed for people who live in standard modern houses. The
presence of a new school, a paved road, and a glass-and-steel police
station defines the professionally built house as the functional unit,
and stamps the self-built home a shanty. The law establishes this
definition by refusing a building permit to people who cannot submit a
plan signed by an architect. People are deprived of their ability to
invest their own time with the power to produce use-value, and are
compelled to work for wages and to exchange their earnings for
industrially defined rented space. They are deprived also of the
opportunity to learn while building.

Industrial society demands that some people be taught before they can
drive a truck and that other people be taught before they can build a
house. Others must be taught how to live in apartment buildings.
Teachers, social workers, and policemen cooperate to keep people who
have low-paying or occasional jobs in houses they may not build or
change. To accommodate more people on less land, Venezuela and Brazil
experimented with high-rise tenements. First, the police had to dislodge
people from their \"slums\" and resettle them in apartments. Then the
social workers had to socialize tenants who lacked sufficient schooling
to understand that pigs may not be raised on eleventh-floor balconies
nor beans cultivated in their bathtubs.

In New York people with less than twelve years of schooling are treated
like cripples: they tend to be unemployable, and are controlled by
social workers who decide for them how to live. The radical monopoly of
overefficient tools exacts from society the increasing and costly
conditioning of clients. Ford produces cars that can be repaired only by
trained mechanics. Agriculture departments turn out high-yield crops
that can be used only with the assistance offarm managers who have
survived an expensive school race. The production of better health,
higher speeds, or greater yields depends on more disciplined recipients.
The real cost of these doubtful benefits is hidden by unloading much of
them on the schools that produce social control.

Pressure for more and better conditioning of people in the name of
education has led schools over their second watershed. Planners make
programs more varied and complex, but their marginal utility thereby
declines. Compulsory attendance has been extended to the point that it
now can be defined by teachers as independent study on the city streets,
or as a field project supervised by the weavers of Teotitlàn del Valle.

Parallel with the growing pretensions of school, other agencies
discovered their educational mission. Newspapers, television, and radio
were no longer just media of communication. They were pressed into the
service of socialization. Periodicals expanded to accommodate all fit
news, which meant that a few professional journalists got vast
readerships, while the majority was reduced to token representation in
the \"\"Letters to the Editor\" section.

The industrial manufacture and marketing of knowledge reduce the access
of people to convivial tools for self-initiated learning Witness the
fate of the book. The book is the result of two major inventions that
enormously extended the balance of learning: the alphabet and the
printing press. Both techniques are almost ideally convivial. Almost
anybody can learn to use them, and for his own purpose. They use cheap
materials. People can take them or leave them as they wish. They are not
easily controlled by third parties. Even the Soviet government cannot
stop the samizdat circulation of subversive typescripts.

The alphabet and the printing press have in principle deprofessionalized
the recorded word. With the alphabet the merchant broke the monopoly of
the priest over hieroglyphs. With cheap paper and pencil, and later with
the typewriter and modern copying devices, a set of new techniques had
in principle opened the era of nonprofessional, truly convivial,
communication by record. The tape recorder and camera added new media to
fully interactive communication. Yet the manipulative nature of
institutions and schooling for the acceptance of manipulation have put
these ideally convivial tools at the service of more one-way teaching.
Schools train people in the use of constantly revised textbooks. They
produce readers of instructions and of news. The per capita purchase of
nontechnical books by high-school graduates declines with the increased
percentage of people who finish high school. More books are written for
the school-trained specialist, and the self-initiated reading of books
declines. More people spend more time hooked on the curriculum defined
by new principals: the publisher, the producer, and the program
director. Every week they wait for Time.

Even the library has become a component of a schooled world. As the
library got \"better,\" the book was further withdrawn from the handy
bookshelf. The reference librarian placed himself between people and
shelves; now he is being replaced by the computer. Putting the book into
huge deposits and into the hands of computers, the New York Public
Library has become so expensive to operate that it now opens only from
ten to six weekdays and is open only partially on Saturdays. This means
that its books have become the specialized tool of readers who live on a
grant to stay away from work and school.

At its best the library is the prototype of a convivial tool.
Repositories for other learning tools can be organized on its model,
expanding access to tapes, pictures, records, and very simple labs
filled with the same scientific instruments with which most of the major
breakthroughs of the last century were made.

Manipulative teaching tools raise the cost of learning. Now we only ask
what people have to learn and then invest in a means to teach them. We
should learn to ask first what people need if they want to learn and
provide these tools for them. Professional teachers laugh at the idea
that people would learn more from random access to learning resources
than they can be taught. In fact, they frequently cite as proof for
their skepticism the declining use of libraries. They overlook the fact
that libraries are little used because they have been organized as
formidable teaching devices. Libraries are not used because people have
been trained to demand that they be taught. Neither are contraceptives,
and for analogous reasons we have to explore.

People must learn to live within bounds. This cannot be taught. Survival
depends on people learning fast what they cannot do. They must learn to
abstain from unlimited progeny, consumption, and use. It is impossible
to educate people for voluntary poverty or to manipulate them into
self-control. It is impossible to teach joyful renunciation in a world
totally structured for higher output and the illusion of declining
costs.

People must learn why and how to practice contraception. The reason is
clear. Man has evolved in a small corner of the universe. His world is
bounded by the resources of the ecosphere, and can accommodate only a
limited number of people. Technology has transformed the characteristics
of this niche. The ecosphere now accommodates a larger number of people,
each less vitally adapted to the environment-each on the average having
less space, less freedom to survive with simple means, fewer roots in
tradition. The attempt to make a better environment has turned out to be
as presumptuous as the attempt to create better health, education, or
communication. As a result there are now more people, most of them less
at home in the world. This large population can survive because of new
tools. In turn, it spurs the search for even more powerful tools, and
thereby demands more radical monopoly; this monopoly, in its turn, calls
for more and more education. But, paradoxically, what people most need
to learn, they cannot be taught or educated to do. If they are
voluntarily to keep their numbers and consumption within bounds, they
must learn to do so by living active and responsible lives, or they will
perish-passive though well informed, frustrated yet resigned. Voluntary
and therefore effective population control is impossible under
conditions of radical monopoly and overprogramming. An efficient,
specialized birth control program must fail in the same way that schools
and hospitals fail. It can start with a futile attempt at effective
seduction. It will logically escalate to enforced sterilization and
abortion. Finally, it will provide a rationale for mega-deaths.

Voluntary and effective contraception is now absolutely necessary. If
such contraception is not practiced in the very near future, humanity is
in danger of being crushed by its own size rather than by the power of
its tools. But this universal practice cannot possibly be the result of
some miracle tool. A new practice, inverse to the present, can only be
the result of a new relationship between people and their tools. The
universal practice of effective contraception is a necessary premise for
the limitation of tools which I advocate. But equally, the psychological
inversion that will accompany a limitation of tools is a premise for the
convivial psychological pressure necessary for effective contraception.

The devices needed for birth control are a paradigm for modern convivial
tools. They incorporate science in instruments that can be handled by
any reasonably prudent and well-apprenticed person. They provide new
ways to engage in the millenary practice of contraception,
sterilization, and abortion. They are cheap enough to be made
universally available. They are made to fit alternate tasks, beliefs,
and situations. They are obviously tools that structure the bodily
relationship of each individual to himself and to others. To be
effective, some must be used by every adult, and many of them must be
used every day. Birth control is an immense task. It must be
accomplished within one decade. It can be accomplished only in a
convivial manner. It is ridiculous to try to control populations with
tools which by their nature are convivial while conditioning the
population by formal education to fit more effectively into an
industrial and professional world. It is absurd to expect that Brazilian
peasants can be taught to depend on doctors for injections and
prescriptions, on lawyers for conflict resolution, and on teachers for
learning to read, while asking them to use the condom on their own. But
it is equally fanciful to expect that Indian doctors will allow
illiterate but well-trained hospital assistants to compete with them in
the performance of sterilizations. If the public realized that this
delicate intervention could be equally or even more carefully performed
by a layman whose attention, dexterity, and programming skills were
refined in the weaving of saris, doctors would lose their monopoly on
all interventions which are economically feasible for any majority of
people. Professional taboos and industrial tools stand and fall together
once truly rational, postindustrial tools are available. Only the
convergent use of convivial tools in all significant areas of
need-satisfaction can render their use in each sector truly effective.
Only among convivially structured tools can people learn to use the new
levels of power that modern technology can incorporate in them.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-9 .calibre4}
### 4. Polarization {#polarization .calibre6}

The present organization of tools impels societies to grow both in
population and in levels of affluence. This growth takes place at the
opposite ends of the privilege spectrum. The underprivileged grow in
number, while the already privileged grow in affluence. The
underprivileged thus strengthen their frustrating claims, while the rich
defend their presumed rights and needs. Hunger and impotence lead the
poor to demand rapid industrialization, and the defense of growing
luxuries pushes the rich into more frantic production. Power is
polarized, frustration is generalized, and the alternative of greater
happiness at lower affluence is pushed into the blind spot of social
vision.

This blindness is a result of the broken balance of learning. People who
are hooked on teaching are conditioned to be customers for everything
else. They see their own personal growth as an accumulation of
institutional outputs, and prefer what institutions make over what they
themselves can do. They repress the ability to discover reality by their
own lights. The skewed balance of learning explains why the radical
monopoly of commodities has become imperceptible. It does not explain
why people feel impotent to correct those profound disorders which they
do perceive.

This helplessness is the result of a fourth disruption: the growing
polarization of power. Under the pressure of an expanding mega-machine,
power is concentrated in a few hands, and the majority becomes dependent
on handouts. New levels of luxuriant overproduction grow faster than the
output of commodities which this wanton production imposes.

A 3 percent increase in the standard of living of the U.S. population
costs twenty-five times as much as a similar increase in the living
standard of India, despite the greater size and more rapid growth of the
Indian population. Significant benefits for the poor demand a reduction
of the resources used by the rich, while significant benefits for the
rich make murderous demands on the resources of the poor. Yet the rich
pretend that by exploiting the poor nations they will become rich enough
to create a hyperindustrial abundance for all. The élites of poor
countries share this fantasy.

The rich will get richer and many more of the poor will be-come
destitute during the next ten years. But anguish about the hungry should
not prevent us from understanding the structural problem of power
distribution that constitutes the fourth dimension of destructive
overgrowth. Unchecked industrialization modernizes poverty. Poverty
levels rise and the gap between rich and poor widens. These two aspects
must be seen together or the nature of destructive polarization will be
missed.

Poverty levels rise because industrial staples are turned into basic
necessities and have a unit cost beyond what a majority could ever pay.
The radical monopoly of industries has created new types of demeaning
poverty in societies of sometimes profligate affluence. The former
subsistence farmer is put out of business by the green revolution. He
earns more as a laborer, but he cannot give his children their former
diet. More importantly, the U.S. citizen with ten times his income is
also desperately poor. Both get increasingly less at greater cost.

The other side of modernized poverty is related but distinct. The power
gap widens because control over production is centralized to make the
most goods for the greatest number. Whereas rising poverty levels are
due to the structure of industrial outputs, the gaping power lag is due
to the structure of inputs. To seek remedies for the former without
simultaneously dealing with the latter would only postpone and aggravate
the world-wide modernization of poverty.

The surface effects of industrially concentrated power can be obviated
by income equalization. Progressive taxes without loopholes can be
supplemented by social security, income supports, and equal welfare
benefits for all. Confiscation of private capital beyond a certain limit
can be attempted. Keeping maximum close to minimum income is an even
tougher way to stem personal enrichment through the management of
corporate power. But such curbs on personal income will be effective
only in regulating private consumption. It has no effect on equalizing
the privileges that really count in a society where the job has become
more important than the home. As long as workers are graded by the
amount of manpower capital they represent, those who hold high
denominations of knowledge stock will be certified for the use of all
kinds of timesaving privileges. The concentration of privileges on a few
is in the nature of industrial dominance.

With the introduction of agriculture and animal husbandry, patriarchal
government and some centralization of power became feasible. At this
stage political means could be used to get the power of many slaves
under one man\'s control. One man could transform a multitude into a
tool for the realization of his design. Religion, ideology, and the whip
were the principal means of control. But the amount of power controlled
was small. The centralization of power which now seems normal could not
have been imagined even a century ago.

In modern society, energy conversion enormously exceeds the body power
of all men. Manpower stands to mechanical power in a ratio of 1:15 in
China and 1:300 in the U.S.A. Switches concentrate the control over this
power more effectively than whips ever could. The social distribution of
control over power inputs has been radically changed. If capital means
the power to make effective change, power inflation has reduced most
people to paupers.

As tools get bigger, the number of potential operators declines. There
are always fewer operators of cranes than of wheelbarrows. As tools
become more efficient, more scarce resources are put at the service of
the operator. On a Guatemalan construction site, only the engineer gets
air conditioning in his trailer. He is also the only one whose time is
deemed so precious that he must be flown to the capital, and whose
decisions seem so important that they aretransmitted by shortwave radio.
He has of course earned his privileges by cornering the largest amount
of tax money and using it to acquire a university degree. The Indio who
works on the gang does not notice the relative increase in privilege
between him and his Ladino gang boss, but the geometricians and
draftsmen who also went to school, but did not graduate, feel the heat
and the distance from their families in a new and acute way. Their
relative poverty has been aggravated by their bosses\' claim to greater
efficiency.

Never before have tools approached present power. Never before have they
been so integrated at the service of a small élite. Kings could not
claim divine right with as little challenge as executives claim services
for the sake of greater production. The Russians justify supersonic
transport by saying it will economize the time of their scientists.
High-speed transportation, broad band-width communication, special
health maintenance, and unlimited bureaucratic assistance are all
explained as requirements to get the most out of the most highly
capitalized people.

A society with very large tools must rely on multiple devices to keep
the majority from claiming the most expensive packages of privilege.
These must be reserved for the most productive individuals. The most
prestigious way to measure a person\'s productivity is by the price tag
on his education consumption. The higher a person\'s knowledge capital,
the greater the social value placed on the decisions he \"\"makes\" and
the more legitimate is his claim to high-level packages of industrial
outputs.

When the legitimacy of educational certification breaks down, other more
primitive forms of discrimination are bound to assume renewed
importance. People are judged to be less valuable manpower because they
are born in the Third World, because they are black, because they are
women, because they belong to the wrong group or party, or because they
cannot pass the right battery of tests. The scene is set for the
multiplication of minority movements, each one claiming its share, and
each one destined to be foiled by its own intent.

Hierarchies must rise and conglomerate as they extend over fewer and
larger corporations. A seat in a high-rise job is the most coveted and
contested product of expanding industry. The lack of schooling,
compounded with sex, color, and peculiar persuasions, now keeps most
people down. Minorities organized by women, or blacks, or the unorthodox
succeed at best in getting some of their members through school and into
an expensive job. They claim victory when they get equal pay for equal
rank. Paradoxically, these movements strengthen the idea that unequal
graded work is necessary and that high-rise hierarchies are necessary to
produce what an egalitarian society needs. If properly schooled, the
black porter will blame himself for not being a black lawyer. At the
same time, schooling generates a new intensity of frustration which
ultimately can act as social dynamite.

It does not matter for what specific purpose minorities now organize if
they seek an equal share in consumption, an equal place on the pyramid
of production, or equal nominal power in the government of ungovernable
tools. As long as a minority acts to increase its share within a
growth-oriented society, the final result will be a keener sense of
inferiority for most of its members.

Movements that seek control over existing institutions give them a new
legitimacy, and also render their contradictions more acute. Changes in
management are not revolutions. The shared control of workers and women,
or blacks and the young, does not constitute a social reconstruction if
what they claim to control are industrial corporations. Such changes are
at best new ways to administer an industrial mode of production which,
thanks to these shifts, continues unchallenged. More commonly, these
changes are professional insurgencies against the status quo. They
expand management, and, at an even faster rate, they degrade labor. A
new desk usually means more capital-intensive production in one firm and
a new guarantee of so-called underemployment somewhere else in society.
A majority loses further productive ability, and a minority is forced to
seek new reasons and weapons to protect its privilege.

New classes of underconsumers and of underemployed are one of the
inevitable by-products of industrial progress. Organization makes them
aware of their common plight. At present articulate minorities-often
claiming the leadership of majorities\--seek equal treatment. If one day
they were to seek equal work rather than equal pay-equal inputs rather
than equal outputs-they could be the pivot of social reconstruction.
Industrial society could not possibly resist a strong women\'s movement,
for example, which would lead to the demand that all people, without
distinction, do equal work. Women are integrated into all classes and
races. Most of their daily activities are performed in nonindustrial
ways. Industrial societies remain viable precisely because women are
there to perform those daily tasks which resist industrialization. It is
easier to imagine that the North American continent would cease to
exploit the underindustrialization of South America than that it would
cease to use its women for industry-resistant chores. In a society ruled
by the standards of industrial efficiency, housework is rendered inhuman
and devalued. It would be rendered even less tolerable if it were given
pro-forma industrial status. The further expansion of industry would be
brought to a halt if women forced upon us the recognition that society
is no longer viable if a single mode of production prevails. The
effective recognition that not two but several equally valuable,
dignified, and important modes of production must coexist within any
viable society would bring industrial expansion under control. Growth
would stop if women obtained equally creative work for all, instead of
demanding equal rights over the gigantic and expanding tools now
appropriated by men.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-10 .calibre4}
### 5. Obsolescence {#obsolescence .calibre6}

Convivial reconstruction demands the disruption of the present monopoly
of industry, but not the abolition of all industrial production. It does
imply the adoption of labor-intensive tools, but not the regression to
inefficient tools. It requires a considerable reduction of all kinds of
now compulsory therapy, but not the elimination of teaching, guidance,
or healing for which individuals take personal responsibility. Neither
must a convivial society be stagnant. Its dynamics depend on wide
distribution of the power to make effective change. In the present
scheme of large-scale obsolescence a few corporate centers of
decision-making impose compulsory innovation on the entire society.
Continued convivial reconstruction depends on the degree to which
society protects the power of individuals and of communities to choose
their own styles of life through effective, small-scale renewal.

I have shown that social polarization is the result of two complementary
factors: the excessive cost of industrially produced and advertised
products, and the excessive rarity of jobs that are considered highly
productive. Obsolescence, on the other hand, produces
devaluation\--which is the result not of a certain general rate of
change but of change in those products which exercise a radical
monopoly. Social polarization depends on the fact that industrial inputs
and outputs come in units so large that most people are excluded from
them. Obsolescence, on the other hand, can become intolerable even when
people are not directly priced out of the market. Product elaboration
and obsolescence are two distinct dimensions of overefficiency, both of
which underpin a society of hierarchically layered privilege.

It does not really matter if forced obsolescence becomes destructive of
old models or of old functions, if Ford discontinues the distribution of
spare parts for its 1955 model, or if the police rule old cars off the
road because they lack features that safety lobbyists have made
standard. Renewal is intrinsic to the industrial mode of production
coupled to the ideology of progress. Products cannot be improved unless
huge machines are retooled\--and in the technical sense engineers have
given this word. To make this pay, huge markets must be created for the
new model. The most effective way to open a market is to identify the
use of what is new as an important privilege. If this identification
succeeds, the old model is devalued and the self-interest of the
consumer is wedded to the ideology of never-ending and progressive
consumption. Individuals are socially graded according to the number of
years their bill of goods is out of date. Some people can afford to keep
up with the Joneses who buy the latest model, while others still use
cars, stoves, and radios that are five to ten years old-and probably
spend their vacations in places that are just as many years out of
style. They know where they fit on the social ladder.

The social grading of individuals by the age of the things they use is
not just a capitalist practice. Wherever the economy is built around the
large-scale production of elaborate and obsolescent packages of staples,
it is only the privileged who have access to the newest model of
services and goods. Only a few nurses get the most recent course in
anesthesiological nursing, and only a few functionaries get the new
model of a \"people\'s car.\" The members of this minority within a
minority recognize each other by the recent date at which the products
they use came onto the market, and it makes little difference whether
they use them at home or at work.

Industrial innovations are costly, and managers must justify their high
cost by producing measurable proof of their superiority. Under the rule
of industrial socialism, pseudo science will have to provide the alibi,
while in market economies, appeal can be made to a survey of consumer
opinion. In any case, periodic innovations in goods or tools foster the
belief that anything new will be proven better. This belief has become
an integral part of the modern world view. It is forgotten that whenever
a society lives by this delusion, each marketed unit generates more
wants than it satisfies. If new things are made because they are better,
then the things most people use are not quite good. New models
constantly renovate poverty. The consumer feels the lag between what he
has and what he ought to get. He believes that products can be made
measurably more valuable and allows himself to be constantly re-educated
for their consumption. The \"better\" replaces the \"good\" as the
fundamental normative concept.

In a society caught up in the race for the better, limits on change are
experienced as a threat. The commitment to the better at any cost makes
the good impossible at all costs. Failure to renew the bill of goods
frustrates the expectation of what is possible, while renewal of the
bill of goods intensifies the expectations of unattainable progress.
What people have and what they are about to get are equally exasperating
to them. Accelerating change has become both addictive and intolerable.
At this point the balance among stability, change, and tradition has
been upset; society has lost both its roots in shared memories and its
bearings for innovation. Judgment on precedents has lost its value.

One of the major objections against a stationary-state economy is the
fear that the production of a limited and durable number of goods would
set intolerable limits on the freedom of innovation and of scientific
exploration. This would be justified if I were discussing the transition
from the present industrial society to its next model: clean and limited
production of goods and unlimited growth in the service sector. I am
not, however, discussing the evolution of industrial society, but the
transition to a new mixed mode of production.

Industrial innovations are planned, trivial, and conservative. The
renewal of convivial tools would be as unpredictable, creative, and
lively as the people who use them. Scientific progress is also dulled by
the present identification of research with industrial development. Most
of the cost of research derives from its competitive nature and
pressure; most of its tools are restricted to people who have been
carefully programmed to look at the world through the prisms of profit
and power; most of its goals are set by the need for more power and
efficiency. Leisurely scientific research does not exclude a bevatron or
some ultracentrifuges; removal of access restrictions now created by
schools would again admit the curious, rather than the orthodox, to the
alchemist\'s vault; and study for its own sake would produce more
surprises than team research on how to eliminate production snags.

A changeless society would be as intolerable for people as the present
society of constant change. Convivial reconstruction requires limits on
the rate of compulsory change. An unlimited rate of change makes lawful
community meaningless. Law is based on the retrospective judgment of
peers about circumstances that occur ordinarily and are likely to occur
again. If the rate of change which affects all circumstances accelerates
beyond some point, such judgments cease to be valid. Lawful society
breaks down. Social control does not accommodate community participation
and becomes the function of experts. Educators define how people are to
be trained and retrained throughout their lives\--shaped and reshaped
until they fit the demands of industry and are attracted by its profits.
Ideologues define what is right or wrong. The tooling of man for the
milieu becomes the major industry when this milieu changes beyond a
certain rate; then man\'s need for language and law, for memories and
myths, imposes limits to the change of tools.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-11 .calibre4}
### 6. Frustration {#frustration .calibre6}

I have identified five realms in each of which the efficiency of tools
can upset the balance of life. Faulty technology can render the
environment uninhabitable. Radical monopoly can force the demand for
affluence to the point of paralyzing the ability to work.
Overprogramming can transform the world into a treatment ward in which
people are constantly taught, socialized, normalized, tested, and
reformed. Centralization and packaging of institutionally produced
values can polarize society into irreversible structural despotism. And,
finally, engineered obsolescence can break all bridges to a normative
past. In each or several of these dimensions a tool can threaten
survival by making it unfeasible for most people to relate themselves in
action to one of the great dimensions of their environment.

In the assessment of society it is not sufficient to select just one of
these realms. Each one of these balances must be preserved.

Even clean and equally distributed electricity could lead to intolerable
radical monopoly of power tools over man\'s personal energy. Not only
compulsory schools but pervasive teaching media can be used to upset the
balance of learning or to polarize society into an oppressive
meritocracy. Any form of engineering can lead to unendurable
obsolescence. It is true that man\'s physical niche is threatened; but
just as he evolved within one particular physiological environment, so
he also evolved within a social, political and psychological environment
which can also be irreversibly destroyed. Mankind may wither and
disappear because he is deprived of basic structures of language, law,
and myth, just as much as he can be smothered by smog. Future shock can
destroy what is human just as much as radical monopoly or social
polarization.

I have argued that in each of five realms conceptual criteria can be
used to recognize escalating imbalance. These criteria serve as
guidelines for political processes by which the members of a
technological society can develop constitutive boundaries within which
tools must be kept. Such boundaries circumscribe the kind of power
structures that can be kept under the control of people. By growing
beyond this range, tools escape political control. Man\'s ability to
claim his rights is extinguished by his bondage to processes over which
he has no say. Biological functions, work, meaning, freedom, and
roots\--insofar as he can still enjoy them-are reduced to concessions,
which optimize the logic of tools. Man is reduced to an indefinitely
malleable resource of a corporate state. Without constitutive limits
translated into constitutional provisions survival in dignity and
freedom is squelched.

Present research is overwhelmingly concentrated in two directions:
research and development for breakthroughs to the better production of
better wares and general systems analysis concerned with protecting man
for further consumption. Future research ought to lead in the opposite
direction; let us call it counterfoil research. Counterfoil research
also has two major tasks: to provide guidelines for detecting the
incipient stages of murderous logic in a tool; and to devise tools and
tool systems that optimize the balance of life, thereby maximizing
liberty for all.

Counterfoil research is not a new branch of science, nor is it some
interdisciplinary project. It is the dimensional analysis of the
relationship of man to his tools. It seems obvious that each person
lives in several concentric social environments. To each social
environment there corresponds a set of natural scales. This is true for
the primary group, for the production unit, for the city, the state, and
the organization of men on the globe. To each of these social
environments there correspond certain characteristic distances, periods,
populations, energy sources, and energy sinks. In each of these
dimensions tools that require time periods or spaces or energies much
beyond the order of corresponding natural scales are dysfunctional. They
upset the homeostasis which renders the particular environment viable.
At present we tend to define human needs in terms of abstract goals and
treat these as problems to which technocrats can apply escalating
solutions. What we need is rational research on the dimensions within
which technology can be used by concrete communities to implement their
aspirations without frustrating equivalent aspirations by others.

The barriers beyond which destruction looms are of a different nature
from the boundaries within which a society freely constrains its tools.
The former establish the realm of possible survival; the latter
determine the shape of a culturally preferred environment. The former
define the conditions for uniform regimentation; the latter set the
conditions of convivial justice. The boundaries of doom are constitutive
requirements common to all postindustrial societies. Statutory
characteristics setting more narrow bounds than those absolutely
necessary are the result of joint options made in a commonweal, as a
result of its members\' defining their life style and their level of
liberty.

Supersonic transports could be easily ruled out to protect the
environment, air transport to avoid social polarization, cars to protect
against radical monopoly. The balance of purpose I want to highlight at
this point provides a further criterion by which to select desirable
tools. In view of this balance it might even be possible to exclude
public transportation moving at high velocity.

There is a form of malfunction in which growth does not yet tend toward
the destruction of life, yet renders a tool antagonistic to its specific
aims. Tools, in other words, have an optimal, a tolerable, and a
negative range. Tolerable overefficiency also disturbs a balance, but a
balance of a subtler and more subjective kind than those discussed
before. The balance here threatened is that between personal cost and
return. It can be expressed more generally as the perception of the
balance between means and ends. When ends become subservient to the
tools chosen for their sake, the user first feels frustration and
finally either abstains from their use or goes mad. Compulsory maddening
behavior in Hades was considered the ultimate punishment reserved for
blasphemy. Sisyphus was forced to keep rolling a stone uphill, only to
see it roll back down. When maddening behavior becomes the standard of a
society, people learn to compete for the right to engage in it. Envy
blinds people and makes them compete for addiction.

Wherever the maximum velocity of any one type of commuter vehicle grows
beyond a certain mph, the travel time and the cost of transportation for
the median commuter is increased. If the maximum velocity at any one
point of a commuter system goes beyond a certain mph, most people are
obliged to spend more time in traffic jams, or waiting for connections,
or recovering from accidents. They will also have to spend more time
paying for the transportation system they are compelled to use.

The critical velocity depends to a certain extent on a variety of
factors: geography, culture, market controls, level of technology, and
money flow. With so many variables affecting a quantity, it would seem
that its value could fluctuate over a very wide range. Just the contrary
is true. Once it is understood that we refer to any vehicular velocity
in the transportation of people within a community, we find that the
range within which the critical velocity can vary is very narrow. It is,
in fact, so narrow and so low that it seems improbable and not worth the
time of most traffic engineers to worry about.

Commuter transportation leads to negative returns when it admits,
anywhere in the system, speeds much above those reached on a bicycle.
Once the barrier of bicycle velocity is broken at any point in the
system, the total per capita monthly time spent at the service of the
travel industry increases.

High output leads to time lack. Time becomes scarce, partly because it
takes time to consume goods and to undergo therapies, and partly because
dependence on production makes abstention from it more costly. The
richer we get in a consumer society, the more acutely we become aware of
how many grades of value\--of both leisure and labor\--we have climbed.
The higher we are on the pyramid, the less likely we are to give up time
to simple idleness and to apparently nonproductive pursuits. The joy of
listening to the neighborhood finch is easily overshadowed by
stereophonic recordings of \"Bird Songs of the World,\" the walk through
the park downgraded by preparations for a packaged bird-watching tour
into the jungle. It becomes difficult to economize time when all
commitments are for the long run. Staffan Linder points out that there
is a strong tendency for us to over-commit the future, so that w hen the
future becomes present, we seem to be conscious all the time of having
an acute scarcity, simply because we have committed ourselves to about
thirty hours a day instead of twenty-four. In addition to the mere fact
that time has competitive uses and high marginal utility in an affluent
society, this overcommitment creates a sense of pressure and
harriedness.

Life in a society where speedy transportation is taken for granted
renders time scarce in both of these ways. Activities related to the use
of speedy vehicles by many people in a society occupy an increasing
percentage of the time budget of most members of that society, as the
speed of the vehicles increases beyond a certain point. Beyond this
point the competition of transportation activities with stationary
activities becomes fierce, especially competition for the allocation of
limited real estate and available energy. This competition seems to grow
exponentially with the rise of speed. The time reserved for commuting
displaces both work and leisure time. Hence, the speedier vehicles are,
the more it becomes important to keep them filled at all times. If they
are individual capsules, they tend to become disproportionately costly
and scarce. If they are public vehicles, they tend to be large, and run
at infrequent intervals or along only a few routes.

As speed increases, the adaptation of life patterns to vehicles becomes
more tyrannical. It becomes necessary to make constant corrections and
amendments to the allocation of shorter periods. It becomes necessary to
make appointments and commitments months or even years ahead. Since some
of these commitments, which have been made at great cost, cannot be
kept, there is a sense of constant failure which produces a sense of
constant tension. Man has only a limited ability to submit to
programming. When speed increases beyond a certain point, the
transportation system vies with other systems in exhausting human
tolerance for social controls.

Machines turn against men at a much lower level of power than would be
ruled out by the first five criteria. But while these criteria identify
necessary safeguards for life and liberty, the balance of purpose
depends on a different kind of value. Conceptual rather than empirical
criteria can be set for the constitutional limitation of power. It ought
to be relatively easy for a majority to rule what abuse it will take
from any minority, or what damage it will not expose its offspring to.
The recognition of the most socially desirable power of a tool is of a
different nature; it can only be the outcome of political procedure. The
value obtained for time wasted on speed transportation is conditioned by
the consensus in a community about the level of its freedom as a
concrete option of its civilization.

Transportation beyond bicycle speeds demands power inputs from the
environment. Velocity translates directly into power, and soon power
needs increase exponentially. In the United States, 22 percent of the
energy converted drives vehicles, and another 10 percent keeps roads
open for them. The amount of energy is comparable to the total
energy\--except for domestic heating-required for the combined economies
of India and China. The energy used up in the United States for the sole
purpose of driving vehicles built to accelerate beyond bicycle speed
would suffice to add auxiliary motors to about twenty times that many
vehicles for people all over the world who want to move at bicycle
speeds and do not or cannot push the pedals because they are sick or
old, or because they want to transport a heavy load or move over a great
distance, or because they just want to relax. Simply on the basis of
equal distribution on a world-wide scale, speeds above those attained by
bicycles could be ruled out. It is of course mere fantasy to assume an
egalitarian consensus sufficiently strong to accept such a proposal. At
closer inspection though, many communities will find that the very same
speed limit necessary for equal distribution of mobility is also very
close to the optimum velocity giving maximum value to community life. At
20 mph constant speed Phileas Fogg could have made his trip around the
world in half of eighty days. Simulation studies would be useful for
exploring imaginative policies that seek optimal liberty with convivial
power tools. To whose advantage would Calcutta\'s traffic flow stabilize
if speeds were limited to 10 mph? What price would Peru\'s military pay
for limiting the nation\'s speed to 20 mph? What gains in equality,
activity, health, and freedom would result from limiting all other
vehicles to the speed of bicycles and sailing ships?

Negative returns are not unique to transportation. Ninety percent of all
medical care for patients with terminal diseases is unrelated to their
health; such treatment tends to increase suffering and disability
without demonstrably lengthening life. The maximum feasibility of
service for the optimum care of an individual patient lies within a
certain range. Beyond this range medical bills measure the health of a
patient in the same way that GNP measures the wealth of a nation. Both
add on the same scale the market value of benefits and the defensive
expenditures which become necessary to offset the unwanted side effects
of their production. The technological escalation of medicine first
ceases to serve healing and then ceases to prolong life. It turns into a
death-denying ritual of terminal care: a final race in which the
personality best fitted to machines turns in the most spectacular
performance.

Counterfoil research is concerned first with an analysis of increasing
marginal disutility and the menace of growth. It is then concerned with
the discovery of general systems of institutional structure which
optimize convivial production. This kind of research meets psychological
resistance. Growth has become addictive. Like heroin addiction, the
habit distorts basic value judgments. Addicts of any kind are willing to
pay increasing amounts for declining satisfactions. They have become
tolerant to escalating marginal disutility. They are blind to deeper
frustration because they are absorbed in playing for always mounting
stakes. Minds accustomed to thinking that transportation ought to
provide speedy motion rather than reduction of the time and effort spent
moving are boggled by this contrary hypothesis. Man is inherently
mobile, and speeds higher than those he can achieve by the use of his
limbs must be proven to be of great social value to warrant support by
public sacrifice.

Counterfoil research must clarify and dramatize the relationship of
people to their tools. It ought to hold constantly before the public the
resources that are available and the consequences of their use in
various ways. It should impress on people the existence of any trend
that threatens one of the major balances on which life depends.
Counterfoil research leads to the identification of those classes of
people most immediately hurt by such trends and helps people to identify
themselves as members of such classes. It points out how a particular
freedom can be jeopardized for the members of various groups which have
otherwise conflicting interests. Counterfoil research involves the
public by showing that the demands for freedom of any group or alliance
can be identified with the implicit interest of all.

Withdrawal from growth mania will be painful, but mostly for members of
the generation which has to experience the transition and above all for
those most disabled by consumption. If their plight could be vividly
remembered, it might help the next generation avoid what they know would
enslave them.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-12 .calibre4}
## IV. Recovery {#iv.-recovery .calibre1}

I have discussed five dimensions on which the balance of life depends.
In each I have indicated tendencies that must be kept in equilibrium to
maintain the homeostasis which constitutes human life. I have argued
that the control of natural forces is functional only if the use of
nature does not make nature useless for man. I have argued that
institutions are functional when they promote a delicate balance between
what people can do for themselves and what tools at the service of
anonymous institutions can do for them. Formal instruction also depends
on a balance. Special arrangements must never outweigh opportunities for
independent learning. An increase in social mobility can render society
more human, but only if at the same time there is a narrowing of the
difference in power which separates the few from the many. Finally, an
increase in the rate of innovation is of value only when with it
rootedness in tradition, fullness of meaning, and security are also
strengthened.

A tool can grow out of man\'s control, first to become his master and
finally to become his executioner. Tools can rule men sooner than they
expect: the plow makes man the lord of a garden but also the refugee
from a dust bowl. Nature\'s revenge can produce children less fit for
life than their fathers, and born into a world less fit for them. Homo
faber can be turned into a sorcerer\'s apprentice. Specialization can
make his every day so complicated that it becomes estranged from his
activity. Addiction to progress can enslave all men to a race in which
none ever reaches the goal.

There are two ranges in the growth of tools: the range within which
machines are used to extend human capability and the range in which they
are used to contract, eliminate, or replace human functions. In the
first, man as an individual can exercise authority on his own behalf and
therefore assume responsibility. In the second, the machine takes
over\--first reducing the range of choice and motivation in both the
operator and the client, and second imposing its own logic and demand on
both. Survival depends on establishing procedures which permit ordinary
people to recognize these ranges and to opt for survival in freedom, to
evaluate the structure built into tools and institutions so they can
exclude those which by their structure are destructive, and control
those which are useful. Exclusion of the malignant tool and control of
the expedient tool are the two major priorities for politics today.
Multiple limits to overefficiency must be expressed in language that is
simple and politically effective. This urgent task is faced, however,
with three formidable obstacles: the idolatry of science, the corruption
of ordinary language, and loss of respect for the formal process by
which social decisions are made.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-13 .calibre4}
### 1. The Demythologization of Science {#the-demythologization-of-science .calibre6}

Above all, political discussion is stunned by a delusion about science.
This term has come to mean an institutional enterprise rather than a
personal activity, the solving of puzzles rather than the unpredictably
creative activity of individual people. Science is now used to label a
spectral production agency which turns out better knowledge just as
medicine produces better health. The damage done by this
misunderstanding about the nature of knowledge is even more fundamental
than the damage done to the conceptions of health, education, or
mobility by their identification with institutional outputs. False
expectations of better health corrupt society, but they do so in only
one particular sense. They foster a declining concern with healthful
environments, healthy life styles, and competence in the personal care
of one\'s neighbor. Deceptions about health are circumstantial. The
institutionalization of knowledge leads to a more general and degrading
delusion. It makes people dependent on having their knowledge produced
for them. It leads to a paralysis of the moral and political
imagination.

This cognitive disorder rests on the illusion that the knowledge of the
individual citizen is of less value than the \"knowledge\" of science.
The former is the opinion of individuals. It is merely subjective and is
excluded from policies. The latter is \"objective\"

-defined by science and promulgated by expert spokesmen. This objective
knowledge is viewed as a commodity which can be refined, constantly
improved, accumulated and fed into a process, now called
\"decision-making.\" This new mythology of governance by the
manipulation of knowledge-stock inevitably erodes reliance on government
by people.

The world does not contain any information. It is as it is. Information
about it is created in the organism through its interaction with the
world. To speak about storage of information outside the human body is
to fall into a semantic trap. Books or computers are part of the world.
They can yield information when they are looked upon. We move the
problem of learning and of cognition nicely into the blind spot of our
intellectual vision if we confuse vehicles for potential information
with information itself. We do the same when we confuse data for
potential decision with decision itself.

Overconfidence in \"better knowledge\" becomes a self-fulfilling
prophecy. People first cease to trust their own judgment and then want
to be told the truth about what they know. Overconfidence in \"better
decision-making\" first hampers people\'s ability to decide for
themselves and then undermines their belief that they can decide.

The growing impotence of people to decide for themselves affects the
structure of their expectations. People are transformed from contenders
for scarce resources into competitors for abundant promises.
Adjudication by ordeal is replaced by recourse to secular rituals. These
rituals are organized as frenzied consumption of the offerings of some
menu: a curriculum, a therapy, or a court case. The promise that science
will provide affluence for all and for each according to his objectively
verified merits deprives personal conflict of its creative legitimacy.
People who have unlearned how to decide about their own rights on their
own evidence become pawns in a world game operated by mega-machines. No
longer can each person make his or her own contribution to the constant
renewal of society. Recourse to better knowledge produced by science not
only voids personal decisions of the power to contribute to an ongoing
historical and social process, it also destroys the rules of evidence by
which experience is traditionally shared. The knowledge-consumer depends
on getting packaged programs funneled into him. He finds security in the
expectation that his neighbor and his boss have seen the same programs
and read the same columns. The procedure by which personal certainties
are honestly exchanged is eroded by the increasing recourse to
exceptionally qualified knowledge produced by a science, profession, or
political party. Mothers poison their children on the adman\'s or the
M.D.\'s advice. Even in the courtroom and in parliament, scientific
hearsay-well hidden under the veil of expert testimony-biases juridical
and political decisions. Judges, governments, and voters abdicate their
own evidence about the necessity of resolving conflicts in a situation
of defined and permanent scarcity and opt for further growth on the
basis of data which they admittedly cannot fully understand.

When communities have grown overconfident in science, they leave it to
experts to set the upper limits on growth. This mandate rests on a
fallacy. Experts can define standards at levels slightly below those at
which people complain with too much force. They can keep the public
sullen and forestall mutiny. But closed peer groups cannot be entrusted
with self-restraint in furthering their expert knowledge. Nor can we
expect them to be representative of the common man. Scientific expertise
cannot define what people will tolerate. No person can abdicate the
right to decide on this for himself. It is, of course, possible to
experiment on humans. Nazi doctors explored what the organism can
endure. They found out how long the average person can survive torture,
but this did not tell them anything about what someone can tolerate.
These doctors were condemned under a statute signed in Nuremberg two
days after Hiroshima and the day before the bomb was dropped on
Nagasaki.

What a population will endure remains beyond experiment. We can tell
what happens to particular groups of people under extreme
circumstances\--in prison, on an expedition, or in an experiment. Such
precedents cannot serve as measures for the privations which a society
will tolerate as a result of tools or rules made for its service.
Scientific measurements may suggest that a certain endeavor threatens a
major balance of life. Only the informed judgment of a majority of
prudent men who act on the much more complex basis of everyday evidence
can determine how to limit individual and social goals. Science can
clarify the dimensions of man\'s realm in the universe. Only a political
community can dialectically choose the dimensions of the roof under
which its members will live.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-14 .calibre4}
### 2. The Rediscovery of Language {#the-rediscovery-of-language .calibre6}

Between 1830 and 1850 a dozen inventors formulated the law of the
conservation of energy. Most of them were engineers, and independently
from each other they redefined the floating life force of the universe
in terms of work machines could perform. Measurements that could be
taken in the laboratory became the scale by which the mysterious cosmic
nexus\--called vis viva for centuries\--could henceforth be defined.

During the same period industry successfully competed with other modes
of production for the first time. Industrial performance became the
scale according to which human effectiveness in the entire economy was
now measured. Housework, farming, handicraft, and subsistence activities
ranging from the making of preserves to the self-building of a home
began to be viewed as subsidiary or second-rate forms of production. The
industrial mode first degraded and later paralyzed the nexus of
productive relationships which coexisted in society.

This monopoly of one mode of production over all social relations is
much more profound than the competition of firms which overshadows it.
In the surface competition the winner is easily recognized as the more
capital-intensive factory, thebetter-organized business, the more
exploitative and better-protected branch of industry, the corporation
that sheds diseconomies the most unobtrusively or produces for war. On a
broad scale this race takes the form of a competition among
multinational corporations and industrializing nation-states. But this
deadly game among giants diverts attention from the ritual service which
the game itself renders to the contestants. As the arena of the contest
expands, an industrial structure is imposed on world society. The mode
of corporate production establishes a radical monopoly not only over
resources and tools but also over the imagination and motivational
structure of people. Political systems compete to baptize the same
expanding industrial structure into opposing creeds, without recognizing
that it is beyond their control. The convergence of corporate monopolies
on the deep structural level of society can be called the
industrialization of man. This trend must be inverted if people are to
be free. But the industrial corruption of language itself makes this
issue terribly difficult to formulate.

Language reflects the monopoly of the industrial mode of production over
perception and motivation. The tongues of industrial nations identify
the fruits of creative work and of human labor with the outputs of
industry. The materialization ofconsciousness is reflected in Western
languages. Schools operate by the slogan \"education!\" while ordinary
language asks what children \"learn.\" The functional shift from verb to
noun highlights the corresponding impoverishment of the social
imagination. People who speak a nominalist language habitually express
proprietary relationships to work which they have. All over Latin
America only the salaried employees, whether workers or bureaucrats, say
that they have work; peasants say that they do it: \"Van a trabajar,
pero no tienen trabajo.\" Those who have been modernized and unionized
expect industries to produce not only more goods but also more work for
more people. Not only what men do but also what men want is designated
by a noun. \"Housing\" designates a commodity rather than an activity.
People acquire knowledge, mobility, even sensitivity or health. They
have not only work or fun but even sex.

This shift from verb to noun reflects a transformation in the idea of
ownership. \"Possessing,\" \"holding,\" and \"seizing\" no longer
describe the relationships people can have to corporations, such as
systems of schools or highways. Possessive statements made about tools
come to mean the ability to command their outputs, interest from
capital, or merchandise, or some kind of prestige connected with their
operation. Fully industrialized man calls his own principally what has
been made for him. He says \"my education,\" \"my transportation,\" \"my
entertainment,\" \"my health\" about the commodities he gets from
school, car, show business, or doctor. Western languages, and above all
English, become almost inseparable from industrial production. Western
men might have to learn from other languages that ownership relations
can be restructured in a convivial way. For instance, in Micronesian
tongues there exist entirely distinct devices to express the
relationship I have to my acts (which can no longer be separated from
me), to my nose (which can be cut off), to my relatives (who were
inflicted on me), to my canoe (without which I could not be a full man),
to a drink (which I serve you), or to the same drink (which I intend to
swallow).

In a society whose language has undergone this shift, predicates come to
be stated in terms of a commodity and claims in terms of competition for
a scarce resource. \"I want to learn\" is translated into \"I want to
get an education.\" The decision to do something is turned into the
demand for a stake in the gamble of schooling. \"I want to walk\" is
restated as \"I need transportation.\" The subject in the first case
designates himself as an actor, and in the second as a consumer.
Linguistic change supports the expansion of the industrial arena:
competition for institutionalized values is reflected in the use of
nominal language. This competition for shares inevitably takes the form
of a game. People gamble for what they perceive as nouns. Of course,
that competition can be organized either as a zero-sum game, in which
one wins when another loses, or as a non-zero-sum game, in which both
competitors get more than if either had lost. Compulsory school could be
construed as an example of a zero-sum game: there are only winners and
losers; by definition school bestows privilege on fewer people than it
degrades. An example of the second would be the transition from private
to public transport: at least for the time being, more commuters could
get faster wherever they want to go.

Conflict does not have to be a competition for scarce commodities. It
could also manifest disagreement about which conditions would best
remove restraints on autonomous action. Conflict can lead to the
creation of new freedom; but this possibility has been obscured by
nominalist language. It can create for both parties the right to do, and
to do things which by definition are neither commodities nor scarce.
Conflict which leads to the right to walk, to participate in shaping
society, to speak and communicate equally, to live in clean air or to
use convivial tools deprives both adversaries of some affluence for the
sake of an incommensurable gain new liberty.

In some societies the corruption of language has crippled the political
fantasy to the point where the difference between a claim to commodities
and a right to convivial tools cannot be understood. Limits on tools
cannot be publicly discussed. Public blindness to urgent issues is not a
new phenomenon. People for decades refused to open their eyes to the
urgency of population control, for example. Limiting tools for the sake
of freedom and conviviality is now such an issue that cannot be raised.
A limit on vehicular velocity as a major election issue seems an
implausible idea to the rich and an irrelevant idea to the poor. People
who are born next to highways cannot imagine a world without speed, and
the peasant in the Andes cannot grasp why anyone should travel that
fast. A slowdown as the condition for good transportation sounds
shocking. To recommend limits on tools sounds as deeply obscene today as
the recommendation for greater sexual frankness and freedom as a
condition for a good marriage law would have sounded a generation ago.

The operating code of industrial tools encroaches on everyday language
and reduces the poetic self-affirmation of men to a barely tolerated and
marginal protest. The consequent industrialization of man can be
inverted only if the convivial function of language is recuperated, but
with a new level of consciousness. Language which is used by a people
jointly claiming and asserting each person\'s right to share in the
shaping of the community becomes, so to speak, a second-order tool to
clarify the relationships of a people to engineered instrumentalities.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-15 .calibre4}
### 3. The Recovery of Legal Procedure {#the-recovery-of-legal-procedure .calibre6}

Support of an ever-expanding productive society has become the
overwhelmingly dominant purpose of the existing structure of politics
and law. The procedure by which people decide what ought to be done has
become subservient to the ideology that corporations ought to produce
more: more knowledge and decisions, more goods and services. This
perversion constitutes the third obstacle to the translation of the need
for a bounded society into actual social process.

Political parties, legislatures, and the juridical system have been
consistently used to foster and protect the growth of schools, unions,
hospitals, and road-systems, not to speak of industries. Gradually, not
only the police but even the courts and the legal system itself have
come to be thought of as tools made for the service of an industrial
state. That they sometimes protect individuals against industrial claims
has become an alibi for their habitual service of legitimizing the
further concentration of power. Along with the idolatry of scientific
method and the corruption of language, this progressive loss of
confidence in political and legal processes is a major obstacle to
retooling society.

People come to understand that an alternative society is possible by
using clear language. They can bring it about by recovering
consciousness of the deep structure by which, in their society,
decisions are made. Such a structure exists wherever people form a
community. Contradictory decisions can be the outcome of the same
process because the structure can be used to define personal values and
also to shore up institutional behavior. But the existence of such
conflicting results does not contradict the existence of a consistent
structure which generates them. People can decide to get an education in
school even though they have decided that it would be better to learn
something on their own. They can let themselves be taken to a hospital,
though they have decided to die at home. Just as cognitive dissonance is
a foundation for dialectics, so the simultaneous acceptance of
contradictory norms proves the existence of normative procedures.

Public confidence in the existence of shared procedures has been shaken
because these procedures are constantly misused. They have become tools
to support unlimited production through converging arguments that
alternately take a moral, a political, or a legal character. Christian
churches preach meekness, charity, and austerity but finance industrial
programs; socialists enforce a Stalinist mode of production, and the
common law has come to favor the firm over the individual. Soon the
computer will be used to define at every juncture what should be done
for the growth of tools, unless people rediscover that they share a deep
commitment to formal procedures by which they can decide how their
present major institutions ought to be turned around.

Unless people agree on a process that can be continuously, convivially,
and effectively used to control society\'s tools, the inversion of the
present institutional structure cannot be either enacted or, what is
more important, precariously maintained. Managers will always re-emerge
to increase institutional productivity and capture public support for
the better service they promise.

Three objections are usually made whenever law is proposed as a tool for
the inversion of society. One of them is rather superficial: not
everybody can be a lawyer, and so not everybody can operate the law on
his own. This, of course, is true only to some degree. Parajuridical
systems could be set up in particular communities and incorporated into
the over-all structure. Much wider scope could be given to alternative
mechanisms to allow for greater participation by the nonprofessional,
such as mediation, conciliation, and arbitration. But insofar as this
objection is valid, it is also irrelevant to my point. The law, as it
deals with the regulation of large-scale production agencies, can surely
be decentralized, demystified and debureaucratized. But even then some
social concerns are, and could for a long time remain, complex and of
vast range, demanding corresponding legal tools. Precisely if it is to
be used for the negotiating of world-wide proscriptions among large
communities, each with its own centuries-old traditions, the law as the
process enabling us to regulate these concerns is and will remain a tool
requiring some experts to operate it. But this does not mean that such
experts have to be graduates of a law school, or that they must be
members of a closed profession.

The second objection is completely relevant and much more profound:
persons who now operate the law as a social tool are deeply infected
with the myths that pervade a growth society. Their imagination of the
possible and of the feasible is determined by the lore of industry. It
would be folly to expect the present corporations of social engineers of
a utilitarian society to turn into the guardians of a convivial one. The
critical importance of this observation is complemented and underlined
by a third objection. The juristic system is not simply a set of written
laws; it is a continuing process by which those laws are made and then
applied to actual situations. The law is used to impose a given mind-set
on all participants. The resulting content of the law embodies the
ideologies of lawmakers and judges. How they experience the ideology
inherent in a culture becomes established mythology in the laws they
make and apply. The body of laws that regulates an industrial society
inevitably reflects and reinforces its ideology, social character, and
class structure. \"More\" is always in the common good\--more power to
firms, professions, and parties.

While this objection does indicate a fundamental difficulty against the
use of law in an inversion of society, it also misses the point. I
carefully distinguish between a body of laws and the purely formal
structure by which it is made, just as I havedistinguished the use of
slogans by which our institutions operate from the use of ordinary
language, and as I will later distinguish between policies and formal
political process. It is the latter and not the former which are the
second order of tools we need, can share, and have to use.

It is almost impossible to insist strongly enough on the distinction
between means and ends in an epoch in which purposeshave been reduced to
operations, in an epoch in which people raise consciousness, movements
pretend to provide \"liberation,\" languages rather than persons are
said to \"speak,\" and politicians make\" revolutions. The law can again
serve to highlight the general difference between substance and what
might be called not \"due process\" but rather \"due procedure.\"

Two major complementary features of the common law make its formal
structure particularly applicable to the needs which arise in a profound
crisis. One is the inherent continuity of the system, and the other is
its adversary nature. Analogous features can be found in other law
systems; I here choose the Anglo-American system of law as an
illustration of my more general point.

The continuity built into the lawmaking process does in one sense
conserve the substance of a body of laws. This is less obvious in the
legislative stage. Legislators are free to innovate at their own
discretion, as long as they stay within a constitutional framework. But
they do also have to fit any new law into the context of existing
legislation, and this tends toensure that new legislation will not vary
too widely from the over-all tradition of existing law.

The function of the courts in providing continuity to the substance of
the law is more obvious. A court applies existing law to actual
situations. Like cases are decided alike, or the facts are found to be
of a different significance today. The law represents the sovereign
authority of the past over the present controversy, the continuity of a
dialectic process. The court recognizes the controversy as a social
concern and incorporates its resolutions into the body of the law. In
the process the social experience of the past is readapted to present
needs. The present decision will in turn serve as reference in future
cases.

The continuity of the formal structure used in this process is of a
different order from the continuous embodiment of one set of prejudices
in a set of laws. Considered in this formal sense, the system of
continuity is not designed to preserve the content of any existing set
of laws. It could even be used to preserve the continuous development of
a set of laws that fit an inverted society. There is nothing in most
constitutions that prevents the passage of laws setting upper limits to
productivity, privilege, professional monopoly, or efficiency. In
principle, the existing process of legislatures and courts can, with a
reversal of its focus, make and apply such law.

The adversary nature of the common law is equally important. The common
law is not formally concerned with what is ethically or technically
good. It is a tool for the understanding of mutualities that surface as
actual conflicts. It leaves to those directly concerned with a social
interest the task of insisting on the protection of their rights or the
pursuit of their claims to what they consider to be good. This works in
both legislation and jurisprudence; the decision is an act of balancing
conflicting interests in a way that is theoretically best for all.

It is obvious that during the last few generations this balance has been
wholly distorted in favor of a production-oriented society. But the
current misuse of the juristic structure is not a valid argument against
its use for precisely the opposite purpose. Interests wholly opposed to
such a society, free from the illusion that growth can overcome
injustice, and concerned with limits, can in principle use the same
tool. It is not, of course, sufficient that new types of plaintiffs
appear; it is equally true that the growth illusions of legislators must
fade, and that parties must be brought forward to represent their
interest in a reassessment of what are now taken as facts.

Not only the legislative but also the juridical process depends on the
presentation of conflicting social interests by interested parties for
settlement by disinterested tribunals. These tribunals operate in a
continuous way. Ideally, judges are ordinary, prudent men or women
indifferent to the substance of the issue they are expected to
reconcile, and experts in the application of process. In practice,
however, tribunals have also come to serve the concentration of power
and the increase of industrial production. Not only do judges, like
legislators, perceive that a conflict is best balanced when the balance
is tipped in favor of the over-all interest of corporations, but society
has also conditioned the plaintiffs always to demand more. A larger
share of institutional output constitutes the substance of a claim much
more frequently than protection against an institution which limits a
person\'s freedom to do something on his own. But this abuse of the
formal structure of common law does not corrupt the structure itself.

An objection is frequently raised when adversary procedures are
presented as a major tool to oppose industrial growth. Society already
heavily relies on such proceedings. Their extension to new areas is
continually recommended. Legal reformers tend to provide new weapons to
all classes of disadvantaged: blacks, Indians, women, employees,
cripples. As a result proceedings have become cumbersome, costly, and
only a few of the interested parties can come forward. Decisions are
often delayed until they have lost their relevance. Role-playing is
encouraged, and this often creates new tensions between artificial
groups. In going out of the way to create structures so that adversary
processes may he used, decisions are made scarce.

This objection is very relevant if it opposes the proliferation of
adversary proceedings in the resolution of conflicts between people. But
neither the conflict between individuals nor the competition between
groups is the substance of our issue. The fundamental conflict in
society is about acts, facts, and things on which people are opposed to
corporations. Formal adversary procedure is the paradigmatic tool for
citizens to oppose the threat of industry to their basic liberties. This
is the process suited to the opposition of two partners whom the law has
rendered equal, in which the aggrieved party is interested in disputing
one fact or a relevant law or principle, and considers this issue the
only continuing interest he has in common with the other. A group of
citizens interested in retooling society is not concerned with
negotiations or mediation but with direct opposition to the industrial
mode of production and its undue expansion in a specific instance.

Like ordinary English, formal process is a convivial tool. Undoubtedly,
industrial institutions have entrenched themselves by corrupting the
habitual use of these tools by individuals and communities. Yet language
and formal process remain intrinsically distinct from the purposes for
which they are used. People can defend language and legal procedure as
inherently theirs; they can find in their inalienable natures the
confidence to use their unchanged formal structures to express contents
entirely opposed to those for which they were taught to use them in
their childhood. The formal structure of law still offers a process by
which the ordinary citizen can present to society his own practical
interest in conflict with the interest of a corporation, even when this
corporation is an agency of the state, and even if this interest favors
or opposes any functioning or proposed program.

It would be absurd to expect that professionals who are experts in the
corrupt use of language or of law could suddenly think clearly and
proceed rightly. Educators who are aware of thebreakdown of schools
usually engage in a frantic search for advice that permits them to teach
more people about more things. Doctors tend to believe that at least
some of the generally useful knowledge they hold cannot be expressed
outside their hieratic code. It is useless to expect the American
Medical Association, the National Education Association, or the
association of traffic engineers to explain in ordinary language the
professional gangsterism of their colleagues. It would be equally
fruitless to count on present legislators, lawyers, and judges to
recognize the independence of what is right from the preconceived good,
which for them is identical with the higher output of goods by
corporations. They are trained to adjust any conflict in favor of
over-all industrial growth. But just as an exceptional doctor here and
there helps people live responsibly, to suffer as a matter of fact, and
to face death, so an exceptional lawyer can help people use the formal
structure of the law to represent their interest in a convivial society.
Even though he will probably be frustrated in his claims, he can use the
courtroom drama to make his point.

Legal procedure applied to a society filled by optimism about its
expanding tools has turned into the most effective instrument for the
social control of people at the service of these tools. To advance an
industrial society, the law is systematically used for social
engineering and the continually more complete and effective elimination
of waste and friction in the mega-machine. Anglo-American industry has
consistently been more successful, in the long run, than the industry of
socialist countries. Law is more effective than centralized planning in
bringing and keeping people under the rule of machines. Yet the current
misuse of the juristic structure is not a valid argument against its use
for precisely the opposite purpose, though it suggests caution against
overly optimistic hopes for such an inverted use.

Most of the present laws and present legislators, most of the present
courts and their decisions, most of the claimants andtheir demands are
deeply corrupted by an overarching industrial consensus: that more is
better, and that corporations serve the public interest better than men.
But this entrenched consensus does not invalidate my thesis that any
revolution which neglects the use of formal legal and political
procedures will fail. Only an active majority in which all individuals
and groups insist for their own reasons on their own rights, and whose
members share the same convivial procedure, can recover the rights of
men against corporations.

The use of procedure for the purpose of hampering, stopping, and
inverting our major institutions will appear to their managers and
addicts as a misuse of the law and as subversion of the only order which
they recognize. The use of due convivial procedure appears corrupt and
criminal to the bureaucrat, even one who calls himself a judge.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-16 .calibre4}
## V. Political Inversion {#v.-political-inversion .calibre1}

If within the very near future man cannot set limits to the interference
of his tools with the environment and practice effective birth control,
the next generations will experience the gruesome apocalypse predicted
by many ecologists. Faced with these impending disasters, society can
stand in wait of survival within limits set and enforced by bureaucratic
dictatorship. Or it can engage in a political process by the use of
legal and political procedures. Ideologically biased interpretations of
the past have made the recognition of political process increasingly
difficult. Liberty has been interpreted as a right to power tools, a
right claimed without reasonable limitation by individuals and private
associations in capitalist countries and by the state in socialist
societies. Recovery becomes feasible only if the fundamental structure
of Western societies is clearly recognized and reclaimed. Analogous
efforts to recover entirely different formal structures will become
necessary when former political or cultural colonies shake off the
Western mode of production.

The bureaucratic management of human survival is unacceptable on both
ethical and political grounds. It would also be as futile as former
attempts at mass therapy. This does not, of course, mean that a majority
might not at first submit to it. People could be so frightened by the
increasing evidence of growing population and dwindling resources that
they would voluntarily put their destiny into the hands of Big Brothers.
Technocratic caretakers could be mandated to set limits on growth in
every dimension, and to set them just at the point beyond which further
production would mean utter destruction. Such a kakotopia could maintain
the industrial age at the highest endurable level of output.

Man would live in a plastic bubble that would protect his survival and
make it increasingly worthless. Since man\'s tolerance would become the
most serious limitation to growth, the alchemist\'s endeavor would be
renewed in the attempt to produce a monstrous type of man fit to live
among reason\'s dreams. A major function of engineering would become the
psychogenetic tooling of man himself as a condition for further growth.
People would be confined from birth to death in a world-wide
schoolhouse, treated in a world-wide hospital, surrounded by television
screens, and the man-made environment would be distinguishable in name
only from a world-wide prison.

The alternative to managerial fascism is a political process by which
people decide how much of any scarce resource is the most any member of
society can claim; a process in which they agree to keep limits
relatively stationary over a long time, and by which they set a premium
on the constant search for new ways to have an ever larger percentage of
the population join in doing ever more with ever less. Such a political
choice of a frugal society remains a pious dream unless it can be shown
that it is not only necessary but also possible: (1) to define concrete
procedures by which more people are enlightened about the nature of our
present crisis and will come to understand that limits are necessary and
a convivial life style desirable; (2) to bring the largest number of
people into now suppressed organizations which claim their right to a
frugal life style and keep them satisfied and therefore committed to
convivial life; and (3) to discover and revalue the political or legal
tools that are accepted within a society and learn how to use them to
establish and protect convivial life where it emerges. Such procedures
may sound idealistic at the present moment. This is not proof that they
cannot become effective as the present crisis deepens.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-17 .calibre4}
### 1. Myths and Majorities {#myths-and-majorities .calibre6}

The ultimate obstacle to the restructuring of society is not the lack of
information about which limits are needed, nor the lack of people who
would accept them if they became inevitable, but the power of political
myths.

Almost everyone in rich societies is a destructive consumer. Almost
everyone is, in some way, engaged in aggression against the milieu.
Destructive consumers constitute a numerical majority. Myth transforms
them into a political one. Numerical majorities come to form a mythical
voting bloc on a nonexistent issue; \"they\" are invoked as the
unbeatable guardians of vested interest in growth. This mythical
majority paralyzes political action. At closer inspection, \"they\" are
a number of reasonable individuals. One is an ecologist who takes a jet
plane to a conference on protecting the environment from further
pollution. Another is an economist who knows that growing efficiency
renders work increasingly scarce; he tries to create new sources of
employment. Neither of them has the same interests as the slum-dweller
in Detroit who purchases his color TV on time. The three belong no more
to a voting bloc that will defend growth than clerks, repairmen, and
salesmen are somehow politically homogenized because each fears for his
job, needs a car, and wants medicine for his children.

There can be no such thing as a majority opposed to an issue that has
not arisen. A majority agitating for limits to growth is as ludicrous a
concept as one demanding growth at all cost. Majorities are not created
by shared ideologies. They develop out of enlightened self-interest. The
most that even the best of ideologies can do is interpret this interest.
The stance each man or woman takes when a social problem becomes an
overwhelming threat depends on two factors: the first is how a
smoldering conflict erupts into a political issue demanding attention
and partisan action; the second is the existence of new élites which can
provide an interpretative framework for new-and hitherto
unexpected-alignments of interest.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-18 .calibre4}
### 2. From Breakdown to Chaos {#from-breakdown-to-chaos .calibre6}

I can only conjecture on how the breakdown of industrial society will
ultimately become a critical issue. But I can make rather firm
statements about the qualifications for providing guidance within the
coming crisis. I believe that growth will grind to a halt. The total
collapse of the industrial monopoly on production will be the result of
synergy in the failure of themultiple systems that fed its expansion.
This expansion is maintained by the illusion that careful systems
engineering can stabilize and harmonize present growth, while in fact it
pushes all institutions simultaneously toward their second watershed.
Almost overnight people will lose confidence not only in the major
institutions but also in the miracle prescriptions of the would-be
crisis managers. The ability of present institutions to define values
such as education, health, welfare, transportation, or news will
suddenly be extinguished because it will be recognized as an illusion.

This crisis may be triggered by an unforeseen event, as the Great
Depression was touched off by the Wall Street Crash. Some fortuitous
coincidence will render publicly obvious the structural contradictions
between stated purposes and effective results in our major institutions.
People will suddenly find obvious what is now evident to only a few:
that the organization of the entire economy toward the \"better\" life
has become the major enemy of the good life. Like other widely shared
insights, this one will have the potential of turning public imagination
inside out. Large institutions can quite suddenly lose their
respectability, their legitimacy, and their reputation for serving the
public good. It happened to the Roman Church in the Reformation, to
Royalty in the Revolution. The unthinkable became obvious overnight:

*that people could and would behead their rulers.*

Sudden change is of a different order than feedback or evolution.
Observe the whirlpools below a waterfall. For many seasons the eddies
stay in the same place no matter whether the water is high or low. Then,
suddenly, one more stone falls into the basin, the entire array changes,
and the old can never be reconstructed. People who invoke the specter of
a hopelessly growth-oriented majority seem incapable of envisaging
political behavior in a crash. Business ceases to be as usual when the
populace loses confidence in industrial productivity, and not just in
paper currency.

It is still possible to face the breakdown of each of our various
systems in a separate perspective. No remedy seems to work, but we can
still find resources to support every remedy proposed. Governments think
they can deal with the breakdown of utilities, the disruption of the
educational system, intolerable transportation, the chaos of the
judicial process, the violent disaffection of the young. Each is dealt
with as a separate phenomenon, each is explained by a different report,
each calls for a new tax and a new program. Squabbles about alternative
remedies give credibility to both: free schools vs. public schools
double the demand for education; satellite cities vs. monorails for
commuters make the growth of cities seem inexorable; higher professional
standards in medicine vs. more paramedical professions further
aggrandize the health professions. Since each of the proposed remedies
appeals to some, the usual solution is an attempt to try both. The
result is a further effort to make the pie grow, and to forget that it
is pie in the sky.

The Coolidge approach to the warnings of the Depression is now applied
to the signs of a much more radical crisis. General systems analysis is
trusted to relate the institutional breakdowns to each other, which only
leads to more planning, centralization, and bureaucracy in order to
achieve control over population, affluence, and inefficient industry.
Unemployment in the manufacturing sector is supposed to be compensated
for by growth in the output of decisions, controls, and therapies.
Fascination with industry and mechanical production still blinds people
to the possibility of a postindustrial society in which several distinct
modes of production would complement each other. Trying to bring about
an era which is both hyperindustrial and ecologically feasible, they
accelerate the breakdown of several other non-physical and equally
fundamental dimensions of the balance of life.

It would be a mere exercise in geomancy to predict which series of
events will play the role of the Wall Street Crash as catalyst of the
first crisis of, not just in, industrial society. But it would be folly
not to expect in the very near future an event whose effects will jam
the growth of tools. When this happens, the noise that accompanies the
crash will distract attention from seeing it in proper perspective.

We still have a chance to understand the causes of the coming crisis,
and to prepare for it. If we are to anticipate its effects, we must
investigate how sudden change can bring about the emergence into power
of previously submerged social groups. It is not calamity as such that
creates these groups; it is much less calamity that brings about their
emergence; but calamity weakens the prevailing powers which have
excluded the submerged from participation in the social process. It is
the power of surprise that weakens control, that shakes up the
established controllers, and brings to the top those people who have not
lost their bearings.

When controls are weakened, those accustomed to control must seek new
allies. In the weakened economic-industrial state of the Great
Depression, the establishment could not do without organized labor, so
organized labor got its share of power within the structure. In the
weakened labor market during the Second World War, industry could not do
without black labor. The blacks began to assert their power.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-19 .calibre4}
### 3. Insight into Crisis {#insight-into-crisis .calibre6}

Forces tending to limit production are already at work within society.
Public, counterfoil research can significantly help these individuals
become more cohesive and self-conscious in their indictment of growth
they consider destructive. We can anticipate that their voices will
acquire new resonance when the crisis of overproductive society becomes
acute. They form no constituency, but they are spokesmen for a majority
of which everyone is a potential member. The more unexpectedly the
crisis comes, the more suddenly their velleities can turn into a
program. But the ability to direct events at that moment depends on how
well these minorities grasp the profound nature of the crisis, and know
how to state it in effective language: to declare what they want, what
they can do, and what they do not need. The critical use of ordinary
language is the first pivot in a political inversion. A second pivot is
needed.

Further growth must lead to a multiple catastrophe. That people would
accept multiple limits to growth without catastrophe seems highly
improbable. The inevitable catastrophic event could be either a crisis
in civilization or its end: end by annihilation or end in B. F.
Skinner\'s world-wide concentration camp run by a T. E. Frazier. The
foreseeable catastrophe will be a true crisis\--that is, the occasion
for a choice\--only if at the moment it strikes the necessary social
demands can be effectively expressed. They must be represented by people
who can demonstrate that the breakdown of the current industrial
illusion is for them a condition for choosing an effective and convivial
mode of production. The preparation of such groups is the key task of
new politics at the present moment.

I have already argued that these groups must be prepared to provide a
logically coherent analysis of the catastrophic event and to communicate
it in ordinary language. I have argued that they must be prepared to
propose the necessity for a bounded society in practical terms that have
general appeal. Sacrifice must be shown as the inevitable price for
different groups of people to get what they want-or at least to be
liberated from what has become intolerable. But beyond using words to
describe the limits as both necessary and appealing, the leadership of
these groups must be prepared to use a social tool that is fit to ordain
what is good enough for all. It must be a tool which, like language, is
respected by all; a tool which, like language, does not lose its power
because of the purpose to which it has been put in recent history; a
tool which, like language, possesses a fundamental structure that misuse
cannot totally corrupt.

I have already argued that such a tool can only be the formal structure
of politics and law. At the moment of the crash which is industrial
rather than simply financial, the transformation of catastrophe into
crisis depends on the confidence an emerging group of clear-thinking and
feeling people can inspire in their peers. They must then argue that the
transition to a convivial society can be, and must be, the result of
conscious use of disciplined procedure that recognizes the legitimacy of
conflicting interests, the historical precedent out of which the
conflict arose, and the necessity of abiding by the decision of peers.
Convivially used procedure guarantees that an institutional revolution
will remain a tool whose goals emerge as they are enacted; the conscious
use of procedure in a continually antibureaucratic sense is the only
possible protection against the revolution itself becoming an
institution. Whether the application of this procedure to the inversion
of all major institutions of society is then called a cultural
revolution, or the recuperation of the formal structure of law, or
participatory socialism or a return to the spirit of the Fueros de
Espa-a, is merely a matter of labeling.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-20 .calibre4}
### 4. Sudden Change {#sudden-change .calibre6}

When I speak about emerging interest groups and their preparation, I am
not speaking of action groups, or of a church, or of new kinds of
experts. I am above all not speaking about one political party which
could assume power at a moment of crisis. Management of the crisis would
make catastrophe irreversible. A well-knit, well-trained party can
establish its power at the moment of a crisis in which the choice to be
made is one within an over-all system. Such was the Great Depression.
What was at issue was control over the tools of production. Such were
the events which brought the Marxists to power in Eastern Europe. But
the crisis I have described as imminent is not a crisis within
industrial society, but a crisis of the industrial mode of production
itself. The crisis I have described confronts people with a choice
between convivial tools and being crushed by machines. The only response
to this crisis is a full recognition of its depth and an acceptance of
inevitable self-limitations. The more varied the perspectives from which
this insight is shared by interest groups and the more disparate the
interests that may be protected only by a reduction of power within
society, the greater the probability that the inevitable will be
recognized as such.

I am also not speaking about a majority opposed to growth on some
abstract principles. Such a majority is unfeasible. A well-organized
élite, vocally promulgating an antigrowth orthodoxy, is indeed
conceivable. It is probably now forming. But such a programmatic
antigrowth élite would be highly undesirable. By pushing people to
accept limits to industrial output without questioning the basic
industrial structure of modern society, it would inevitably provide more
power to the growth-optimizing bureaucrats and become their pawn. One of
the first results of transition toward a stable-state industrial economy
would be the development of a labor-intensive, highly disciplined, and
growing subsector of production that would control people by giving them
jobs. Such a stabilized production of highly rationalizedand
standardized goods and services would be\--if this were possible-even
further away from convivial production than the industrial-growth
society we have now.

The proponents of a bounded society have no need to put together some
kind of majority. A voting majority in a democracy is not motivated by
the explicit commitment of all its members to some specific ideology or
to some particular value. A voting majority in favor of a specific
institutional limitation would have to be composed of very disparate
elements: those seriously aggrieved by some aspect of overproduction,
those who do not profit from it, and those who may have objections to
the over-all organization of society\--but not directly to the specific
limit being set. How this functions in times of normal politics can be
well illustrated by the example of school. Some people are childless and
resent the school tax. Others feel they are taxed more heavily and
served less well than their peers in another district. Others object to
tax support of schools since they want to send their children to
parochial schools. Others object to compulsory schooling as such: some
because it does harm to the young and others because it fosters
discrimination. All these people could form a voting majority, but not a
party or a sect. Under present circumstances they might succeed in
cutting school down to size, but thereby they would merely assure its
more legitimate survival. A majority vote to limit one major institution
tends to be conservative when business is as usual.

But a majority can have the contrary effect in a crisis which affects
society on a deeper level. The joint arrival of several institutions at
their second watershed is the beginning of such a crisis. The crash that
will follow must make it clear that industrial society as such\--and not
just its separate institutions\--has outgrown the range of its
effectiveness.

The nation-state has become so powerful that it cannot per-form its
stated functions. Just as General Vo Nguyen Giap could use the U.S.
military machine to win his war, so the multinational corporations and
professions can now use the lawand the two-party system to establish
their empire. But while democracy in the United States can survive a
victory by Giap, it cannot survive one by ITT and its like. As a total
crisis approaches, it becomes more obvious that the nation-state has
grown into the holding corporation for a multiplicity of self-serving
tools, and the political party into an instrument to organize
stockholders for the occasional election of boards and presidents. In
this situation, parties support each voter\'s right to claim higher
levels of individual consumption and to enforce thereby higher levels of
industrial consumption. People can claim cars, but the appropriation of
society\'s over-all resources by a transportation system which
determines that cars are useful is left to the decision of experts. Such
parties support a state whose only purpose is the support of an
increasing GNP, and they are obviously useless at the moment of a
general crash.

When business is normal, the procedural opposition between corporations
and clients usually heightens the legitimacy of the latter\'s
dependence. But at the moment of a structural crisis not even the
voluntary reduction of overefficiency on the part of major institutions
will keep any of them functioning. A general crisis opens the way t6
social reconstruction. The loss of legitimacy of the state as a holding
corporation does not destroy, but reasserts, the need for constitutional
procedure. The loss of confidence in parties that have become
stockholders\' factions brings Out the importance of adversary
procedures in politics. A loss of credibility of opposing claims for
more individual consumption only highlights the importance of the use of
adversary procedures when the issue to be decided upon is the
reconciliation of opposing sets of society-wide limitations. The same
general crisis that could easily lead to one-man rule, expert
government, and ideological orthodoxy is also the great opportunity to
reconstruct a political process in which all participate.

The structures of political and legal procedures are integral to one
another. Both shape and express the structure of freedom in history. If
this is recognized, the framework of due procedure can be used as the
most dramatic, symbolic, and convivial tool in the political area. The
appeal to law remains powerful even where society makes access to legal
machinery a privilege, or where it systematically denies justice, or
where it cloaks despotism in the mantle of show tribunals. Even when he
who upholds the formal structure of ordinary language and procedure
earns the scorn, ridicule, and persecution of his fellow
revolutionaries, the appeal of an individual to the formal structure
embedded in a people\'s history remains the most powerful instrument to
say the truth and denounce the cancerous domination of the industrial
dominance over production as the ultimate form of idolatry. I feel
almost unbearable anguish when faced by the fact that only the word
recovered from history should be left to us as the power for stemming
disaster. Yet only the word in its weakness can associate the majority
of people in the revolutionary inversion of inevitable violence into
convivial reconstruction.

Reconstruction for poor countries means adopting a set of negative
design criteria within which their tools are kept, in order to advance
directly into a postindustrial era of conviviality. The limits to choose
are of the same order as those which hyperindustrialized countries will
have to adopt for the sake of survival and at the cost of their vested
interest. Suchsocial reconstruction cannot be supported by a
high-powered army, both because the maintenance of such an army would
foil reconstruction and because no such army would be powerful enough.
Defense of conviviality is possible only if undertaken by the people
with tools they control. Imperialist mercenaries can poison or maim but
never conquer a people who have chosen to set boundaries to their tools
for the sake of conviviality.
:::
