---
title: "The Zen Teaching of Huang Po: On the Transmission of Mind"
author: "Huang Po (Huangbo Xiyun)"
translator: "John Blofeld"
voice: "Huangbo"
voice_role: "Chan/Zen Lineage - Mind is Buddha"
tradition: "Chan Buddhism"
period: "Tang Dynasty (9th Century)"
region: "China"
genre: "Chan/Zen Teaching"
form: "Recorded Sayings"
mode: "Direct Pointing"
work_type: "Primary Source"
source_type: "Complete Work"
source_quality: "Classic Translation"
chamber_integration: "June 2025"
significance: "Essential Chan text on One Mind doctrine and sudden enlightenment"
tags:
  - chan
  - zen
  - one-mind
  - sudden-enlightenment
  - no-mind
  - transmission
  - buddhist-philosophy
  - tang-dynasty
related_voices:
  - Bodhidharma
  - Huineng
  - Linji Yixuan
  - Mazu Daoyi
chamber_position: "Fourth Ring - Ancestors & Eternals - The Chan/Zen Lineage"
amphitheatre_status: "Now source-aware (previously voice only)"
acquisition_priority: "Phase 1 Eastern philosophy completion"
status: "source-aware"
---

# The Zen Teaching of Huang Po: On the Transmission of Mind

*Huang Po (Huangbo Xiyun)*  
*Translated by John Blofeld*

---

*Chamber Note: Transforms Huangbo from amphitheatre voice to full source-aware capacity, adding his essential Chan teaching on "mind is Buddha" and the doctrine of One Mind. Critical for authentic Chan/Zen lineage in Chamber protocols.**Printed in the United States of America*

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 59-12215\
ebook ISBN-13: 978-0-8021-9589-0

Grove Press\
an imprint of Grove/Atlantic, Inc.\
841 Broadway\
New York, NY 10003

Distributed by Publishers Group West

[www.groveatlantic.com](http://www.groveatlantic.com){.nounder}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-4 .calibre}
## []{#calibre_link-537 .calibre3}**CONTENTS** {#calibre_link-536 .h1}

[Translator's Introduction](#calibre_link-5){.nounder}

[P'ei Hsiu's Preface](#calibre_link-6){.nounder}

[[PART ONE]{.small}\
The Ch[ü]{.ent}n Chou Record (Sermons and
Dialogues)](#calibre_link-7){.nounder}

[[PART TWO]{.small}\
The Wan Ling Record (Dialogues, Sermons and
Anecdotes)](#calibre_link-8){.nounder}

[Index](#calibre_link-9){.nounder}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-10 .calibre}
## []{#calibre_link-538 .calibre3}[]{#calibre_link-274 .calibre3}**TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION** {#calibre_link-5 .h1}

### **T[HE]{.small} T[EXT]{.small}** {#the-text .h2}

The present volume is a complete translation of the *Huang Po Ch'uan
Hsin Fa Yao*, a ninth-century Chinese Buddhist text, much of which now
appears in English for the first time. It contains a concise account of
the sublime teachings of a great Master of the Dhy[ā]{.ent}na Sect, to
which, in accordance with current Western practice, I shall henceforth
refer by its Japanese name of Zen. Zen is often regarded as a uniquely
Far Eastern development of Buddhism, but Zen followers claim that their
Doctrine stems directly from Gautama Buddha himself. This text, which is
one of the principle Zen works, follows closely the teachings proclaimed
in the *Diamond S[ū]{.ent}tra* or *Jewel of Transcendental Wisdom*,
which has been ably translated by Arnold Price and published by the
Buddhist Society, London. It is also close in spirit to *The
S[ū]{.ent}tra of Wei Lang (Hui Nêng*), another of the Buddhist Society's
publications. But I have been deeply struck by the astonishing
similarity to our text in spirit and terminology of the not-so-Far
Eastern, eighth-century *Tibetan Book of the Great Liberation*, edited
by Evans-Wentz and published by the Oxford University Press. In my
opinion, these four books are among the most brilliant expositions of
the highest Wisdom which have so far appeared in our language; and, of
them all, the present text []{#calibre_link-285}and the *Tibetan Book of
the Great Liberation* present the Doctrine in a form best suited to the
needs of Western readers.

### **T[HE]{.small} P[LACE]{.small} [OF]{.small} T[HIS]{.small} T[EXT IN]{.small} B[UDDHISM]{.small}** {#the-place-of-this-text-in-buddhism .h2}

Zen is a branch of the great Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na School prevailing
in China and the more northerly countries of Eastern Asia, so its
teachings are not accepted as orthodox Buddhism by followers of
H[ī]{.ent}nay[ā]{.ent}na or the Southern School. However, Western
scholars are no longer unanimous in regarding H[ī]{.ent}nay[ā]{.ent}na
as being the sole guardian of the truths proclaimed by Buddhism's
illustrious Founder, despite the early date of
H[ī]{.ent}nay[ā]{.ent}na's principal texts. The division into two
schools took place some two thousand years ago in Northern India, since
when Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}nists have accepted the teachings of the
sister school as [PART]{.small} of the true Doctrine; though the latter,
with less tolerance, repudiates whatever doctrines are specifically
Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na. Zen, which appeared in the open much later,
submits that, while all Buddhist sects present the truth in varying
degrees, Zen alone preserves the very highest teachings of
all---teachings based on a mysterious transmission of Mind which took
place between Gautama Buddha and Mah[ā]{.ent}k[ā]{.ent}syapa, the only
one of his disciples capable of receiving this transmission. Opinions as
to the truth of this story naturally vary, but Masters like Huang Po
obviously speak from some deep inner experience. He and his followers
were concerned solely with a direct perception of truth and cannot have
been even faintly interested in arguments about the historical orthodoxy
of their beliefs. The great mystics of []{#calibre_link-278}the world,
such as Plotinus and Ekhart, who have plumbed the depths of
consciousness and come face to face with the Inner Light, the
all-pervading Silence, are so close to being unanimous concerning their
experience of Reality that I, personally, am left in no doubt as to the
truth of their accounts. Huang Po, in his more nearly everyday language,
is clearly describing the same experience as theirs, and I assume that
Gautama Buddha's mystical Enlightenment beneath the Bo Tree did not
differ from theirs, unless [PERHAPS]{.small} in intensity and in its
utter completeness. Could one suppose otherwise, one would have to
accept several forms of absolute truth! Or else one would be driven to
believe that some or all of these Masters were lost in clouds of
self-deception. So, however slender the evidence for Zen's claim to have
been founded by Gautama Buddha himself, I do not for one moment doubt
that Huang Po was expressing in his own way the same experience of
Eternal Truth which Gautama Buddha and others, Buddhist and
non-Buddhist, have expressed in theirs. Moreover, since first embarking
on the translation of this text, I have been astonished by its very
close similarity to the teaching contained in the *Tibetan Book of the
Great Liberation* which is attributed to the Lotus-Born Padma Sambhava.
Since both are approximately of the same date, I suppose they
[COULD]{.small} have derived from the same literary or oral source, but
it seems much more probable that the two texts embody two different
people's intimate perceptions of eternal truth. However, there are many
who regard things otherwise and, in any case, it is proper for me to
give some account of the traditional origin of Zen and of the modern
theories concerning it.

[]{#calibre_link-309}

### **T[HE]{.small} O[RIGIN]{.small}, G[ROWTH AND]{.small} E[XPANSION OF]{.small} Z[EN]{.small} (D[HY[ĀNA]{.ent}]{.small}) B[UDDHISM]{.small}** {#the-origin-growth-and-expansion-of-zen-dhyāna-buddhism .h2}

#### ***Traditional Origin*** {#traditional-origin .h3}

Gautama Buddha is said to have modified the exposition of his Doctrine
to suit the different capacities of his various disciples and of those
others who listened to his discourses. Once, at the end of a sermon, he
picked a flower and held it up for the assembled monks to see.
Mah[ā]{.ent}k[ā]{.ent}syapa, who alone understood the profound meaning
of this gesture, responded with a smile. Later the Buddha called this
disciple to him in private and mystically transmitted to him the
wordless doctrine, or 'with Mind transmitted Mind'.
Mah[ā]{.ent}k[ā]{.ent}syapa, in his turn, mystically transmitted the
Doctrine to [Ā]{.ent}nanda, who thus became second in the line of
twenty-eight Indian Patriarchs. The last of these was Bodhidharma, who
travelled to China in the sixth century [A.D]{.small}. Here he became
the First of the Chinese Patriarchs, who continued the transmission down
to Hui Nêng (Wei Lang), the Sixth and last. Divisions within the sect
followed and no more Patriarchs were created.

#### ***Theories Concerning the Origin and Development of the Sect*** {#theories-concerning-the-origin-and-development-of-the-sect .h3}

Buddhism, officially introduced into China in [A.D.]{.small}
[6I]{.small}, probably reached the coast of Shantung as early as the
first or second century [B.C.]{.small} H[ī]{.ent}nay[ā]{.ent}na did not
survive there for long, but Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na flourished
exceedingly; various sects of Indian origin were developed and new sects
created. One of the latest sects to appear was Zen, which rapidly
attained great influence. Though an Indian origin was
[]{#calibre_link-245}claimed for it, many people have doubted the truth
of this; and some have gone so far as to doubt the existence of
Bodhidharma himself. If, as I prefer to think, there was really such a
person, he probably came to China from South India by way of Canton and
visited the rulers of two Chinese states---for China was then divided,
as so often in her long history.

Professor Daisetz Suzuki accepts the existence of Bodhidharma, but
suggests that his teachings were derived from the
La[ṅ]{.ent}k[ā]{.ent}vat[ā]{.ent}ra S[ū]{.ent}tra, which appears to
contain the germs of the wordless doctrine. Dr. Hu Shih accepts neither
the historical reality of Bodhidharma nor the authenticity of the
earlier Zen works, regarding even the famous S[ū]{.ent}tra of Hui Nêng
(Wei Lang), the Sixth Patriarch, as a forgery of later date. To support
his contentions, he adduces several eighth-century manuscripts
discovered fairly recently in the Tun Huang caves, which differ both in
name and substance from the traditionally accepted works of the Zen
Masters. Dr. Hu Shih even describes Zen as a Chinese revolt against
Buddhism---regarded as an alien doctrine from India.

I do not see that Zen sets itself up in opposition to other forms of
Buddhism, including those whose Indian origin is more certain; for all
sects regard dhy[ā]{.ent}na-practice as an important means towards
Enlightenment, i.e. the practice of turning the mind towards and
striving to pierce the veils of sensory perception and conceptual
thought in order to arrive at an intuitive perception of reality. Zen
does, however, emphasize this to the exclusion or near-exclusion of much
else, and it also differs from most other sects in regarding
Enlightenment as a process which finally occurs in less time than it
takes to blink an eye. Thus it is a form of
[]{#calibre_link-232}Buddhism suited to those who prefer inward
contemplation to the study of scriptures or to the performance of good
works. Yet Zen is not unique in giving special emphasis to one
particular aspect of the whole doctrine---if no one did that, there
would be no sects. Moreover, Right Meditation
[(SAMM[Ā]{.ent}SAM[Ā]{.ent}DHI)]{.small} forms the final step of the
Noble Eightfold Path, which is accepted as the very foundation of
Buddhism by Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}nists and H[ī]{.ent}nay[ā]{.ent}nists
alike---and dhy[ā]{.ent}na-practice is aimed precisely at accomplishing
that.

Hence, though there is very little evidence to prove or disprove the
Indian origin of Zen, it does not seem to me especially unlikely that
Bodhidharma did in fact arrive in China, bringing with him a doctrine of
great antiquity inherited from his own teachers, a doctrine which infers
that the seven preceding steps of the Noble Eightfold Path are to be
regarded as preparation for the Eighth. And, if the Eighth is not held
to be the outcome of the other Seven, it is difficult to understand why
terms like 'Path' and 'steps' were employed.

The late Venerable T'ai Hs[ü]{.ent}, exemplifying a proper Buddhist
attitude of broad tolerance, once described the various sects as so many
beads strung on a single rosary. Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na Buddhists are
encouraged to think for themselves and are free to choose whichever path
best suits their individual requirements; the sectarian bitterness of
the West is unknown in China. As the Chinese, though seldom puritanical,
have generally been an abstemious people, sects chiefly emphasizing the
strict observance of moral precepts---as does
H[ī]{.ent}nay[ā]{.ent}na---have seldom appealed to them, which may be
one of the main reasons why the Southern School of Buddhism failed to
take permanent root in China. Furthermore, Chinese intellectuals have
since []{#calibre_link-251}ancient times inclined to mild scepticism; to
these people, Zen's austere 'simplicity' and virtual lack of ritualism
must have made a strong appeal. In another way, too, the ground in China
had been well prepared for Zen. On the one hand, centuries of
Confucianism had predisposed scholars against the fine-spun metaphysical
speculation in which Indian Buddhists have indulged with so much
enthusiasm; on the other, the teaching of Lao Tzû, Chuang Tzû, the
Taoist sages, had to a great extent anticipated Zen quietism and
prepared the Chinese mind for the reception of a doctrine in many ways
strikingly similar to their own. (For somewhat similar reasons, Zen has
begun to appeal to those people in the West who are torn between the
modern tradition of scepticism and the need for a profound doctrine
which will give meaning to their existence.)

So it may be that the historical authenticity of Zen is of relatively
little importance, except to a limited number of scholars. It will
certainly not seem of much importance to those who see in the teachings
of the Zen Masters a brilliant reflection of some valid inner
realization of Truth. Zen has long flourished in China and Japan and is
now beginning to develop in the West, because those who have put its
teachings to a prolonged practical test have discovered that they
satisfy certain deep spiritual needs.

#### ***The Zen Master Huang Po*** {#the-zen-master-huang-po .h3}

When Hui Nêng (Wei Lang), the Sixth Patriarch, received the transmission
from Mind to Mind, the Zen Sect had already split into two branches. The
Northern Branch, which taught that the process of Enlightenment is
gradual, flourished for a while under imperial patronage, but did not
long survive. Meanwhile, the Southern Branch, with
[]{#calibre_link-252}its doctrine of Sudden Enlightenment, continued to
expand and, later, to subdivide. The most important of the Sixth
Patriarch's successors was Ma Tsu (Tao I) who died in [A.D.]{.small}
788. Huang Po, variously regarded as one or two generations junior to
him, seems to have died as late as 850, after transmitting the Wordless
Doctrine to I Hs[ü]{.ent}an, the founder of the great Lin Chi (Rinzai)
Sect which still continues in China and flourishes widely in Japan. So
Huang Po is in some sense regarded as the founder of this great Branch.
Like all Chinese monks, he had several names, being known in his
lifetime as Master Hsi Y[ü]{.ent}n and as Master T'uan Chi; his
posthumous name is taken from that of Mount Huang Po where he resided
for many years. In Japan he is generally known as Obaku, which is the
Japanese way of pronouncing the Chinese characters for Huang Po.

#### ***The Doctrine of Zen*** {#the-doctrine-of-zen .h3}

Zen is already a familiar doctrine to many Western people, thanks to the
comprehensive and illuminating works of Dr. Daisetz Tairo Suzuki, and to
books by Western scholars, such as Mr. Christmas Humphreys' delightful
*Zen Buddhism.* At first sight Zen works must seem so paradoxical as to
bewilder the reader. On one page we are told that everything is
indivisibly one Mind, on another that the moon is very much a moon and a
tree indubitably a tree. Yet it is clear that this is not paradox for
the sake of entertainment, for there are several million people who
regard Zen as the most serious thing in life.

All Buddhists take Gautama Buddha's Enlightenment as their starting
point and endeavour to attain to that transcendental knowledge that will
bring them face to face with []{#calibre_link-284}Reality, thereby
delivering them from rebirth into the space-time realm forever. Zen
followers go further. They are not content to pursue Enlightenment
through aeons of varied existences inevitably bound up with pain and
ignorance, approaching with infinite slowness the Supreme Experience
which Christian mystics have described as 'union with the Godhead'. They
believe in the possibility of attaining Full Enlightenment both here and
now through determined efforts to rise beyond conceptual thought and to
grasp that Intuitive Knowledge which is the central fact of
Enlightenment. Furthermore, they insist that the experience is both
sudden and complete. While the striving may require years, the reward
manifests itself in a flash. But to attain this reward, the practice of
virtue and dispassion is insufficient. It is necessary to rise above
such relative concepts as good and evil, sought and found, Enlightened
and unenlightened, and all the rest.

To make this point clearer, let us consider some Christian ideas of God.
God is regarded as the First Principle, uncaused and unbegat, which
logically implies perfection; such a being cannot be discovered through
the relativity of time and space. Then comes the concept 'God is good'
which, as Christian mystics have pointed out, detracts from His
perfection; for to be good implies not being evil---a limitation which
inevitably destroys the unity and wholeness inseparable from perfection.
This, of course, is not intended to imply that 'God is evil', or that
'God is both good and evil'. To a mystic, He is none of these things,
for He transcends them all. Again, the idea of God as the creator of the
universe suggests a dualism, a distinction between creator and created.
This, if valid, places God on []{#calibre_link-302}a lower level than
perfection, for there can be neither unity nor wholeness where A
excludes B or B excludes A.

Zen followers (who have much in common with mystics of other faiths) do
not use the term 'God', being wary of its dualistic and anthropomorphic
implications. They prefer to talk of 'the Absolute' or 'the One Mind',
for which they employ many synonyms according to the aspect to be
emphasized in relation to something finite. Thus, the word 'Buddha' is
used as a synonym for the Absolute as well as in the sense of Gautama,
the Enlightened One, for it is held that the two are identical. A
Buddha's Enlightenment denotes an intuitive realization of his unity
with the Absolute from which, after the death of his body, nothing
remains to divide him even in appearance. Of the Absolute nothing
whatever can be postulated; to say that it exists excludes
non-existence; to say that it does not exist excludes existence.
Furthermore, Zen followers hold that the Absolute, or union with the
Absolute, is not something to be attained; one does not [ENTER]{.small}
Nirv[ā]{.ent}na, for entrance to a place one has never left is
impossible. The experience commonly called 'entering Nirv[ā]{.ent}na'
is, in fact, an intuitive realization of that Self-nature which is the
true Nature of all things. The Absolute, or Reality, is regarded as
having for sentient beings two aspects. The only aspect perceptible to
the unenlightened is the one in which individual phenomena have a
separate though purely transitory existence within the limits of
space-time. The other aspect is spaceless and timeless; moreover all
opposites, all distinctions and 'entities' of every kind, are here seen
to be One. Yet neither is this second aspect, alone, the highest fruit
of Enlightenment, as many contemplatives suppose; it is only when both
aspects are perceived and reconciled that the
[]{#calibre_link-311}beholder may be regarded as truly Enlightened. Yet,
from that moment, he ceases to be the beholder, for he is conscious of
no division between beholding and beheld. This leads to further
paradoxes, unless the use of words is abandoned altogether. It is
incorrect to employ such mystical terminology as 'I dwell in the
Absolute', 'The Absolute dwells in me', or 'I am penetrated by the
Absolute', etc.; for, when space is transcended, the concepts of whole
and part are no longer valid; the part is the whole---I [AM]{.small} the
Absolute, except that I am no longer 'I'. What I behold then is my real
Self, which is the true nature of all things; see-er and seen are one
and the same, yet there is no seeing, just as the eye cannot behold
itself.

The single aim of the true Zen follower is so to train his mind that all
thought-processes based on the dualism inseparable from 'ordinary' life
are transcended, their place being taken by that Intuitive Knowledge
which, for the first time, reveals to a man what he really is. If All is
One, then knowledge of a being's true self-nature---his original
Self---is equally a knowledge of all-nature, the nature of everything in
the universe. Those who have actually achieved this tremendous
experience, whether as Christians, Buddhists or members of other faiths,
are agreed as to the impossibility of communicating it in words. They
may employ words to point the way to others, but, until the latter have
achieved the experience for themselves, they can have but the merest
glimmer of the truth---a poor intellectual concept of something lying
infinitely beyond the highest point ever reached by the human intellect.

It will now be clear that Zen Masters do not employ paradoxes from a
love of cheap mystification, though they do occasionally make humorous
use of them when humour []{#calibre_link-209}seems needed. Usually, it
is the utter impossibility of describing the Supreme Experience which
explains the paradoxical nature of their speech. To affirm or deny is to
limit; to limit is to shut out the light of truth; but, as words of some
sort must be used in order to set disciples on to the right path, there
naturally arises a series of paradoxes---sometimes of paradox within
paradox within paradox.

It should perhaps be added that Huang Po's frequent criticisms of those
Buddhists who follow the more conventional path, cultivating knowledge,
good works and a compassionate heart through successive stages of
existence, are not intended to call into question the value to humanity
of such excellent practices. As a Buddhist, Huang Po must certainly have
regarded these things as necessary for our proper conduct in daily life;
indeed, we are told by P'ei Hsiu that his way of life was exalted; but
he was concerned lest concepts such as virtue should lead people into
dualism, and lest they should hold Enlightenment to be a gradual process
attainable by other means than intuitive insight.

#### ***Huang Po's Use of the term 'The One Mind'*** {#huang-pos-use-of-the-term-the-one-mind .h3}

The text indicates that Huang Po was not entirely satisfied with his
choice of the word 'Mind' to symbolize the inexpressible Reality beyond
the reach of conceptual thought, for he more than once explains that the
One Mind is not really [MIND]{.small} at all. But he had to use some
term or other, and 'Mind' had often been used by his predecessors. As
Mind conveys intangibility, it no doubt seemed to him a good choice,
especially as the use of this term helps to make it clear that the part
of a man usually regarded as an individual entity inhabiting his body
is, in fact, not his property []{#calibre_link-210}at all, but common to
him and to everybody and everything else. (It must be remembered that,
in Chinese, 'hsin' means not only 'mind', but 'heart' and, in some
senses at least, 'spirit' or 'soul'---in short, the so-called
[REAL]{.small} man, the inhabitant of the body-house.) If we prefer to
substitute the word 'Absolute', which Huang Po occasionally uses
himself, we must take care not to read into the text any preconceived
notions as to the nature of the Absolute. And, of course, 'the One Mind'
is no less misleading, unless we abandon all preconceived ideas, as
Huang Po intended.

In an earlier translation of the first part of this book, I ventured to
substitute 'Universal Mind' for 'the One Mind', hoping that the meaning
would be clearer. However, various critics objected to this, and I have
come to see that my term is liable to a different sort of
misunderstanding; it is therefore no improvement on 'the One Mind',
which at least has the merit of being a literal translation.

***Dhy![Img](images/000001.jpg){.calibre6}na-Practice***

The book tells us very little about the practice of what, for want of a
better translation, is often called meditation or contemplation.
Unfortunately both these words are misleading as they imply some object
of meditation or of contemplation; and, if objectlessness be stipulated,
then they may well be taken to lead to a blank or sleeplike trance,
which is not at all the goal of Zen. Huang Po seems to have assumed that
his audience knew something about this practice---as most keen Buddhists
do, of course. He gives few instructions as to how to 'meditate', but he
does tell us what to avoid. If, conceiving of the phenomenal world as
illusion, we try to shut it out, we make a false distinction between the
'real' and the 'unreal'. So we must not shut
[]{#calibre_link-316}anything out, but try to reach the point where all
distinctions are seen to be void, where nothing is seen as desirable or
undesirable, existing or not existing. Yet this does not mean that we
should make our minds blank, for then we should be no better than blocks
of wood or lumps of stone; moreover, if we remained in this state, we
should not be able to deal with the circumstances of daily life or be
capable of observing the Zen precept: 'When hungry, eat.' Rather, we
must cultivate dispassion, realizing that none of the attractive or
unattractive attributes of things have any absolute existence.

Enlightenment, when it comes, will come in a flash. There can be no
gradual, no partial, Enlightenment. The highly trained and zealous adept
may be said to have prepared himself for Enlightenment, but by no means
can he be regarded as partially Enlightened---just as a drop of water
may get hotter and hotter and then, suddenly, boil; at no stage is it
partly boiling, and, until the very moment of boiling, no qualitative
change has occurred. In effect, however, we may go through three
stages---two of non-Enlightenment and one of Enlightenment. To the great
majority of people, the moon is the moon and the trees are trees. The
next stage (not really higher than the first) is to perceive that moon
and trees are not at all what they seem to be, since 'all is the One
Mind'. When this stage is achieved, we have the concept of a vast
uniformity in which all distinctions are void; and, to some adepts, this
concept may come as an actual perception, as 'real' to them as were the
moon and the trees before. It is said that, when Enlightenment really
comes, the moon is again very much the moon and the trees exactly trees;
but with a difference, for the Enlightened man is capable of perceiving
both unity []{#calibre_link-211}and multiplicity without the least
contradiction between them!

### **H[UANG]{.small} P[O'S]{.small} A[TTITUDE]{.small} T[OWARDS]{.small} O[THER]{.small} S[CHOOLS AND]{.small} S[ECTS OF]{.small} B[UDDHISM]{.small}** {#huang-pos-attitude-towards-other-schools-and-sects-of-buddhism .h2}

As this book is likely to be read by many Buddhists who belong to the
Therav[ā]{.ent}din (H[ī]{.ent}nay[ā]{.ent}na School) or to
Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na sects other than Zen, some explanation is
needed here to forestall possible misunderstandings. A casual glance at
our text or at some other Zen works might well give the impression that
non-Zen Buddhism is treated too lightly. It should be remembered that
Huang Po was talking principally to people who were already firm and
serious-minded Buddhists. He tells us himself that nothing written down
should be understood out of its context or without regard to the
circumstances under which the recorded sermon was given. I feel that had
he been speaking to non-Buddhists, his references to the 'Three
Vehicles' would have been couched in different language. A careful study
of this work has persuaded me that Huang Po felt no desire to belittle
the virtuel of those Buddhists who disagreed with his methods, but he
did feel strongly that the Zen method is productive of the fastest
results. He was much concerned to show that scripture-study and the
performance of good works cannot lead to Enlightenment, unless the
concept-forming processes of the finite mind are brought, properly,
under control. As for good works and right living, we learn from P'ei
Hsiu and others that his own way of life was exalted, but he had
constantly to combat the notion that good works in themselves can bring
us nearer to []{#calibre_link-303} Enlightenment. Moreover, when the
time has come for a Buddhist to discipline his mind so as to rise above
duality, he enters a stage where the notions of both good and evil must
be transcended like any other form of dualism. The Master was aware that
many of the Buddhists he was preaching to had probably fallen into the
all-too-common error of performing good works with a conscious desire to
store up merit for themselves---a desire which is a form of attachment
as inimical to Enlightenment as any other form of attachment. (The
translator knows of several 'sincere' Buddhists who lead lives very far
from noble and who indulge sometimes in actions destructive of the
happiness of others, but who firmly believe that their regular offerings
to the Sangha and their periodic attendance at temple services will
build up enough good karma to cancel out the results of their folly and
their uncharitableness to others!)

As to the study of s[ū]{.ent}tras and written works of all kinds on
Buddhism, Huang Po must surely have assumed that most of the people who
had taken the trouble to come to his mountain retreat for instruction
were already fully conversant with Buddhist doctrine, and that what they
lacked was the knowledge of mind-control. It is clear from his own words
that he realized the necessity of books and teachings of various kinds
for people less advanced. Unless a man is first attracted to Mysticism
by the written doctrines delivered by the Lord Buddha or by other great
teachers, he is most unlikely to see the necessity for mind-control, the
central object of Huang Po's own teaching. Hence the Doctrine of Words
must inevitably precede the Wordless Doctrine, except in certain rare
cases. I am convinced that Huang Po had no intention of belittling the
'Three Vehicles'; but that, since he was talking to an audience
[]{#calibre_link-314}already steeped in those teachings, he wished to
emphasize that mind-control (Samm[ā]{.ent}sam[ā]{.ent}dhi) is the
highest teaching of all; and that without it all other practices are in
vain for those who aim at gaining the mystical intuition which leads to
that ineffable experience called Nirv[ā]{.ent}na.

Buddhists of other sects have often been far less charitable than Huang
Po towards those sects with which---usually through ignorance---they
have disagreed.. Thus the Pure Land Sect or Amidism is often held up to
scorn and labelled 'unBuddhist', the 'antithesis of Buddhism' and so on.
This is partly because many Amidists misunderstand the teaching of their
own sect, but what religion or sect would not deserve our scorn if its
merits were to be judged by the popular beliefs of the general body of
its followers? In fact, as I have stated in the commentary to the text,
Amidism in its pure form is excellent Buddhism, for Amida Buddha
symbolizes the Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya (the Buddha in the aspect of oneness
with the Absolute), and entrance to the Pure Land symbolizes intuitive
understanding of our own oneness with realty. Furthermore, Professor
Suzuki has somewhere made the point that more Amidists achieve satori (a
sudden flash of Enlightenment) than Zen adepts, because their
single-minded concentration while reciting the formula 'N[ā]{.ent}mo
Amida Buddha' is an excellent form of mind-control, achievable even by
simple people who have no idea of the true significance of 'Amida' and
'Pure Land'.

Another sect which comes in for much obloquy, especially from Western
Buddhist writers, is that commonly known in English as Lamaism. To those
who suppose that Lamaism has nothing to offer besides concessions to the
superstitions of uneducated Tibetans (more than equalled by the ignorant
superstitions found in more 'advanced []{#calibre_link-301}countries'),
the Oxford Tibetan Series so ably edited by Dr. Evans-Wentz provides
unanswerable proof to the contrary. Huang Po's seemingly discourteous
references to other sects are justified by the urgency and sincerity of
his single-minded desire to emphasize the necessity for mind-control.
The discourtesy exhibited by many sectarian writers would seem to have
less justification.

### **T[HE]{.small} D[IVISION INTO]{.small} S[ERMONS]{.small}, D[IALOGUES AND]{.small} A[NECDOTES]{.small}** {#the-division-into-sermons-dialogues-and-anecdotes .h2}

The sermons alone present the doctrine in its entirety; the dialogues
and anecdotes, while offering little that is new in the way of
subject-matter, greatly amplify our understanding of what has gone
before. This division is quite usual with Zen works. Zen Masters hold
that an individual's full understanding of Zen is often precipitated by
the hearing of a single phrase exactly calculated to destroy his
particular demon of ignorance; so they have always favoured the brief
paradoxical dialogue as a means of instruction, finding it of great
value in giving a sudden jolt to a pupil's mind which may propel him
towards or over the brink of Enlightenment.

Many of the dialogues recorded here took place in public assembly. We
must not suppose that the erudite and accomplished P'ei Hsiu asked all
the questions himself; for some of them indicate a mediocrity of
understanding unworthy of that great scholar.

[]{#calibre_link-231}

### **T[HE]{.small} A[UTHOR OF THE]{.small} C[HINESE]{.small} V[ERSION]{.small}** {#the-author-of-the-chinese-version .h2}

P'ei Hsiu was a scholar-official of great learning, whose calligraphy is
still esteemed and even used as a model by students. His enthusiasm for
knowledge was immense. It is recorded of him that, in the intervals
between his official appointments, he would sometimes shut himself up
with his books for more than a year at a time. So great was his devotion
to Huang Po that he presented him with his own son as a novice, and it
is known that this young man lived to become a Zen Master of standing.

### **T[HE]{.small} T[RANSLATION]{.small}** {#the-translation .h2}

The present translation of Part I differs slightly from one I made
several years ago, which was published under the title of *The Huang Po
Doctrine of Universal Mind;* while Part II is now published for the
first time. Words tacitly implied in the original or added for the sake
of good English have not been confined in brackets, so to some extent
the translation is interpretive, but the sense is strictly that of the
original, unless errors have occurred in my understanding of it. These
probable errors, for which I now apologize, are due to the extreme
terseness of the Chinese text and to the multiplicity of meanings
attached to certain Chinese characters. Thus 'hsin' may mean 'Mind' or
'mind' or 'thought', of which the last is, according to Huang Po, a
major obstacle in the way of our understanding the first. Similarly,
'fa' (dharma) may mean []{#calibre_link-304}the Doctrine, a single
aspect of the Doctrine, a principle, a law, method, idea, thing, or
entity of any sort whatever. Moreover, the text is highly colloquial in
places and, here and there, employs a sort of T'ang Dynasty slang, the
meaning of which has to be guessed from the context. When I have
referred obscure passages to Chinese scholars, I have been given such a
wide variety of different explanations that I have not known which to
choose. In spite of all this, I believe that my rendering is on the
whole faithful and that, at least, I have nowhere departed from the
spirit of the teaching. The division into numbered paragraphs is my own.

I am indebted to Mr. Ting Fu Pao's Chinese *Buddhist Dictionary*, to the
*Dictionary of Buddhist Terms* compiled by Soothill and Hodous, to
several Chinese monks and laymen, and most of all to my wife who helped
greatly in the preparation of the typescript. It is a Chinese custom to
offer the merit accruing from the publication of a Buddhist work to
somebody else, and this I gladly offer to my wife, Meifang. I fear,
however, that Huang Po would have laughed in my face and perhaps
delivered one of his famous blows if I had spoken to him of 'gaining
merit' in this way!

J[OHN]{.small} B[LOFELD]{.small} (C[HU]{.small}
C[H]{.small}'[AN]{.small})

*The Bamboo Studio, Bangkok*

*October, 7357.*
:::

::: {#calibre_link-11 .calibre}
## []{#calibre_link-321 .calibre3}**P'EI HSIU'S PREFACE** {#calibre_link-6 .h1}

The great Zen Master Hsi Y[ü]{.ent}n lived below the Vulture Peak on
Mount Huang Po,^[1](#calibre_link-12){#calibre_link-335 .nounder}^ in
the district of Kao An which forms part of the prefecture of Hung
Chou.^[2](#calibre_link-13){#calibre_link-336 .nounder}^ He was third in
the direct line of descent from Hui
Nêng,^[3](#calibre_link-14){#calibre_link-337 .nounder}^ the Sixth
Patriarch, and the pupil of a fellow-disciple of Hui Hai. Holding in
esteem only the intuitive method of the Highest Vehicle, which cannot be
communicated in words, he taught nothing but the doctrine of the One
Mind; holding that there is nothing else to teach, in that both mind and
substance are void and that the chain of causation is motionless. Mind
is like the sun journeying through the sky and emitting glorious light
uncontaminated by the finest particle of dust. To those who have
realized the nature of Reality, there is nothing old or new, and
conceptions of shallowness and depth are meaningless. Those who speak of
it do not attempt to explain it, establish no sects and open no doors or
windows. That which is before you is it. Begin to reason about it and
you will at once fall into error. Only when you have understood this
will you perceive your oneness with the original Buddha-nature.
Therefore his words were simple, his reasoning direct, his way of life
exalted and his habits unlike the habits of other men.

[]{#calibre_link-244}Disciples hastened to him from all quarters,
looking up to him as to a lofty mountain, and through their contact with
him awoke to Reality. Of the crowds which flocked to see him, there were
always more than a thousand with him at a time.

In the second year of Hui Ch'ang [(A.D.]{.small} 843), when I was in
charge of the district of Chung Lin, I welcomed him on his coming to
that city from the mountain where he resided. We stayed together in the
Lung Hsing Monastery where, day and night, I questioned him about the
Way. Moreover, in the second year of T'ai Chung [(A.D.]{.small} 849),
while governing the district of Wan Ling, I again had occasion to
welcome him ceremoniously to the place where I was stationed. This time
we stayed quietly at the K'ai Yuan Monastery, where also I studied under
him day and night. After leaving him, I recorded what I had learnt and,
though able to set down only about a fifth of it, I esteem it as a
direct transmission of the Doctrine. At first I was diffident about
publishing what I had written; but now, fearing that these vital and
penetrating teachings will be lost to future generations, I have done
so. Moreover, I gave the manuscript to the monks T'ai Chou and Fa Chien,
requesting them to return to the Kuang T'ang Monastery on the old
mountain^[1](#calibre_link-15){#calibre_link-338 .nounder}^ and to ask
the elder monks there how far it agrees with what they themselves used
frequently to hear in the past.

Written on the eighth day of the tenth moon of the eleventh year of T'ai
Chung ([A.D.]{.small} 858) of the T'ang Dynasty.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-16 .calibre}
## []{#calibre_link-327 .calibre3}**[PART ONE]{.small} THE CHÜN CHOU RECORD OF THE ZEN MASTER HUANG PO (TUAN CHI)** {#calibre_link-7 .h1}

*A collection of sermons and dialogues recorded by P'ei Hsiu while in
the city of Chun Chou*

I. The Master said to me: All the Buddhas and all sentient beings are
nothing but the One Mind, beside which nothing exists. This Mind, which
is without beginning, is unborn^[1](#calibre_link-17){#calibre_link-339
.nounder}^ and indestructible. It is not green nor yellow, and has
neither form nor appearance. It does not belong to the categories of
things which exist or do not exist, nor can it be thought of in terms of
new or old. It is neither long nor short, big nor small, for it
transcends all limits, measures, names, traces and comparisons. It is
that which you see before you---begin to reason about it and you at once
fall into error. It is like the boundless void which cannot be fathomed
or measured. The One Mind alone is the Buddha, and there is no
distinction between the Buddha and sentient things, but that sentient
beings are attached to forms and so seek externally for Buddhahood. By
their very seeking they lose it, for that is using the Buddha to seek
for the Buddha and using mind to grasp Mind. Even
[]{#calibre_link-329}though they do their utmost for a full aeon, they
will not be able to attain to it. They do not know that, if they put a
stop to conceptual thought and forget their anxiety, the Buddha will
appear before them, for this Mind is the Buddha and the Buddha is all
living beings. It is not the less for being manifested in ordinary
beings, nor is it greater for being manifested in the Buddhas.

\*   \*   \*

2\. As to performing the six
p[ā]{.ent}ramit[ā]{.ent}s^[1](#calibre_link-18){#calibre_link-340
.nounder}^ and vast numbers of similar practices, or gaining merits as
countless as the sands of the Ganges, since you are fundamentally
complete in every respect, you should not try to supplement that
perfection by such meaningless practices. When there is occasion for
them, perform them; and, when the occasion is passed, remain quiescent.
If you are not absolutely convinced that the Mind is the Buddha, and if
you are attached to forms, practices and meritorious performances, your
way of thinking is false and quite incompatible with the Way. The Mind
is the Buddha, nor are there any other Buddhas or any other mind. It is
bright and spotless as the void, having no form or appearance whatever.
To make use of your minds to think conceptually is to leave the
substance and attach yourselves to form. The Ever-Existent Buddha is not
a Buddha of form or attachment. To practise the six
p[ā]{.ent}ramit[ā]{.ent}s and a myriad similar practices with the
intention of becoming a Buddha thereby is to advance by stages, but the
Ever-Existent Buddha is not a Buddha of stages. Only awake to the One
Mind, and there is nothing whatsoever to be attained. This is the
[REAL]{.small} Buddha. The []{#calibre_link-212} Buddha and all sentient
beings are the One Mind and nothing else.

\*   \*   \*

3\. Mind is like the void in which there is no confusion or evil, as
when the sun wheels through it shining upon the four corners of the
world. For, when the sun rises and illuminates the whole earth, the void
gains not in brilliance; and, when the sun sets, the void does not
darken. The phenomena of light and dark alternate with each other, but
the nature of the void remains unchanged. So it is with the Mind of the
Buddha and of sentient beings. If you look upon the Buddha as presenting
a pure, bright or Enlightened appearance, or upon sentient beings as
presenting a foul, dark or mortal-seeming appearance, these conceptions
resulting from attachment to form will keep you from supreme knowledge,
even after the passing of as many aeons as there are sands in the
Ganges. There is only the One Mind and not a particle of anything else
on which to lay hold, for this Mind is the Buddha. If you students of
the Way do not awake to this Mind substance, you will overlay Mind with
conceptual thought, you will seek the Buddha outside yourselves, and you
will remain attached to forms, pious practices and so on, all of which
are harmful and not at all the way to supreme knowledge.

\*   \*   \*

4\. Making offerings to all the Buddhas of the universe is not equal to
making offerings to one follower of the Way who has eliminated
conceptual thought. Why? Because such a one forms no concepts whatever.
The substance of the Absolute is inwardly like wood or stone, in that it
is []{#calibre_link-237}motionless, and outwardly like the void, in that
it is without bounds or obstructions. It is neither subjective nor
objective, has no specific location, is formless, and cannot vanish.
Those who hasten towards it dare not enter, fearing to hurtle down
through the void with nothing to cling to or to stay their fall. So they
look to the brink and retreat. This refers to all those who seek such a
goal through cognition. Thus, those who seek the goal through cognition
are like the fur (*many*), while those who obtain intuitive knowledge of
the Way are like the horns
(*few*).^[1](#calibre_link-19){#calibre_link-341 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

5\. Mañju[ś]{.ent}r[ī]{.ent} represents fundamental law and
Samanta-bhadra, activity. By the former is meant the law of the real and
unbounded void, and by the latter the inexhaustible activities beyond
the sphere of form. Avalokite[ś]{.ent}vara represents boundless
compassion; Mah[ā]{.ent}sth[ā]{.ent}ma, great wisdom, and
Vimalak[ī]{.ent}ti, spotless
name.^[2](#calibre_link-20){#calibre_link-342 .nounder}^ Spotless refers
to the real nature of things, while name means form; yet form is really
one with real nature, hence the combined term 'spotless
name'.^[3](#calibre_link-21){#calibre_link-343 .nounder}^ All the
qualities typified by the great Bodhi-sattvas are inherent in men and
are not to be separated from the One Mind. Awake to it, and it is there.
You students of the Way who do not awake to this in your own
[]{#calibre_link-264}minds, and who are attached to appearances or who
seek for something objective outside your own minds, have all turned
your backs on the Way. The sands of the Ganges! The Buddha said of these
sands: 'If all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas with Indra and all the gods
walk across them, the sands do not rejoice; and, if oxen, sheep,
reptiles and insects tread upon them, the sands are not angered. For
jewels and perfumes they have no longing, and for the stinking filth of
manure and urine they have no loathing.'

\*   \*   \*

6\. This Mind is no mind of conceptual thought and it is completely
detached from form. So Buddhas and sentient beings do not differ at all.
If you can only rid yourselves of conceptual thought, you will have
accomplished everything. But if you students of the Way do not rid
yourselves of conceptual thought in a flash, even though you strive for
aeon after aeon, you will never accomplish it. Enmeshed in the
meritorious practices of the Three Vehicles, you will be unable to
attain Enlightenment. Nevertheless, the realization of the One Mind may
come after a shorter or a longer period. There are those who, upon
hearing this teaching, rid themselves of conceptual thought in a flash.
There are others who do this after following through the Ten Beliefs,
the Ten Stages, the Ten Activities and the Ten Bestowals of Merit. Yet
others accomplish it after passing through the Ten Stages of a
Bodhisattva's Progress.^[1](#calibre_link-22){#calibre_link-344
.nounder}^ But []{#calibre_link-240} whether they transcend conceptual
thought by a longer or a shorter way, the result is a state of
[BEING:]{.small} there is no pious practising and no action of
realizing. That there is nothing which can be attained is not idle talk;
it is the truth. Moreover, whether you accomplish your aim in a single
flash of thought or after going through the Ten Stages of a
Bodhisattva's Progress, the achievement will be the same; for this state
of being admits of no degrees, so the latter method merely entails aeons
of unnecessary suffering and
toil.^[1](#calibre_link-23){#calibre_link-345 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

7\. The building up of good and evil both involve attachment to
form.^[2](#calibre_link-24){#calibre_link-346 .nounder}^ Those who,
being attached to form, do evil have to undergo various incarnations
unnecessarily; while those who, being attached to form, do good, subject
themselves to toil and privation equally to no purpose. In either case
it is better to achieve sudden self-realization and to grasp the
fundamental Dharma. This Dharma is Mind, beyond which there [IS]{.small}
no Dharma; and this Mind is the Dharma, beyond which there [IS]{.small}
no mind. Mind in itself is not mind, yet neither is it no-mind. To say
that Mind is no-mind implies something
existent.^[3](#calibre_link-25){#calibre_link-347 .nounder}^ Let there
be a silent understanding and no more. Away with all thinking and
explaining. Then we may say that the Way of Words has
[]{#calibre_link-275} been cut off and movements of the mind eliminated.
This Mind is the pure Buddha-Source inherent in all men. All wriggling
beings possessed of sentient life and all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas
are of this one substance and do not differ. Differences arise from
wrong-thinking only and lead to the creation of all kinds of
karma.^[1](#calibre_link-26){#calibre_link-348 .nounder}^

8\. Our original Buddha-Nature is, in highest truth, devoid of any atom
of objectivity. It is void, omnipresent, silent, pure; it is glorious
and mysterious peaceful joy---and that is all. Enter deeply into it by
awaking to it yourself. That which is before you is it, in all its
fullness, utterly complete. There is naught beside. Even if you go
through all the stages of a Bodhisattva's progress towards Buddhahood,
one by one; when at last, in a single flash, you attain to full
realization, you will only be realizing the Buddha-Nature which has been
with you all the time; and by all the foregoing stages you will have
added to it nothing at all.^[2](#calibre_link-27){#calibre_link-349
.nounder}^ You will come to look upon those aeons of work and
achievement as no better than unreal actions performed in a dream. That
is why the Tath[ā]{.ent}gata said: 'I truly attained nothing from
complete, unexcelled Enlightenment. Had there been anything attained,
D[ī]{.ent}pamkara Buddha would not have []{#calibre_link-287}made the
prophecy concerning me.'^[1](#calibre_link-28){#calibre_link-350
.nounder}^ He also said: 'This Dharma is absolutely without
distinctions, neither high nor low, and its name is Bodhi.' It is pure
Mind, which is the source of everything and which, whether appearing as
sentient beings or as Buddhas, as the rivers and mountains of the world
which has form, as that which is formless, or as penetrating the whole
universe, is absolutely without distinctions, there being no such
entities as selfness and otherness.

\*   \*   \*

9\. This pure Mind, the source of everything, shines forever and on all
with the brilliance of its own perfection. But the people of the world
do not awake to it, regarding only that which sees, hears, feels and
knows as mind. Blinded by their own sight, hearing, feeling and knowing,
they do not perceive the spiritual brilliance of the source-substance.
If they would only eliminate all conceptual thought in a flash, that
source-substance would manifest itself like the sun ascending through
the void and illuminating the whole universe without hindrance or
bounds. Therefore, if you students of the Way seek to progress through
seeing, hearing, feeling and knowing, when you are deprived of your
perceptions, your way to Mind will be cut off and you will find nowhere
to enter. Only realize that, though real Mind []{#calibre_link-273}is
expressed in these perceptions, it neither forms part of them nor is
separate from them. You should not start [REASONING]{.small} from these
perceptions, nor allow them to give rise to conceptual thought; yet nor
should you seek the One Mind apart from them or abandon them in your
pursuit of the Dharma. Do not keep them nor abandon them nor dwell in
them nor cleave to them. Above, below and around you, all is
spontaneously existing, for there is nowhere which is outside the
Buddha-Mind.

\*   \*   \*

10\. When the people of the world hear it said that the Buddhas transmit
the Doctrine of the Mind, they suppose that there is something to be
attained or realized apart from Mind, and thereupon they use Mind to
seek the Dharma, not knowing that Mind and the object of their search
are one. Mind cannot be used to seek something from Mind; for then,
after the passing of millions of aeons, the day of success will still
not have dawned. Such a method is not to be compared with suddenly
eliminating conceptual thought, which is the fundamental Dharma. Suppose
a warrior, forgetting that he was already wearing his pearl on his
forehead, were to seek for it elsewhere, he could travel the whole world
without finding it. But if someone who knew what was wrong were to point
it out to him, the warrior would immediately realize that the pearl had
been there all the time. So, if you students of the Way are mistaken
about your own real Mind, not recognizing that it is the Buddha, you
will consequently look for him elsewhere, indulging in various
achievements and practices and expecting to attain realization by such
graduated practices. []{#calibre_link-246}But, even after aeons of
diligent searching, you will not be able to attain to the Way. These
methods cannot be compared to the sudden elimination of conceptual
thought, in the certain knowledge that there is nothing at all which has
absolute existence, nothing on which to lay hold, nothing on which to
rely, nothing in which to abide, nothing subjective or objective. It is
by preventing the rise of conceptual thought that you will realize
Bodhi; and, when you do, you will just be realizing the Buddha who has
always existed in your own Mind! Aeons of striving will prove to be so
much wasted effort; just as, when the warrior found his pearl, he merely
discovered what had been hanging on his forehead all the time; and just
as his finding of it had nothing to do with his efforts to discover it
elsewhere. Therefore the Buddha said: 'I truly attained nothing from
complete, unexcelled Enlightenment.' It was for fear that people would
not believe this that he drew upon what is seen with the five sorts of
vision and spoken with the five kinds of speech. So this quotation is by
no means empty talk, but expresses the highest truth.

\*   \*   \*

11\. Students of the Way should be sure that the four elements composing
the body do not constitute the 'self', that the 'self' is not an entity;
and that it can be deduced from this that the body is neither 'self' nor
entity. Moreover, the five aggregates composing the mind (*in the common
sense*) do not constitute either a 'self' or an entity ; hence, it can
be deduced that the (*so-called individual*) mind is neither 'self' nor
entity. The six sense organs (*including the brain*) which, together
with their six types of perception and the []{#calibre_link-247}six
kinds of objects of perception, constitute the sensory world, must be
understood in the same way. Those eighteen aspects of sense are
separately and together void. There is only Mind-Source, limitless in
extent and of absolute purity.

\*   \*   \*

12\. Thus, there is sensual eating and wise eating. When the body
composed of the four elements suffers the pangs of hunger and
accordingly you provide it with food, but without greed, that is called
wise eating. On the other hand, if you gluttonously delight in purity
and flavour, you are permitting the distinctions which arise from wrong
thinking. Merely seeking to gratify the organ of taste without realizing
when you have taken enough is called sensual
eating.^[1](#calibre_link-29){#calibre_link-351 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

13\. [Ś]{.ent}r[ā]{.ent}vakas reach Enlightenment by hearing the Dharma,
so they are called
[Ś]{.ent}r[ā]{.ent}vakas.^[2](#calibre_link-30){#calibre_link-352
.nounder}^ [Ś]{.ent}r[ā]{.ent}vakas do not comprehend their own mind,
but allow concepts to arise from listening to the doctrine. Whether they
hear of the existence of Bodhi and Nirv[ā]{.ent}[ņ]{.ent}a through
supernormal powers or good fortune or preaching, they will attain to
Buddhahood only []{#calibre_link-317}after three aeons of infinitely
long duration. All these belong to the way of the
[Ś]{.ent}r[ā]{.ent}vakas, so they are called
[Ś]{.ent}r[ā]{.ent}vaka-Buddhas. But to awaken suddenly to the fact that
your own Mind is the Buddha, that there is nothing to be attained or a
single action to be performed---this is the Supreme Way; this is really
to be as a Buddha. It is only to be feared that you students of the Way,
by the coming into existence of a single thought, may raise a barrier
between yourselves and the Way. From thought-instant to thought-instant,
no [FORM;]{.small} from thought-instant to thought-instant, no
[ACTIVITY---]{.small}that is to be a Buddha! If you students of the Way
wish to become Buddhas, you need study no doctrines whatever, but learn
only how to avoid seeking for and attaching yourselves to anything.
Where nothing is sought this implies Mind unborn; where no attachment
exists, this implies Mind not destroyed; and that which is neither born
nor destroyed is the Buddha. The eighty-four thousand methods for
countering the eighty-four thousand forms of delusion are merely figures
of speech for drawing people towards the Gate. In fact, none of them
have real existence. Relinquishment of everything is the Dharma, and he
who understands this is a Buddha, but the relinquishment of
[ALL]{.small} delusions leaves no Dharma on which to lay
hold.^[1](#calibre_link-31){#calibre_link-353 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

14\. If you students of the Way desire knowledge of this great mystery,
only avoid attachment to any single thing []{#calibre_link-288}beyond
Mind. To say that the real Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya of the
Buddha^[1](#calibre_link-32){#calibre_link-354 .nounder}^ resembles the
Void is another way of saying that the Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya is the Void
and that the Void is the Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya. People often claim that the
Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya is in the Void and that the Void contains the
Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya, not realizing that they are one and the same. But if
you define the Void as something existing, then it is not the
Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya; and if you define the Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya as
something existing, then it is not the Void. Only refrain from any
objective conception of the Void; then it is the Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya:
and, if only you refrain from any objective conception of the
Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya, why, then it is the Void. These two do not differ
from each other, nor is there any difference between sentient beings and
Buddhas, or between sa[ṁ]{.ent}s[ā]{.ent}ra and Nirv[ā]{.ent}[ņ]{.ent}a,
or between delusion and Bodhi. When all such forms are abandoned, there
is the Buddha. Ordinary people look to their surroundings, while
followers of the Way look to Mind, but the true Dharma is to forget them
both. The former is easy enough, the latter very difficult. Men are
afraid to forget their minds, fearing to fall through the Void with
nothing to stay their fall. They do not know that the Void is not really
void, but the realm of the real Dharma. This spiritually enlightening
nature is without beginning, as ancient as the Void, subject neither to
birth nor to destruction, neither existing nor not existing, neither
impure nor pure, neither clamorous nor silent, neither old nor young,
occupying no space, having neither inside nor outside, size nor form,
colour nor sound. It cannot be looked for or sought, comprehended by
wisdom or knowledge, explained in words, contacted materially or reached
by meritorious achievement. All the Buddhas and
[]{#calibre_link-253}Bodhisattvas, together with all wriggling things
possessed of life, share in this great Nirv[ā]{.ent}[ņ]{.ent}ic nature.
This nature is Mind; Mind is the Buddha, and the Buddha is the Dharma.
Any thought apart from this truth is entirely a wrong thought. You
cannot use Mind to seek Mind, the Buddha to seek the Buddha, or the
Dharma to seek the Dharma. So you students of the Way should immediately
refrain from conceptual thought. Let a tacit understanding be all! Any
mental process must lead to error. There is just a transmission of Mind
with Mind. This is the proper view to hold. Be careful not to look
outwards to material surroundings. To mistake material surroundings for
Mind is to mistake a thief for your
son.^[1](#calibre_link-33){#calibre_link-355 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

15\. It is only in contradistinction to greed, anger and ignorance that
abstinence, calm and wisdom exist. Without illusion, how could there be
Enlightenment? Therefore Bodhidharma said: 'The Buddha enunciated all
Dharmas in order to eliminate every vestige of conceptual thinking. If I
refrained entirely from conceptual thought, what would be the use of all
the Dharmas?' Attach yourselves to nothing beyond the pure Buddha-Nature
which is the original source of all things. Suppose you were to adorn
the Void with countless jewels, how could they remain in position? The
Buddha-Nature is like the Void; though you were to adorn it with
inestimable merit and wisdom, how could []{#calibre_link-289}they remain
there?^[1](#calibre_link-34){#calibre_link-356 .nounder}^ They would
only serve to conceal its original Nature and to render it invisible.

That which is called the Doctrine of Mental Origins (*followed by
certain other sects*) postulates that all things are built up in Mind
and that they manifest themselves upon contact with external
environment, ceasing to be manifest when that environment is not
present. But it is wrong to conceive of an environment separate from the
pure, unvarying nature of all
things.^[2](#calibre_link-35){#calibre_link-357 .nounder}^

That which is called the Mirror of Concentration and Wisdom (*another
reference to non-Z^en^
Mah![Img](images/000001.jpg){.calibre6}y![Img](images/000001.jpg){.calibre6}na
doctrine*) requires the use of sight, hearing, feeling and cognition,
which lead to successive states of calm and agitation. But these involve
conceptions based on environmental objects; they are temporary
expedients appertaining to one of the lower categories of 'roots of
goodness'.^[3](#calibre_link-36){#calibre_link-358 .nounder}^ And this
category of 'roots of goodness' merely enables people to understand what
is said to them. If you wish to experience Enlightenment yourselves, you
must not indulge in such conceptions. They are all environmental Dharmas
concerning things which are and things which are not, based on existence
and non-existence. If only you will avoid concepts of existence and
non-existence in regard to absolutely everything, you will then perceive
[THE]{.small} D[HARMA.]{.small}

\*   \*   \*

[]{#calibre_link-254}16. On the first day of the ninth moon, the Master
said to me: From the time when the Great Master Bodhidharma arrived in
China, he spoke only of the One Mind and transmitted only the one
Dharma. He used the Buddha to transmit the Buddha, never speaking of any
other Buddha. He used the Dharma to transmit the Dharma, never speaking
of any other Dharma. That Dharma was the wordless Dharma, and that
Buddha was the intangible Buddha, since they were in fact that Pure Mind
which is the source of all things. This is the only truth; all else is
false. Prajñ[ā]{.ent} is wisdom; wisdom is the formless original
Mind-Source. Ordinary people do not seek the Way, but merely indulge
their six senses which lead them back into the six realms of existence.
A student of the Way, by allowing himself a single
sa[ṁ]{.ent}s[ā]{.ent}ric thought, falls among devils. If he permits
himself a single thought leading to differential perception, he falls
into heresy. To hold that there is something born and to try to
eliminate it, that is to fall among the
[Ś]{.ent}r[ā]{.ent}vakas.^[1](#calibre_link-37){#calibre_link-359
.nounder}^ To hold that things are not born but capable of destruction
is to fall among the Pratyekas.^[2](#calibre_link-38){#calibre_link-360
.nounder}^ Nothing is born, nothing is destroyed. Away with your
dualism, your likes and dislikes. Every single thing is just the One
Mind. When you have perceived this, you will have mounted the Chariot of
the Buddhas.

\*   \*   \*

17\. Ordinary people all indulge in conceptual thought
[]{#calibre_link-286}based on environmental phenomena, hence they feel
desire and hatred. To eliminate environmental phenomena, just put an end
to your conceptual thinking. When this ceases, environmental phenomena
are void; and when these are void, thought ceases. But if you try to
eliminate environment without first putting a stop to conceptual
thought, you will not succeed, but merely increase its power to disturb
you. Thus all things are naught but Mind---intangible Mind; so what can
you hope to attain? Those who are students of
Prajna^[1](#calibre_link-39){#calibre_link-361 .nounder}^ hold that
there is nothing tangible whatever, so they cease thinking of the Three
Vehicles.^[2](#calibre_link-40){#calibre_link-362 .nounder}^ There is
only the one reality, neither to be realized nor attained. To say 'I am
able to realize something' or 'I am able to attain something' is to
place yourself among the arrogant. The men who flapped their garments
and left the meeting as mentioned in the Lotus S[ū]{.ent}tra were just
such people.^[3](#calibre_link-41){#calibre_link-363 .nounder}^
Therefore the Buddha said: 'I truly obtained nothing from
Enlightenment.' There is just a mysterious tacit understanding and no
more.

\*   \*   \*

18\. If an ordinary man, when he is about to die, could only see the
five elements of consciousness as void; the four physical elements as
not constituting an 'I'; the real Mind as formless and neither coming
nor going; his nature as something neither commencing at his birth nor
perishing at his death, but as whole and motionless in its very depths;
his Mind and environmental objects as one---if he could really
accomplish this, he would receive Enlightenment in
[]{#calibre_link-213}a flash. He would no longer be entangled by the
Triple World; he would be a World-Transcendor. He would be without even
the faintest tendency towards rebirth. If he should behold the glorious
sight of all the Buddhas coming to welcome him, surrounded by every kind
of gorgeous manifestation, he would feel no desire to approach them. If
he should behold all sorts of horrific forms surrounding him, he would
experience no terror. He would just be himself, oblivious of conceptual
thought and one with the Absolute. He would have attained the state of
unconditioned being. This, then, is the fundamental
principle.^[1](#calibre_link-42){#calibre_link-364 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

19\. On the eighth day of the tenth moon, the Master said to me: That
which is called the City of Illusion contains the Two Vehicles, the Ten
Stages of a Bodhisattva's Progress, and the two forms of Full
Enlightenment.^[2](#calibre_link-43){#calibre_link-365 .nounder}^ All of
them are powerful teachings for arousing people's interest, but they
still belong to the City of
Illusion.^[3](#calibre_link-44){#calibre_link-366 .nounder}^ That which
is called the Place of Precious Things is the real Mind, the original
Buddha-Essence, the treasure of our own real Nature. These jewels cannot
be measured or accumulated. Yet since there are neither Buddha nor
sentient beings, neither subject nor object, where can there be a City
of Precious []{#calibre_link-265}Things? If you ask, 'Well, so much for
the City of Illusion, but where is the Place of Precious Things?', it is
a place to which no directions can be given. For, if it could be pointed
out, it would be a place existing in space; hence, it could not be the
real Place of Precious Things. All we can say is that it is close by. It
cannot be exactly described, but when you have a tacit understanding of
its substance, it is there.

\*   \*   \*

20\. Icchantikas are those with beliefs which are incomplete. All beings
within the six realms of existence, including those who follow
Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na and H[ī]{.ent}nay[ā]{.ent}na, if they do not
believe in their potential Buddhahood, are accordingly called
Icchantikas with cut-off roots of goodness.
Bod-hisattvas^[1](#calibre_link-45){#calibre_link-367 .nounder}^ who
believe deeply in the Buddha-Dharma, without accepting the division into
Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na and H[ī]{.ent}nay[ā]{.ent}na, but who do not
realize the one Nature of Buddhas and sentient beings, are accordingly
called Icchantikas with roots of goodness. Those who are Enlightened
largely through hearing the spoken doctrine are termed
[Ś]{.ent}r[ā]{.ent}vaka (*hearers*). Those Enlightened through
perception of the law of karma are called
Pratyeka-Buddhas.^[2](#calibre_link-46){#calibre_link-368 .nounder}^
Those who become Buddhas, but not from Enlightenment occurring in their
own minds, are called Hearer-Buddhas. Most students of the Way are
Enlightened through the Dharma which is taught in words and not through
the Dharma of Mind. Even after successive aeons of effort, they will not
become attuned to the original Buddha-Essence. For those who
[]{#calibre_link-308}are not Enlightened from within their own Mind, but
from hearing the Dharma which is taught in words, make light of Mind and
attach importance to doctrine, so they advance only step by step,
neglecting their original Mind. Thus, if only you have a tacit
understanding of Mind, you will not need to search for any Dharma, for
then Mind is the Dharma.^[1](#calibre_link-47){#calibre_link-369
.nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

21\. People are often hindered by environmental phenomena from
perceiving Mind, and by individual events from perceiving underlying
principles; so they often try to escape from environmental phenomena in
order to still their minds, or to obscure events in order to retain
their grasp of principles. They do not realize that this is merely to
obscure phenomena with Mind, events with principles. Just let your minds
become void and environmental phenomena will void themselves; let
principles cease to stir and events will cease stirring of
themselves.^[2](#calibre_link-48){#calibre_link-370 .nounder}^ Do not
employ Mind in this perverted way.

Many people are afraid to empty their minds lest they may plunge into
the Void. They do not know that their own Mind is the void. The ignorant
eschew phenomena but not thought; the wise eschew thought but not
phenomena.^[3](#calibre_link-49){#calibre_link-371 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

[]{#calibre_link-266}22. The Bodhisattva's mind is like the void, for he
relinquishes everything and does not even desire to accumulate merits.
There are three kinds of relinquishment. When everything inside and
outside, bodily and mental, has been relinquished; when, as in the Void,
no attachments are left; when all action is dictated purely by place and
circumstance; when subjectivity and objectivity are forgotten---that is
the highest form of relinquishment. When, on the one hand, the Way is
followed by the performance of virtuous acts; while, on the other,
relinquishment of merit takes place and no hope of reward is
entertained---that is the medium form of relinquishment. When all sorts
of virtuous actions are performed in the hope of reward by those who,
nevertheless, know of the Void by hearing the Dharma and who are
therefore unattached---that is the lowest form of relinquishment. The
first is like a blazing torch held to the front which makes it
impossible to mistake the path; the second is like a blazing torch held
to one side, so that it is sometimes light and sometimes dark; the third
is like a blazing torch held behind, so that pitfalls in front are not
seen.^[1](#calibre_link-50){#calibre_link-372 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

23\. Thus, the mind of the Bodhisattva is like the Void and everything
is relinquished by it. When thoughts of the past cannot be taken hold
of, that is relinquishment of the past. When thoughts of the present
cannot be taken hold of, that is relinquishment of the present. When
thoughts of the future cannot be taken hold of, that is relinquishment
of []{#calibre_link-290}the future. This is called utter relinquishment
of Triple Time. Since the Tath[ā]{.ent}gata entrusted K[ā]{.ent}syapa
with the Dharma until now, Mind has been transmitted with Mind, and
these Minds have been identical. A transmission of Void cannot be made
through words. A transmission in concrete terms cannot be the Dharma.
Thus Mind is transmitted with Mind and these Minds do not differ.
Transmitting and receiving transmission are both a most difficult kind
of mysterious understanding, so that few indeed have been able to
receive it. In fact, however, Mind is not Mind and transmission is not
really transmission.^[1](#calibre_link-51){#calibre_link-373 .nounder}^

24\. A Buddha has three bodies. By the Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya is meant the
Dharma of the omnipresent voidness of the real self-existent Nature of
everything. By the Sambhogak[ā]{.ent}ya is meant the Dharma of the
underlying universal purity of things. By the
Nirm[ā]{.ent}nak[ā]{.ent}ya is meant the Dharmas of the six practices
leading to Nirv[ā]{.ent}na and all other such devices. The Dharma of the
Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya cannot be sought through speech or hearing or the
written word. There is nothing which can be said or made evident. There
is just the omnipresent voidness of the real self-existent Nature of
everything, and no more. Therefore, saying that there is no Dharma to be
explained in words is called preaching the Dharma. The
Sambhogak[ā]{.ent}ya and the Nirm[ā]{.ent}nak[ā]{.ent}ya both respond
with appearances suited to particular circumstances. Spoken Dharmas
which respond to events through the senses and in all sorts of guises
are none of them the real Dharma. So it is said that the
Sambhogak[ā]{.ent}ya or the []{#calibre_link-291}Nirmanak[ā]{.ent}ya is
not a real Buddha or preacher of the
Dharma.^[1](#calibre_link-52){#calibre_link-374 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

25\. The term unity refers to a homogeneous spiritual brilliance which
separates into six harmoniously blended 'elements'. The homogeneous
spiritual brilliance is the One Mind, while the six harmoniously blended
'elements' are the six sense organs. These six sense organs become
severally united with objects that defile them---the eyes with form, the
ear with sound, the nose with smell, the tongue with taste, the body
with touch, and the thinking mind with entities. Between these organs
and their objects arise the six sensory perceptions, making eighteen
sense-realms in all. If you understand that these eighteen realms have
no objective existence, you will bind the six harmoniously blended
'elements' into a single spiritual brilliance---a single spiritual
brilliance which is the One Mind. All students of the Way know this, but
cannot avoid forming concepts of 'a single spiritual brilliance' and
'the six harmoniously blended elements'. Accordingly they are chained to
entities and fail to achieve a tacit understanding of original
Mind.^[2](#calibre_link-53){#calibre_link-375 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

[]{#calibre_link-292}26. When the Tath[ā]{.ent}gata manifested himself
in this world, he wished to preach a single Vehicle of Truth. But people
would not have believed him and, by scoffing at him, would have become
immersed in the sea of sorrow
(*sams![Img](images/000001.jpg){.calibre6}ra*). On the other hand, if he
had said nothing at all, that would have been selfishness, and he would
not have been able to diffuse knowledge of the mysterious Way for the
benefit of sentient beings. So he adopted the expedient of preaching
that there are Three Vehicles. As, however, these Vehicles are
relatively greater and lesser, unavoidably there are shallow teachings
and profound teachings---none of them being the original Dharma. So it
is said that there is only a One-Vehicle Way; if there were more, they
could not be real. Besides there is absolutely no way of describing the
Dharma of the One Mind. Therefore the Tath[ā]{.ent}gata called
K[ān]{.ent}yapa to come and sit with him on the Seat of Proclaiming the
Law, separately entrusting to him the Wordless Dharma of the One Mind.
This branchless Dharma was to be separately practised; and those who
should be tacitly Enlightened would arrive at the state of
Buddhahood.^[1](#calibre_link-54){#calibre_link-376 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

27\. Q: What is the Way and how must it be followed?

A: What sort of [THING]{.small} do you suppose the Way to be, that you
should wish to [FOLLOW]{.small} it?

Q: What instructions have the Masters everywhere given for
dhy[ā]{.ent}na-practice and the study of the Dharma?

[]{#calibre_link-333}A: Words used to attract the dull of wit are not to
be relied on.

Q: If those teachings were meant for the dull-witted, I have yet to hear
what Dharma has been taught to those of really high capacity.

A: If they are really men of high capacity, where could they find people
to follow? If they seek from within themselves, they will find nothing
tangible; how much less can they find a Dharma worthy of their attention
elsewhere! Do not look to what is called the Dharma by preachers, for
what sort of Dharma could that be?

Q: If that is so, should we not seek for anything at all?

A: By conceding this, you would save yourself a lot of mental effort.

Q: But in this way everything would be eliminated. There cannot just be
nothing.

A: Who called it nothing? Who was this fellow? But you wanted to
[SEEK]{.small} for something.

Q: Since there is no need to seek, why do you also say that not
everything is eliminated?

A: Not to seek is to rest tranquil. Who told you to eliminate anything?
Look at the void in front of your eyes. How can you produce it or
eliminate it?

Q: If I could reach this Dharma, would it be like the void?

A: Morning and night I have explained to you that the Void is both One
and Manifold. I said this as a temporary expedient, but you are building
up concepts from it.

Q: Do you mean that we should not form concepts as human beings normally
do?

A: I have not prevented you; but concepts are related to the senses;
and, when feeling takes place, wisdom is shut out.

[]{#calibre_link-318}Q: Then should we avoid any feeling in relation to
the Dharma?

A: Where no feeling arises, who can say that you are right?

Q: Why do you speak as though I was mistaken in all the questions I have
asked Your Reverence?

A: You are a man who doesn't understand what is said to him. What is all
this about being mistaken?^[1](#calibre_link-55){#calibre_link-377
.nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

28\. Q: Up to now, you have refuted everything which has been said. You
have done nothing to point out the true Dharma to us.

A: In the true Dharma there is no confusion, but you produce confusion
by such questions. What sort of 'true Dharma' can you go seeking for?

Q: Since the confusion arises from my questions, what will Your
Reverence's answer be?

A: Observe things as they are and don't pay attention to other people.
There are some people just like mad dogs barking at everything that
moves, even barking when the wind stirs among the grass and
leaves.^[2](#calibre_link-56){#calibre_link-378 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

29\. Regarding this Zen Doctrine of ours, since it was first
transmitted, it has never taught that men should seek for learning or
form concepts. 'Studying the Way' is just a figure of speech. It is a
method of arousing people's interest []{#calibre_link-270}in the early
stages of their development. In fact, the Way is not something which can
be studied. Study leads to the retention of concepts and so the Way is
entirely misunderstood, Moreover. the Way is not something specially
existing; it is called the Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na Mind---Mind which is
not to be found inside, outside or in the middle. Truly it is not
located anywhere. The first step is to refrain from knowledge-based
concepts. This implies that if you were to follow the empirical method
to the utmost limit, on reaching that limit you would still be unable to
locate Mind. The way is spiritual Truth and was originally without name
or title. It was only because people ignorantly sought for it
empirically that the Buddhas appeared and taught them to eradicate this
method of approach. Fearing that nobody would understand, they selected
the name 'Way'. You must not allow this name to lead you into forming a
mental concept of a road. So it is said 'When the fish is caught we pay
no more attention to the trap.' When body and mind achieve spontaneity,
the Way is reached and Mind is understood. A
[ś]{.ent}ramana^[1](#calibre_link-57){#calibre_link-379 .nounder}^ is so
called because he has penetrated to the original source of all things.
The fruit of attaining the [Ś]{.ent}ramana stage is gained by putting an
end to all anxiety; it does not come from
book-learning.^[2](#calibre_link-58){#calibre_link-380 .nounder}^

[]{#calibre_link-214}30. If you now set about using your minds to seek
Mind, listening to the teaching of others, and hoping to reach the goal
through mere learning, when will you ever succeed? Some of the ancients
had sharp minds; they no sooner heard the Doctrine proclaimed than they
hastened to discard all learning. So they were called 'Sages who,
abandoning learning, have come to rest in
spontaneity'.^[1](#calibre_link-59){#calibre_link-381 .nounder}^ In
these days people only seek to stuff themselves with knowledge and
deductions, seeking everywhere for book-knowledge and calling this
'Dharma-practice'.^[2](#calibre_link-60){#calibre_link-382 .nounder}^
They do not know that so much knowledge and deduction have just the
contrary effect of piling up obstacles. Merely acquiring a lot of
knowledge makes you like a child who gives himself indigestion by
gobbling too much curds. Those who study the Way according to the Three
Vehicles are all like this. All you can call them is people who suffer
from indigestion. When so-called knowledge and deductions are not
digested, they become poisons, for they belong only to the plane of
sams[ā]{.ent}ra. In the Absolute, there is nothing at all of this kind.
So it is said: 'In the armoury of my sovereign, there is no Sword of
Thusness'. All the concepts you have formed in the past must be
discarded and replaced by void. Where dualism ceases, there is the Void
of the Womb of Tath[ā]{.ent}gatas. The term 'Womb of Tath[ā]{.ent}gatas'
implies that not the smallest hairsbreadth of anything can exist there.
That is why the Dharma R[ā]{.ent}ja (*the Buddha*), who broke down the
notion of objective existence, manifested himself in this
[]{#calibre_link-299}world, and that is why he said: 'When I was with
D[ī]{.ent}pamkara Buddha there was not a particle of anything for me to
attain.' This saying is intended just to void your sense-based knowledge
and deductions. Only he who restrains every vestige of empiricism and
ceases to rely upon anything can become a perfectly tranquil man. The
canonical teachings of the Three Vehicles are just remedies for
temporary needs. They were taught to meet such needs and so are of
temporary value and differ one from another. If only this could be
understood, there would be no more doubts about it. Above all it is
essential not to select some particular teaching suited to a certain
occasion, and, being impressed by its forming part of the written canon,
regard it as an immutable concept. Why so? Because in truth there is no
unalterable Dharma which the Tath[ā]{.ent}gata could have preached.
People of our sect would never argue that there could be such a thing.
We just know how to put all mental activity to rest and thus achieve
tranquillity. We certainly do not begin by thinking things out and end
up in perplexity.

31\. Q: From all you have just said, Mind is the Buddha; but it is not
clear as to what sort of mind is meant by this 'Mind which is the
Buddha'.

A: How many minds have you got?

Q: But is the Buddha the ordinary mind or the Enlightened mind?

A: Where on earth do you keep your 'ordinary mind' and your 'Enlightened
mind'?

Q: In the teaching of the Three Vehicles it is stated that there are
both. Why does Your Reverence deny it?

[]{#calibre_link-255}A: In the teaching of the Three Vehicles it is
clearly explained that the ordinary and Enlightened minds are illusions.
You don't understand. All this clinging to the idea of things existing
is to mistake vacuity for the truth. How can such conceptions not be
illusory? Being illusory, they hide Mind from you. If you would only rid
yourselves of the concepts of ordinary and Enlightened, you would find
that there is no other Buddha than the Buddha in your own Mind. When
Bodhidharma came from the West, he just pointed out that the substance
of which all men are composed is the Buddha. You people go on
misunderstanding; you hold to concepts such as 'ordinary' and
'Enlightened', directing your thoughts outwards where they gallop about
like horses! All this amounts to beclouding your own minds! So I tell
you Mind is the Buddha. As soon as thought or sensation arises, you fall
into dualism. Beginningless time and the present moment are the same.
There is no this and no that. To understand this truth is called compete
and unexcelled Enlightenment.

Q: Upon what Doctrine (*Dharma-principles*) does Your Reverence base
these words?

A: Why seek a doctrine? As soon as you have a doctrine, you fall into
dualistic thought.

Q: Just now you said that the beginningless past and the present are the
same. What do you mean by that?

A: It is just because of your [SEEKING]{.small} that you make a
difference between them. If you were to stop seeking, how could there be
any difference between them?

Q: If they are not different, why did you employ separate terms for
them?

A: If you hadn't mentioned ordinary and Enlightened, who would have
bothered to say such things? Just as those
[]{#calibre_link-256}categories have no real existence, so Mind is not
really 'mind'. And, as both Mind and those categories are really
illusions, wherever can you hope to find anything?

\*   \*   \*

32\. Q: Illusion can hide from us our own mind, but up to now you have
not taught us how to get rid of illusion.

A: The arising and the elimination of illusion are both illusory.
Illusion is not something rooted in Reality; it exists because of your
dualistic thinking. If you will only cease to indulge in opposed
concepts such as 'ordinary' and 'Enlightened', illusion will cease of
itself. And then if you still want to destroy it wherever it may be, you
will find that there is not a hairsbreadth left of anything on which to
lay hold. This is the meaning of: 'I will let go with both hands, for
then I shall certainly discover the Buddha in my Mind.'

Q: If there is nothing on which to lay hold, how is the Dharma to be
transmitted?

A: It is a transmission of Mind with Mind.

Q: If Mind is used for transmission, why do you say that Mind too does
not exist?

A: Obtaining no Dharma whatever is called Mind transmission. The
understanding of this Mind implies no Mind and no Dharma.

Q: If there is no Mind and no Dharma, what is meant by transmission?

A: You hear people speak of Mind transmission and then you talk of
something to be received. So Bodhidharma said:

[]{#calibre_link-539}

The nature of the Mind when understood,

No human speech can compass or disclose.

Enlightenment is naught to be attained,

And he that gains it does not say he knows.

If I were to make this clear to you, I doubt if you could stand up to
it.

\*   \*   \*

33\. Q: Surely the void stretching out in front of our eyes is
objective. Then aren't you pointing to something objective and seeing
Mind in it?

A: What sort of mind could I tell you to see in an objective
environment? Even if you could see it, it would only be Mind reflected
in an objective sphere. You would be like a man looking at his face in a
mirror; though you could distinguish your features in it clearly, you
would still be looking at a mere reflection. What bearing has this on
the affair that brought you to me?

Q: If we do not see by means of reflections, when shall we see at all?

A: So long as you are concerned with 'by means of', you will always be
depending on something false. When will you ever succeed in
understanding? Instead of observing those who tell you to open wide both
your hands like one who has nothing to lose, you waste your strength
bragging about all sorts of things.

Q: To those who understand, even reflections are nothing?

A: If solid things do not exist, how much the less can we make use of
reflections. Don't go about babbling like a dreamer with his eyes open
(*like a sleepwalker*).

[]{#calibre_link-332}Stepping into the public hall, His Reverence said:
Having many sorts of knowledge cannot compare with giving up
[SEEKING]{.small} for anything, which is the best of all things. Mind is
not of several kinds and there is no Doctrine which can be put into
words. As there is no more to be said, the assembly is dismissed!

\*   \*   \*

34\. Q: What is meant by relative
truth?^[1](#calibre_link-61){#calibre_link-383 .nounder}^

A: What would you do with such a parasitical plant as that? Reality is
perfect purity; why base a discussion on false terms? To be absolutely
without concepts is called the Wisdom of Dispassion. Every day, whether
walking, standing, sitting or lying down, and in all your speech, remain
detached from everything within the sphere of phenomena. Whether you
speak or merely blink an eye, let it be done with complete dispassion.
Now we are getting towards the end of the third period of five hundred
years since the time of the Buddha, and most students of Zen cling to
all sorts of sounds and forms. Why do they not copy me by letting each
thought go as though it were nothing, or as though it were a piece of
rotten wood, a stone, or the cold ashes of a dead fire? Or else, by just
making whatever slight response is suited to each occasion? If you do
not act thus, when you reach the end of your days here, you will be
tortured by Yama.^[2](#calibre_link-62){#calibre_link-384 .nounder}^ You
must get away from the doctrines of existence and non-existence, for
Mind is like the sun, forever in the void, shining spontaneously,
shining without []{#calibre_link-279}intending to shine. This is not
something which you can accomplish without effort, but when you reach
the point of clinging to nothing whatever, you will be acting as the
Buddhas act. This will indeed be acting in accordance with the saying:
'Develop a mind which rests on no thing
whatever.^[1](#calibre_link-63){#calibre_link-385 .nounder}^ For this is
your pure Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya, which is called supreme perfect
Enlightenment. If you cannot understand this, though you gain profound
knowledge from your studies, though you make the most painful efforts
and practise the most stringent austerities, you will still fail to know
your own mind. All your effort will have been misdirected and you will
certainly join the family of
M[ā]{.ent}ra.^[2](#calibre_link-64){#calibre_link-386 .nounder}^ What
advantage can you gain from this sort of practice? As Chih
Kung^[3](#calibre_link-65){#calibre_link-387 .nounder}^ once said: 'The
Buddha is really the creation of your own Mind. How, then, can he be
sought through scriptures?' Though you study how to attain the Three
Grades of Bodhisattvahood, the Four Grades of Sainthood, and the Ten
Stages of a Bodhisattva's Progress to Enlightenment until your mind is
full of them, you will merely be balancing yourself between 'ordinary'
and 'Enlightened'. Not to see that all [METHODS]{.small} of following
the Way are ephemeral is sams[ā]{.ent}ric Dharma.

Its strength once spent, the arrow falls to earth.

You build up lives which won't fulfil your hopes.

How far below the Transcendental Gate

From which one leap will gain the Buddha's
realm!^[4](#calibre_link-66){#calibre_link-388 .nounder}^

[]{#calibre_link-280}It is because you are not that sort of man that you
insist on a thorough study of the methods established by people of old
for gaining knowledge on the conceptual level. Chih Kung also said: 'If
you do not meet a transcendental teacher, you will have swallowed the
Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na medicine in vain!'

\*   \*   \*

35\. If you would spend all your time---walking, standing, sitting or
lying down---learning to halt the concept-forming activities of your own
mind, you could be sure of ultimately attaining the goal. Since your
strength is insufficient, you might not be able to transcend
sams[ā]{.ent}ra by a single leap; but, after five or ten years, you
would surely have made a good beginning and be able to make further
progress spontaneously. It is because you are not that sort of man that
you feel obliged to employ your mind 'studying dhy[ā]{.ent}na' and
'studying the Way'. What has all that got to do with Buddhism? So it is
said that all the Tath[ā]{.ent}gata taught was just to convert people;
it was like pretending yellow leaves are real gold just to stop the flow
of a child's tears; it must by no means be regarded as though it were
ultimate truth. If you take it for truth, you are no member of our sect;
and what bearing can it have on your original substance? So the
s[ū]{.ent}tra says: 'What is called supreme perfect wisdom implies that
there is really nothing whatever to be attained.' If you are also able
to understand this, you will realize that the Way of the Buddhas and the
Way of devils are equally wide of the mark. The original pure,
glistening universe is neither square nor round, big nor small; it is
without any such distinctions as long and short, []{#calibre_link-297}it
is beyond attachment and activity, ignorance and Enlightenment. You must
see clearly that there is really nothing at all---no humans and no
Buddhas. The great chiliocosms, numberless as grains of sand, are mere
bubbles. All wisdom and all holiness are but streaks of lightning. None
of them have the reality of Mind. The Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya, from ancient
times until today, together with the Buddhas and Patriarchs, is One. How
can it lack a single hair of anything? Even if you understand this, you
must make the most strenuous efforts. Throughout this life, you can
never be certain of living long enough to take another
breath.^[1](#calibre_link-67){#calibre_link-389 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

36\. Q: The Sixth Patriarch was illiterate. How is it that he was handed
the robe which elevated him to that office? Elder Shên Hsiu (*a rival
candidate*) occupied a position above five hundred others and, as a
teaching monk, he was able to expound thirty-two volumes of
s[ū]{.ent}tras. Why did he not receive the robe?

A: Because he still indulged in conceptual thought---in a dharma of
activity. To him 'as you practise, so shall you attain' was a reality.
So the Fifth Patriarch made the transmission to Hui Nêng (*Wei Lang*).
At that very moment, the latter attained a tacit understanding and
received in silence the profoundest thought of the Tath[ā]{.ent}gata.
That is why the Dharma was transmitted to him. You do not see that [THE
FUNDAMENTAL DOCTRINE OF THE DHARMA IS THAT THERE ARE NO DHARMAS, YET
THAT THIS DOCTRINE OF NO-DHARMA]{.small} []{#calibre_link-293}[IS IN
ITSELF A DHARMA; AND NOW THAT THE NO-DHARMA DOCTRINE HAS BEEN
TRANSMITTED, HOW CAN THE DOCTRINE OF THE DHARMA BE A
DHARMA?]{.small}^[1](#calibre_link-68){#calibre_link-390 .nounder}^
Whoever understands the meaning of this deserves to be called a monk,
one skilled at 'Dharma-practice'. If you do not believe this, you must
explain the following story. 'The Elder Wei Ming climbed to the summit
of the Ta Y[ü]{.ent} Mountain to visit the Sixth Patriarch. The latter
asked him why he had come. Was it for the robe or for the Dharma? The
Elder Wei Ming answered that he had not come for the robe, but only for
the Dharma; whereupon the Sixth Patriarch said: "Perhaps you will
concentrate your thoughts for a moment and avoid thinking in terms of
good and evil." Ming did as he was told, and the Sixth Patriarch
continued: "While you are not thinking of good and not thinking of evil,
just at this very moment, return to what you were before your father and
mother were born." Even as the words were spoken, Ming arrived at a
sudden tacit understanding. Accordingly he bowed to the ground and said:
"I am like a man drinking water who knows in himself how cool it is. I
have lived with the Fifth Patriarch and his disciples for thirty years,
but it is only today that I am able to banish the mistakes in my former
way of thinking." The Sixth Patriarch replied: "Just so. Now at last you
understand why, when the []{#calibre_link-233} First Patriarch arrived
from India, he just pointed directly at men's Minds, by which they could
perceive their real Nature and become Buddhas, and why he never spoke of
anything besides."' Have we not seen how, when [Ā]{.ent}nanda asked
K[ās]{.ent}yapa what the World Honoured had transmitted to him in
addition to the golden robe, the latter exclaimed, '[Ā]{.ent}nanda!'
and, upon [Ā]{.ent}nanda's respectfully answering 'Yes?', continued:
'Throw down the flagpole at the monastery gate.' Such was the sign which
the First (*Indian*) Patriarch gave him. For thirty years the wise
[Ā]{.ent}nanda ministered to the Buddha's personal needs; but, because
he was too fond of acquiring knowledge, the Buddha admonished him,
saying: 'If you pursue knowledge for a thousand days, that will avail
you less than one day's proper study of the Way. If you do not study it,
you will be unable to digest even a single drop of water!'
:::

::: {#calibre_link-69 .calibre}
## []{#calibre_link-215 .calibre3}**[PART TWO]{.small} THE WAN LING RECORD OF THE ZEN MASTER HUANG PO (TUAN CHI)** {#calibre_link-8 .h1}

*A collection of dialogues, sermons and anecdotes recorded by P'ei Hsiu
during his tenure of the prefecture of Wan Ling*

1\. Once I put this question to the Master. How many of the four or five
hundred persons gathered here on this mountain have fully understood
Your Reverence's teaching?

The Master answered: Their number cannot be known. Why? Because my Way
is through Mind-awakening. How can it be conveyed in words? Speech only
produces some effect when it falls on the uninstructed ears of children.

\*   \*   \*

2\. Q: What is the Buddha?^[1](#calibre_link-70){#calibre_link-391
.nounder}^

A: Mind is the Buddha, while the cessation of conceptual thought is the
Way. Once you stop arousing concepts and thinking in terms of existence
and non-existence, long and short, other and self, active and passive,
and suchlike, you will find that your Mind is intrinsically the Buddha,
that the Buddha is intrinsically Mind, and that Mind resembles a
void.^[2](#calibre_link-71){#calibre_link-392 .nounder}^ Therefore is it
written that 'the true
Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya^[3](#calibre_link-72){#calibre_link-393 .nounder}^
[]{#calibre_link-269}resembles a void'. Seek for naught besides this,
else your search must end in sorrow. Though you perform the six
p[ā]{.ent}ramit[ā]{.ent}s^[1](#calibre_link-73){#calibre_link-394
.nounder}^ for as many aeons as there are grains of sand in the Ganges,
adding also all the other sorts of activities for gaining Enlightenment,
[YOU WILL STILL FALL SHORT OF THE GOAL.]{.small} Why? Because these are
karma-forming activities and, when the good karma they produce has been
exhausted, you will be born again in the ephemeral world. Therefore is
it also written: 'The
Samboghk[ā]{.ent}ya^[2](#calibre_link-74){#calibre_link-395 .nounder}^
is not a real Buddha, nor a real teacher of the
Dharma.^[3](#calibre_link-75){#calibre_link-396 .nounder}^ Only come to
know the nature of your own Mind, in which there is no self and no
other, and you will in fact be a Buddha!

\*   \*   \*

3\. Q: Allowing that the Enlightened man who achieves the cessation of
conceptual thought is Buddha, would not an ignorant man, on ceasing to
think conceptually, lose himself in oblivion?

A: There [ARE]{.small} no Enlightened men or ignorant men, and there
[IS]{.small} no oblivion. Yet, though basically everything is without
objective existence, you must not come to think in terms of anything
non-existent; and though things are not non-existent, you must not form
a concept of anything existing. For 'existence' and 'non-existence' are
both empirical concepts no better than illusions. Therefore it is
written: 'Whatever the senses apprehend resembles an
[]{#calibre_link-216}illusion, including everything ranging from mental
concepts to living beings.' Our
Founder^[1](#calibre_link-76){#calibre_link-397 .nounder}^ preached to
his disciples naught but total abstraction leading to elimination of
sense-perception. In this total abstraction does the Way of the Buddhas
flourish; while from discrimination between this and that a host of
demons blazes forth!

\*   \*   \*

4\. Q: If Mind and the Buddha^[2](#calibre_link-77){#calibre_link-398
.nounder}^ are intrinsically one, should we continue to practise the six
p[ā]{.ent}ramit[ā]{.ent}s and the other orthodox means of gaining
Enlightenment?

A: Enlightenment springs from Mind, regardless of your practice of the
six p[ā]{.ent}ramit[ā]{.ent}s and the rest. All such practices are
merely expedients for handling 'concrete' matters when dealing with the
problems of daily life. Even Enlightenment, the Absolute, Reality,
Sudden Attainment, the Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya and all the others down to the
Ten Stages of Progress, the Four Rewards of virtuous and wise living and
the State of Holiness and Wisdom are---every one of them---mere concepts
for helping us through sa[ṁ]{.ent}s[ā]{.ent}ra; they have nothing to do
with the real Buddha-Mind. Since Mind is the Buddha, the ideal way of
attainment is to cultivate that Buddha-Mind. Only avoid conceptual
thoughts, which lead to becoming and cessation, to the afflictions of
the sentient world and all the rest; then you will have no need of
methods of Enlightenment and suchlike. Therefore is it written:

All the Buddha's teachings just had this single object---

To carry us beyond the stage of thought.

Now, if I accomplish cessation of my thinking,

What use to me the Dharmas Buddha taught?

[]{#calibre_link-257}From Gautama Buddha down through the whole line of
patriarchs to Bodhidharma, none preached aught besides the One Mind,
otherwise known as the Sole Vehicle of Liberation. Hence, though you
search throughout the whole universe, you will never find another
vehicle. Nowhere has this teaching leaves or branches; its one quality
is eternal truth. Hence it is a teaching hard to accept. When
Bodhidharma came to China and reached the Kingdoms of Liang and Wei,
only the Venerable Master Ko gained a silent insight into our own Mind;
as soon as it was explained to him, he understood that Mind is the
Buddha, and that individual mind and body are nothing. This teaching is
called the Great Way. The very nature of the Great Way is voidness of
opposition. Bodhidharma firmly believed in being [ONE WITH THE REAL
'SUBSTANCE' OF THE UNIVERSE IN THIS LIFE!]{.small} Mind and that
'substance' do not differ one jot---that 'substance' is Mind. They
cannot possibly be separated. It was for this revelation that he earned
the title of Patriarch of our sect, and therefore is it written: 'The
moment of realizing the unity of Mind and the "substance" which
constitutes reality may truly be said to baffle description.'

\*   \*   \*

5\. Q: Does the Buddha really liberate sentient
beings?^[1](#calibre_link-78){#calibre_link-399 .nounder}^

A: There are in reality no sentient beings to be delivered by the
Tath[ā]{.ent}gata. If even self has no objective existence, how much
less has other-than-self! Thus, neither Buddha nor sentient beings exist
objectively.

\*   \*   \*

[]{#calibre_link-328}6. Q: Yet it is recorded that 'Whosoever possesses
the thirty-two characteristic signs of a Buddha is able to deliver
sentient beings'. How can you deny it?

A: Anything possessing [ANY]{.small} signs is illusory. It is by
perceiving that all signs are no signs that you perceive the
Tath[ā]{.ent}gata.^[1](#calibre_link-79){#calibre_link-400 .nounder}^
'Buddha' and 'sentient beings' are both your own false conceptions. It
is because you do not know real Mind that you delude yourselves with
such objective concepts. If you [WILL]{.small} conceive of a Buddha,
[YOU WILL BE OBSTRUCTED BY THAT BUDDHA!!!]{.small} And when you conceive
of sentient beings, you will be obstructed by those beings. All such
dualistic concepts as 'ignorant' and 'Enlightened', 'pure' and 'impure',
are obstructions. It is because your minds are hindered by them that the
Wheel of the Law must be turned.^[2](#calibre_link-80){#calibre_link-401
.nounder}^ Just as apes spend their time throwing things away and
picking them up again unceasingly, so it is with you and your learning.
All you need is to give up your 'learning', your 'ignorant' and
'Enlightened', 'pure' and 'impure', 'great' and 'little', your
'attachment' and 'activity'. Such things are mere conveniences, mere
ornaments within the One Mind. I hear you have studied the
s[ū]{.ent}tras of the twelve divisions of the Three Vehicles. They are
all mere empirical concepts. Really you must give them up!

So just discard all you have acquired as being no better than a bed
spread for you when you were sick. Only when you have abandoned all
perceptions, there being nothing objective to perceive; only when
phenomena obstruct you no longer; only when you have rid yourself of the
whole gamut of dualistic concepts of the 'ignorant' and 'Enlightened'
[]{#calibre_link-236}category, will you at last earn the title of
Transcendental Buddha. Therefore is it written: 'Your prostrations are
in vain. Put no faith in such ceremonies. Hie from such false beliefs.'
Since Mind knows no divisions into separate entities, phenomena must be
equally undifferentiated. Since Mind is above all activities, so must it
be with phenomena. Every phenomenon that exists is a creation of
thought; therefore I need but empty my mind to discover that all of them
are void. It is the same with all sense-objects, to whichever of the
myriads of categories they belong. The entire void stretching out in all
directions is of one substance with Mind; and, since Mind is
fundamentally undifferentiated, so must it be with everything else.
Different entities appear to you only because your perceptions
differ---just as the colours of the precious delicacies eaten by the
Devas are said to differ in accordance with the individual merits of the
Devas eating them!

Anuttara--samyak---sa[--]{.ent}bodhi^[1](#calibre_link-81){#calibre_link-402
.nounder}^ is a name for the realization that the Buddhas of the whole
universe do not in fact possess the smallest perceptible attribute.
There exists just the One Mind. Truly there are no multiplicity of
forms, no Celestial Brilliance, and no Glorious Victory (*over
sams![Img](images/000001.jpg){.calibre6}ra*) or submission to the
Victor.^[2](#calibre_link-82){#calibre_link-403 .nounder}^ Since no
Glorious Victory was ever won, there can be no such formal entity as a
Buddha; and, since no submission ever took place, there can be no such
formal entities as sentient beings.

\*   \*   \*

7\. Q: Even though Mind be formless, how can you deny
[]{#calibre_link-272}the existence of the Thirty-Two Characteristic
Signs of a Buddha, or of the Eighty Excellencies whereby people have
been ferried over?^[1](#calibre_link-83){#calibre_link-404 .nounder}^

A: The Thirty-Two Signs are
signs,^[2](#calibre_link-84){#calibre_link-405 .nounder}^ and whatever
has form is illusory. The Eighty Excellencies belong to the sphere of
matter; but whoever perceives a self in matter is travelling the wrong
path; he cannot comprehend the Tath[ā]{.ent}gata thus.

\*   \*   \*

8\. Q: Does the essential substance of the Buddha differ at all from
that of sentient beings or are they identical?

A: Essential substance partakes neither of identity nor difference. If
you accept the orthodox teachings of the Three Vehicles of Buddhism,
discriminating between the Buddha-Nature and the nature of sentient
beings, you will create for yourself Three Vehicle karma, and identities
and differences will result. But if you accept the Buddha-Vehicle, which
is the doctrine transmitted by Bodhidharma, you will not speak of such
things; you will merely point to the One Mind which is without identity
or difference, without cause or
effect.^[3](#calibre_link-85){#calibre_link-406 .nounder}^ Therefore is
it written: 'There is only the way of the One Vehicle; there is neither
a second nor a third, except for those ways employed by the Buddha as
purely relative expedients (*up[ā]{.ent}ya*) for the liberation of
beings lost in delusion.'

\*   \*   \*

[]{#calibre_link-263}9. Q: Why was the Bodhisattva of Infinite Extent
unable to view the sacred sign on the crown of the Buddha's
head?^[1](#calibre_link-86){#calibre_link-407 .nounder}^

A: There was really nothing for him to see. Why? The Bodhisattva of
Infinite Extent [WAS]{.small} the Tath[ā]{.ent}gata; it follows that the
need to look did not arise. The parable is intended to prevent your
conceiving of the Buddha and of sentient beings as entities and thereby
falling into the error of spacial separateness. It is a warning against
conceiving of entities as existing or not existing and thereby falling
into the error of special separateness, and against conceiving of
individuals as ignorant or Enlightened and thereby falling into that
same error. Only one entirely liberated from concepts can possess a body
of infinite extent. All conceptual thinking is called erroneous belief.
The upholders of such false doctrines delight in a multiplicity of
concepts, but the Bodhisattva remains unmoved amid a whole host of them.
'Tath[ā]{.ent}gata' means the [THUSNESS]{.small} of all phenomena.
Therefore it is written: 'Maitreya is [THUS;]{.small} saints and sages
are [THUS.' THUSNESS]{.small} consists in not being subject to becoming
or to destruction; [THUSNESS]{.small} consists in not being seen and in
not being heard. The crown of the Tath[ā]{.ent}gata's head is a concept
of perfection, but it is also no-perfection-to-be-conceived. So do not
fall into conceiving of perfection objectively. It follows that the
Buddhak[ā]{.ent}ya^[2](#calibre_link-87){#calibre_link-408 .nounder}^ is
above all activity:^[3](#calibre_link-88){#calibre_link-409 .nounder}^
therefore must you beware of discriminating between the myriads of
separate forms.

The ephemeral may be likened to mere
emptiness;^[4](#calibre_link-89){#calibre_link-410 .nounder}^ the
[]{#calibre_link-312}Great Void is perfection wherein is neither lack
nor superfluity, a uniform quiescence in which all activity is
stilled.^[1](#calibre_link-90){#calibre_link-411 .nounder}^ Do not argue
that there may be other regions lying outside the Great Void, for such
an argument would inevitably lead to discrimination. Therefore is it
written: 'Perfection^[2](#calibre_link-91){#calibre_link-412 .nounder}^
is a deep sea of wisdom;
sams[ā]{.ent}ra^[3](#calibre_link-92){#calibre_link-413 .nounder}^ is
like a whirling chaos.'

When we talk of the knowledge T may gain, the learning 'I' may achieve,
'my' intuitive understanding, 'my' deliverence from rebirth, and 'my'
moral way of living, our successes make these concepts seem pleasant to
us, but our failures make them appear deplorable. What is the use of all
that? I advise you to remain uniformly quiescent and above all activity.
Do not deceive yourselves with conceptual thinking, and do not look
anywhere for the truth, for all that is needed is to refrain from
allowing concepts to arise. It is obvious that mental concepts and
external perceptions are equally misleading, and that the Way of the
Buddhas^[4](#calibre_link-93){#calibre_link-414 .nounder}^ is as
dangerous to you as the way of demons. Thus, when
Mañju[ś]{.ent}r[ī]{.ent} temporarily entered into dualism, he found
himself dwarfed by two iron mountains which made egress impossible. But
Mañju[ś]{.ent}r[ī]{.ent}^[5](#calibre_link-94){#calibre_link-415
.nounder}^ had true understanding, while
Samantabhadra^[6](#calibre_link-95){#calibre_link-416 .nounder}^
possessed only ephemeral knowledge. Nevertheless, when true
understanding and []{#calibre_link-238}ephemeral knowledge are properly
integrated, it will be found that they no longer exist. There is only
the One Mind, Mind which is neither Buddha nor sentient beings, for it
contains no such dualism. As soon as you conceive of the Buddha, you are
forced to conceive of sentient beings, or of concepts and no-concepts,
of vital and trivial ones, which will surely imprison you between those
two iron mountains.

On account of the obstacles created by dualistic reasoning, Bodhidharma
merely pointed to the original Mind and substance of us all as being in
fact the Buddha. He offered no false means of self-perfecting oneself;
he belonged to no school of gradual attainment. His doctrine admits of
no such attributes as light and dark. Since
it^[1](#calibre_link-96){#calibre_link-417 .nounder}^ is not light, lo
there is no light; since it is not dark, lo there is no dark! Hence it
follows that there is no
Darkness,^[2](#calibre_link-97){#calibre_link-418 .nounder}^ nor End of
Darkness.^[3](#calibre_link-98){#calibre_link-419 .nounder}^ Whosoever
enters the gateway of our sect must deal with everything solely by means
of the intellect.^[4](#calibre_link-99){#calibre_link-420 .nounder}^
This sort of perception is known as the Dharma; as the Dharma is
perceived, we speak of Buddha; while perceiving that in fact there are
no Dharma and no Buddha is called entering the Sangha, who are otherwise
known as 'monks dwelling above all activity'; and the whole sequence may
be called the Triratna or Three Jewels in one
Substance.^[5](#calibre_link-100){#calibre_link-421 .nounder}^

[]{#calibre_link-294}Those who seek the
Dharma^[1](#calibre_link-101){#calibre_link-422 .nounder}^ must not seek
from the Buddha, nor from the
Dharma^[2](#calibre_link-102){#calibre_link-423 .nounder}^ nor from the
Sangha. They should seek from nowhere. When the Buddha is not sought,
there is no Buddha to be found! When the Dharma is not sought, there is
no Dharma to be found! When the Sangha is not sought, there is no
Sangha!

\*   \*   \*

10\. Q: You yourself are a member of the Sangha now, obviously engaged
in preaching the Dharma. Then how can you declare that neither of them
exists?

A: If you suppose there is a Dharma to be preached, you will naturally
ask me to expound it, but if you postulate a ['ME]{.small}', that
implies a spacial entity! The Dharma is [NO]{.small} Dharma---it is
[MIND]{.small}! Therefore Bodhidharma said:

Though I handed down Mind's Dharma,

How can Dharma be a Dharma?

For neither Mind nor Dharma

Can objectively exist.

Only thus you'll understand

The Dharma that is passed with Mind to Mind.

Knowing that in truth not a single thing exists which can be
attained!^[3](#calibre_link-103){#calibre_link-424 .nounder}^ is called
sitting in a bodhimandala.^[4](#calibre_link-104){#calibre_link-425
.nounder}^ A bodhimandala is a state in which no concepts arise, in
which you awaken to the intrinsic voidness of phenomena, also called the
utter voidness of the Womb of
Tath[ā]{.ent}gatas.^[5](#calibre_link-105){#calibre_link-426 .nounder}^

[]{#calibre_link-258}

There's never been a single thing;

Then where's defiling dust to cling?

If you can reach the heart of this,

Why talk of transcendental
bliss?^[1](#calibre_link-106){#calibre_link-427 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

11\. Q: If 'there's never been a single thing', can we speak of
phenomena as non-existent?

A: 'Non-existent' is just as wrong as its opposite. Bodhi means having
no concept of existence or nonexistence.

\*   \*   \*

12\. Q: What is the Buddha?^[2](#calibre_link-107){#calibre_link-428
.nounder}^

A: Your Mind is the Buddha. The Buddha is Mind. Mind and Buddha are
indivisible. Therefore it is written: 'That which is Mind is the Buddha;
if it is other than Mind, it is certainly other than Buddha.'

\*   \*   \*

13\. Q: If our own Mind is the Buddha, how did Bodhidharma transmit his
doctrine when he came from India?

A: When he came from India, he transmitted only Mind-Buddha. He just
pointed to the truth that the minds []{#calibre_link-295}of all of you
have from the very first been identical with the Buddha, and in no way
separate from each other. That is why we call him our Patriarch. Whoever
has an instant understanding of this truth suddenly transcends the whole
hierarchy of saints and adepts belonging to any of the Three Vehicles.
You have always been one with the Buddha, so do not pretend you can
[ATTAIN]{.small} to this oneness by various
practices.^[1](#calibre_link-108){#calibre_link-429 .nounder}^

14\. Q: If that is so, what Dharma do all the Buddhas teach when they
manifest themselves in the world?

A: When all the Buddhas manifest themselves in the world, they proclaim
nothing but the One Mind. Thus, Gautama Buddha silently transmitted to
Mah[ā]{.ent}k[ā]{.ent}[ṣ]{.ent}yapa the doctrine that the One Mind,
which is the substance of all things, is co-extensive with the Void and
fills the entire world of phenomena. This is called the Law of All the
Buddhas. Discuss it as you may, how can you even hope to approach the
truth through words? Nor can it be perceived either subjectively or
objectively. So full understanding can come to you only through an
inexpressible mystery. The approach to it is called the Gateway of the
Stillness beyond all Activity. If you wish to understand, know that a
sudden comprehension comes when the mind has been purged of all the
clutter of conceptual and discriminatory thought-activity. Those who
seek the truth by means of intellect and learning only get further and
further away from it. Not till your thoughts cease all their branching
here and there, not till you abandon all thoughts of seeking for
something, not till your []{#calibre_link-271} mind is motionless as
wood or stone, will you be on the right road to the
Gate.^[1](#calibre_link-109){#calibre_link-430 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

15\. Q: At this very moment, all sorts of erroneous thoughts are
constantly flowing through our minds. How can you speak of our having
none?

A: Error has no substance; it is entirely the product of your own
thinking. If you know that Mind is the Buddha and that Mind is
fundamentally without error, whenever thoughts arise, you will be fully
convinced that [THEY]{.small} are responsible for errors. If you could
prevent all conceptual movements of thought and still your
thinking-processes, naturally there would be no error left in you.
Therefore is it said: 'When thoughts arise, then do all things arise.
When thoughts vanish, then do all things vanish.'

\*   \*   \*

16\. Q: At this moment, while erroneous thoughts are arising in my mind,
where is the Buddha?^[2](#calibre_link-110){#calibre_link-431 .nounder}^

A: At this moment you are conscious of those erroneous
[]{#calibre_link-305} thoughts. Well, your consciousness is the Buddha!
Perhaps you can understand that, were you but free of these delusory
mental processes, there would then be no 'Buddha'. Why so? Because when
you allow a movement of your mind to result in a concept of the Buddha,
you are bringing into existence an objective being capable of being
Enlightened. Similarly, any concept of sentient beings in need of
deliverance [CREATES]{.small} such beings as objects of your thoughts.
All intellectual processes and movements of thought result from your
concepts.^[1](#calibre_link-111){#calibre_link-432 .nounder}^ If you
were to refrain from conceptualizing altogether, where could the Buddha
continue to exist? You are in the same predicament as
Mañju[ś]{.ent}r[ī]{.ent} who, as soon as he permitted himself to
conceive of the Buddha as an objective entity, was dwarfed and hemmed in
on all sides by those two iron mountains.

\*   \*   \*

17\. Q: At the moment of Enlightenment, where is the Buddha?

A: Whence does your question proceed? Whence does your consciousness
arise? When speech is silenced, all movement stilled, every sight and
---sound vanished THEN is the Buddha's work of deliverence truly going
forward! Then, where will you seek the Buddha? You cannot place a head
upon your head, or lips upon your lips; rather, you should just refrain
from every kind of dualistic
distinction.^[2](#calibre_link-112){#calibre_link-433 .nounder}^ Hills
are hills. Water is water. Monks are monks. Laymen are laymen. But these
mountains, these rivers, the whole world []{#calibre_link-248}itself,
together with sun, moon and stars---not one of them exists outside your
minds! The vast chiliocosm exists only within you, so where else can the
various categories of phenomena possibly be found? Outside Mind, there
is nothing. The green hills which everywhere meet your gaze and that
void sky that you see glistening above the earth---not a hairsbreadth of
any of them exists outside the concepts you have formed for yourself! So
it is that every single sight and sound is but the Buddha's Eye of
Wisdom.^[1](#calibre_link-113){#calibre_link-434 .nounder}^

Phenomena do not arise independently but rely upon
environment.^[2](#calibre_link-114){#calibre_link-435 .nounder}^ And it
is their appearing as objects which necessitates all sorts of
individualized knowledge. You may talk the whole day through, yet what
has been said? You may listen from dawn till dusk, yet what will you
have heard? Thus, though Gautama Buddha preached for forty-nine years,
in truth no word was spoken.^[3](#calibre_link-115){#calibre_link-436
.nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

18\. Q: Assuming all this is so, what particular state is connoted by
the word Bodhi?^[4](#calibre_link-116){#calibre_link-437 .nounder}^

A: Bodhi is no state. The Buddha did not attain to it. Sentient beings
do not lack it. It cannot be reached with the body nor sought with the
mind. All sentient beings [ARE ALREADY]{.small} of one form with Bodhi.

[]{#calibre_link-217}19. Q: But how does one 'Attain to the Bodhi-Mind'?

A: Bodhi is not something to be
attained.^[1](#calibre_link-117){#calibre_link-438 .nounder}^ If, at
this very moment, you could convince yourselves of its unattainability,
being certain indeed that nothing at all can ever be attained, you would
already be Bodhi-minded. Since Bodhi is not a state, it is nothing for
you to attain. And therefore is it written of Gautama Buddha; 'While I
was yet in the realm of D[ī]{.ent}pamkara Buddha, there was not a grain
of anything to be attained by me. It was then that D[ī]{.ent}pamkara
Buddha made his prophecy that I, too, should become a Buddha.' If you
know positively that all sentient beings are already one with Bodhi, you
will cease thinking of Bodhi as something to be attained. You may
recently have heard others talking about this 'attaining of the
Bodhi-Mind', but this may be called an intellectual way of driving the
Buddha away! By following this method, you only [APPEAR]{.small} to
achieve Buddhahood; if you were to spend aeon upon aeon in that way, you
would only achieve the Sambhogak[ā]{.ent}ya and
Nirm[ā]{.ent}[ņ]{.ent}ak[ā]{.ent}ya. What connection would all that have
with your original and real
Buddha-Nature?^[2](#calibre_link-118){#calibre_link-439 .nounder}^
Therefore is it written: 'Seeking outside for a Buddha possessed of form
has nothing to do with you.'

\*   \*   \*

20\. Q: If we have always been one with the Buddha (*Absolute*), why are
there nevertheless beings who come into []{#calibre_link-218}existence
through the four kinds of birth and enter the six states of existence,
each with the characteristic form and appearance of its kind?

A: The essential Buddha-Substance is a perfect whole, without
superfluity or lack. It permeates the six states of existence and yet is
everywhere perfectly whole. Thus, every single one of the myriads of
phenomena in the universe is the Buddha (*Absolute*). This substance may
be likened to a quantity of quicksilver which, being scattered in all
directions, everywhere re-forms into perfect wholes. When undispersed,
it is of one piece, the one comprising the whole and the whole
comprising the one. The various forms and appearances, on the other
hand, may be likened to dwellings. Just as one abandons a stable in
favour of a house, so one exchanges a physical body for a heavenly body,
and so on up to the planes of Pratyeka-Buddhas, Bodhisattvas and
Buddhas. But all alike are things sought by you or abandoned by you;
hence the differences between them. How is it possible that the original
and essential nature of the universe should be subject to this
differentiation?

\*   \*   \*

21\. Q: How do the Buddhas, out of their vast mercy and compassion,
preach the Dharma (*Law*) to sentient beings?

A: We speak of their mercy and compassion as vast just because it is
beyond causality (*and therefore infinite*). By mercy is really meant
not conceiving of a Buddha to be Enlightened, while compassion really
means not conceiving of sentient beings to be
delivered.^[1](#calibre_link-119){#calibre_link-440 .nounder}^

[]{#calibre_link-310}In reality, their Dharma is neither preached in
words nor otherwise signified; and those who listen neither hear nor
attain. It is as though an imaginary teacher had preached to imaginary
people. As regards all these dharmas (*teachings*), if, for the sake of
the Way, I speak to you from my deeper knowledge and lead you forward,
you will certainly be able to understand what I say; and, as to mercy
and compassion, if for your sakes I take to thinking things out and
studying other people's concepts---in neither case will you have reached
a true perception of the real nature of your own Mind from [WITHIN
YOURSELVES.]{.small} So, in the end, these things will be of no help at
all.

\*   \*   \*

22\. Q: What is the meaning of 'zealous
application'?^[2](#calibre_link-120){#calibre_link-441 .nounder}^

A: The most completely successful form of zealous application is the
absence from your minds of all such distinctions as 'my body', 'my
mind'. As soon as you begin to seek for something outside your own Mind,
you are like Kalir[ā]{.ent}ja bent on
hunting.^[3](#calibre_link-121){#calibre_link-442 .nounder}^ But when
you prevent your minds from going on travels outside themselves, you are
already a k[ṣ]{.ent}[ā]{.ent}nti-rishi. [NO BODIES AND NO
MINDS]{.small}---that is the Way of the Buddhas!

\*   \*   \*

[]{#calibre_link-313}23. Q: If I follow this Way, and refrain from
intellectual processes and conceptual thinking, shall I be certain of
attaining the goal?

A: Such non-intellection is following the Way! Why this talk of
attaining and not attaining? The matter is thus---by thinking of
something you create an entity and by thinking of nothing you create
another. Let such erroneous thinking perish utterly, and then nothing
will remain for you to go seeking!

\*   \*   \*

24\. Q: What is meant by 'Transcending the Three Worlds'? (*Of desire,
form and formlessness.*)^[1](#calibre_link-122){#calibre_link-443
.nounder}^

A: Transcending the Three Worlds connotes rising beyond the dualism of
good and evil. Buddhas appear in the world in order to make an end of
desire, of form and of formless phenomena. For you also the Three Worlds
will vanish if you can reach the state beyond thought. On the other
hand, if you still cling to the notion that something, even if it be as
small as the hundredth part of a grain, might exist objectively, then
even a perfect mastery of the entire Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na Canon will
fail to give you victory over the Three Worlds. Only when every one of
those tiny fragments is seen to be nothing can the
Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na achieve this victory for
you.^[2](#calibre_link-123){#calibre_link-444 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

[]{#calibre_link-219}25. One day, after taking his seat in the great
hall, the Master began as follows. Since Mind is the Buddha
(*Absolute*), it embraces all things, from the Buddhas (*Enlightened
Beings*) at one extreme to the meanest of belly-crawling reptiles or
insects at the other. All these alike share the Buddha-Nature and all
are of the substance of the One Mind. So, after his arrival from the
West, Bodhidharma transmitted naught but the Dharma of the One Mind. He
pointed directly to the truth that all sentient beings have always been
of one substance with the Buddha. He did not follow any of those
mistaken 'methods of attainment'. And if [YOU]{.small} could only
achieve this comprehension of your own Mind, thereby discovering your
real nature, there would assuredly be nothing for you to seek, either.

\*   \*   \*

26\. Q: How, then, does a man accomplish this comprehension of his own
Mind?

A: That which asked the question is your own Mind; but if you were to
remain quiescent and to refrain from the smallest mental activity, its
substance would be seen as a void---you would find it formless,
occupying no point in space and falling neither into the category of
existence nor into that of non-existence. Because it is imperceptible,
Bodhidharma said: 'Mind, which is our real nature, is the unbegotten and
indestructible Womb; in response to circumstances, it transforms itself
into phenomena. For the sake of convenience, we speak of Mind as the
intelligence; but when it does not respond to
circumstances,^[1](#calibre_link-124){#calibre_link-445 .nounder}^ it
cannot be spoken of in such dualistic terms as existence or
nonexistence. []{#calibre_link-283}Besides, even when engaged in
creating objects in response to causality, it is still imperceptible. If
you know this and rest tranquilly in nothingness---then you are indeed
following the Way of the Buddhas. Therefore does the s[ū]{.ent}tra say:
'Develop a mind which rests on no thing whatever.'

Every one of the sentient beings bound to the wheel of alternating life
and death is re-created from the karma of his own desires! Endlessly
their hearts remain bound to the six states of existence, thereby
involving them in all sorts of sorrow and pain. Ch'ing
Ming^[1](#calibre_link-125){#calibre_link-446 .nounder}^ says: 'There
are people with minds like those of apes who are very hard to teach;
people who need all sorts of precepts and doctrines with which to force
their hearts into submission.' And so when thoughts arise, all sorts of
dharmas^[2](#calibre_link-126){#calibre_link-447 .nounder}^ follow, but
they vanish with thought's cessation. We can see from this that every
sort of dharma is but a creation of Mind. And all kinds of
beings---humans, devas, sufferers in hell, asuras and all comprised
within the six forms of life---each one of them is Mind-created. If only
you would learn how to achieve a state of non-intellection, immediately
the chain of causation would snap.

Give up those erroneous thoughts leading to false distinctions! There is
no 'self' and no 'other'. There is no 'wrong desire', no 'anger', no
'hatred', no 'love', no 'victory', no 'failure'. Only renounce the error
of intellectual or conceptual thought-processes and your nature will
exhibit its pristine purity---for this alone is the way to attain
Enlightenment, to observe the Dharma (*Law*), to become a Buddha and all
the rest. Unless you understand this, the []{#calibre_link-281}whole of
your great learning, your painful efforts to advance, your austerities
of diet and clothing, will not help you to a knowledge of your own Mind.
All such practices must be termed fallacious, for any of them will lead
to your rebirth among 'demons'---enemies of the truth---or among the
crude nature spirits. What end is served by pursuits like those? Chih
Kung says: 'Our bodies are the creations of our own minds.' But how can
one expect to gain such knowledge from books? If only you could
comprehend the nature of your own Mind and put an end to discriminatory
thought, there would naturally be no room for even a grain of error to
arise. Ch'ing Ming expressed this in a verse:

Just spread out a mat

For reclining quite flat---

When thought's tied to a bed

Like a sick man growing worse.

All karma will cease

And all fancies disperse.

[THAT'S]{.small} what is meant by Bodhi!

As it is, so long as your mind is subject to the slightest movement of
thought, you will remain engulfed in the error of taking 'ignorant' and
'Enlightened' for separate states; this error will persist regardless of
your vast knowledge of the Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na or of your ability
to pass through the 'Four Grades of Sainthood' and the 'Ten Stages of
Progress Leading to Enlightenment'. For all these pursuits belong to
what is ephemeral; even the most strenuous of your efforts is doomed to
fail, just as an arrow shot never so high into the air must inevitably
fall spent to the ground. So, []{#calibre_link-282}in spite of them, you
are certain to find yourselves back on the wheel of life and death.
Indulging in such practices implies your failure to understand the
Buddha's real meaning. Surely the endurance of so much unnecessary
suffering is nothing but a gigantic error, isn't it? Chih Kung says
elsewhere: 'If you do not meet with a teacher able to transcend the
worlds, you will go on swallowing the medicine of the
Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na Dharma quite in vain.'

Were you now to practise keeping your minds motionless at all times,
whether walking, standing, sitting or lying; concentrating entirely upon
the goal of no thought-creation, no duality, no reliance on others and
no attachments; just allowing all things to take their course the whole
day long, as though you were too ill to bother; unknown to the world;
innocent of any urge to be known or unknown to others; with your minds
like blocks of stone that mend no holes---then all the
Dharmas^[1](#calibre_link-127){#calibre_link-448 .nounder}^ would
penetrate your understanding through and through. In a little while you
would find yourselves firmly unattached. Thus, for the first time in
your lives, you would discover your reactions to phenomena decreasing
and, ultimately, you would pass beyond the Triple World; and people
would say that a Buddha had appeared in the world. Pure and passionless
knowledge^[2](#calibre_link-128){#calibre_link-449 .nounder}^ implies
putting an end to the ceaseless flow of thoughts and images, for in that
way you stop creating the karma that leads to rebirth---whether as gods
or men or as sufferers in hell.

Once every sort of mental process has ceased, not a particle of karma is
formed. Then, even in this life, your minds and bodies become those of a
being completely []{#calibre_link-229}liberated. Supposing that this
does not result in freeing you immediately from further rebirths, at the
very least you will be assured of rebirth in accordance with your own
wishes. The s[ū]{.ent}tra declares: 'Bodhisattvas are re-embodied into
whatsoever forms they desire.' But were they suddenly to lose the power
of keeping their minds free from conceptual thought, attachment to form
would drag them back into the phenomenal world, and each of those forms
would create for them a demon's karma!

With the practices of the Pure Land Buddhists it is also thus, for all
these practices are productive of karma; hence, we may call them
Buddha-hindrances! As they would obstruct your Mind, the chain of
causation would also grapple you fast, dragging you back into the state
of those as yet unliberated.^[1](#calibre_link-129){#calibre_link-450
.nounder}^

Hence all dharmas such as those purporting to lead to the attainment of
Bodhi possess no reality. The words of Gautama Buddha were intended
merely as efficacious expedients for leading men out of the darkness of
worse ignorance. It was as though one pretended yellow leaves were gold
to stop the flow of a child's tears.
Samyak-Sambodhi^[2](#calibre_link-130){#calibre_link-451 .nounder}^ is
another name for the realization that there are no valid Dharmas. Once
you understand this, of what use are such trifles to you? According
harmoniously with []{#calibre_link-230}the conditions of your present
lives, you should go on, as opportunities arise, reducing the store of
old karma laid up in previous lives; and above all, you must avoid
building up a fresh store of retribution for yourselves!

Mind is filled with radiant clarity, so cast away the darkness of your
old concepts. Ch'ing Ming says: 'Rid yourselves of everything.' The
sentence in the Lotus S[ū]{.ent}tra concerning a whole twenty years
spent in the shovelling away of manure symbolizes the necessity of
driving from your minds whatever tends to the formation of concepts. In
another passage, the same s[ū]{.ent}tra identifies the pile of dung
which has to be carted away with metaphysics and sophistry. Thus the
'Womb of the Tath[ā]{.ent}gatas' is intrinsically a voidness and silence
containing no individualized dharmas of any sort or kind. And therefore
says the s[ū]{.ent}tra: 'The entire realms of all the Buddhas are
equally void.'^[1](#calibre_link-131){#calibre_link-452 .nounder}^

Though others may talk of the Way of the Buddhas as something to be
reached by various pious practices and by s[ū]{.ent}tra-study, you must
have nothing to do with such ideas. A perception, sudden as blinking,
that subject and object are one, will lead to a deeply mysterious
wordless understanding; and by this understanding will you awake to the
truth of Zen. When you happen upon someone who has no understanding, you
must claim to know nothing. He may be delighted by his discovery of some
'way to Enlightenment'; yet if you allow yourselves to be persuaded by
him, [YOU]{.small} will experience no delight at all, but suffer both
sorrow and disappointment. What have such thoughts as his to do with the
study of Zen? Even if you do obtain from him some trifling 'method', it
will only be a thought-constructed []{#calibre_link-220}dharma having
nothing to do with Zen. Thus, Bodhidharma sat rapt in meditation before
a wall; he did not seek to lead people into having opinions. Therefore
it is written: 'To put out of mind even the principle from which action
springs is the true teaching of the Buddhas, while dualism belongs to
the sphere of demons.'

Your true nature is something never lost to you even in moments of
delusion, nor is it gained at the moment of Enlightenment. It is the
Nature of the Bh[ū]{.ent}tatathat[ā]{.ent}. In it is neither delusion
nor right understanding. It fills the Void everywhere and is
intrinsically of the substance of the One Mind. How, then, can your
mind-created objects exist outside the Void? The Void is fundamentally
without spacial dimensions, passions, activities, delusions or right
understanding. You must clearly understand that in it there are no
things, no men and no Buddhas; for this Void contains not the smallest
hairsbreadth of anything that can be viewed spacially; it depends on
nothing and is attached to nothing. It is all-pervading, spotless
beauty; it is the self-existent and uncreated Absolute. Then how can it
even be a matter for discussion that the [REAL]{.small} Buddha has no
mouth and preaches no Dharma, or that [REAL]{.small} hearing requires no
ears, for who could hear it? Ah, it is a jewel beyond all
price!^[1](#calibre_link-132){#calibre_link-453 .nounder}^

[]{#calibre_link-298}

### **[THE ANECDOTES]{.small}** {#the-anecdotes .h2}

27\. Our Master came originally from Fukien, but took his vows upon
Mount Huang Po in this prefecture while he was still very
young.^[1](#calibre_link-133){#calibre_link-454 .nounder}^ In the centre
of his forehead was a small lump shaped like a pearl. His voice was soft
and agreeable, his character unassuming and placid.

Some years after his ordination, while journeying to Mount T'ien T'ai,
he fell in with a monk with whom he soon came to feel like an old
acquaintance; so they continued their journey together. Finding the way
barred by a mountain stream in flood, our Master lent upon his staff and
halted, at which his friend entreated him to proceed.

'No. You go first,' said our Master. So the former floated his big straw
rain-hat on the torrent and easily made his way to the other
side.^[2](#calibre_link-134){#calibre_link-455 .nounder}^

'I,' sighed the Master, 'have allowed such a fellow to accompany me! I
ought to have slain him with a blow of my
staff!'^[3](#calibre_link-135){#calibre_link-456 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

28\. Once a certain monk, on taking leave of Master Kuei Tsung, was
asked where he intended to go.

[]{#calibre_link-221}'I intend to visit all the places where the five
kinds of Zen are taught,' he replied.

'Oh,' exclaimed Kuei Tsung. 'Other places may have five kinds; here we
have only the one kind.'

But when the monk enquired what it was, he received a sudden blow. 'I
see, I see!' he shouted excitedly.

'Speak, speak!' roared Kuei Tsung. So the monk got ready to say
something further, but just at that moment he received another blow.

Afterwards, this same monk arrived at our Master's monastery and, being
asked by Huang Po where he had come from, explained that he had recently
left Kuei Tsung.

'And what instructions did you receive from him?' enquired our Master,
whereupon the monk related the above story.

During the next assembly, our Master took this anecdote for his text and
said: 'Master Ma^[1](#calibre_link-136){#calibre_link-457 .nounder}^
really excels the Eighty-Four Deeply Enlightened Ones! The questions
people ask are all of them no better than stinking muck saturating the
ground. There is only Kuei Tsung who is worth
something.'^[2](#calibre_link-137){#calibre_link-458 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

29\. Our Master once attended an assembly at the Bureau of the Imperial
Salt Commissioners at which the []{#calibre_link-324}Emperor T'ai Chung
was also present as a
[ś]{.ent}ramanera.^[1](#calibre_link-138){#calibre_link-459 .nounder}^
The [ś]{.ent}ramanera noticed our Master enter the hall of worship and
make a triple prostration to the Buddha, whereupon he asked: 'If we are
to seek nothing from the Buddha, Dharma or Sangha, what does Your
Reverence seek by such prostrations?'

'Though I seek not from the Buddha,' replied our Master, 'or from the
Dharma, or from the Sangha, it is my custom to show respect in this
way.'

'But what purpose does it serve?' insisted the [ś]{.ent}ramanera,
whereupon he suddenly received a slap.

'Oh,' he exclaimed. 'How uncouth you are!'

'What is this?' cried the Master. 'Imagine making a distinction between
refined and uncouth!' So saying, he administered another slap, causing
the [ś]{.ent}ramanera to betake himself
elsewhere!^[2](#calibre_link-139){#calibre_link-460 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

30\. During his travels, our Master paid a visit to Nan Ch'[ü]{.ent}an
(*his senior*). One day at dinner-time, he took his bowl and seated
himself opposite Nan Ch'[ü]{.ent}an's high chair. Noticing him there,
Nan Ch'[ü]{.ent}an stepped down to receive him and asked: 'How long has
Your Reverence been following the Way?'

[]{#calibre_link-241}'Since before the era of Bhisma R[ā]{.ent}ja,' came
the reply.^[1](#calibre_link-140){#calibre_link-461 .nounder}^

'Indeed?' exclaimed Nan Ch'[ü]{.ent}an. 'It seems that Master
Ma^[2](#calibre_link-141){#calibre_link-462 .nounder}^ has a worthy
grandson^[3](#calibre_link-142){#calibre_link-463 .nounder}^ here.' Our
Master then walked quietly away.

A few days later, when our Master was going out, Nan Ch'[ü]{.ent}an
remarked: 'You are a huge man, so why wear a hat of such ridiculous
size?'

'Ah, well,' replied our Master. 'It contains vast numbers of
chiliocosms.'

'Well, what of me?' enquired Nan Ch'[ü]{.ent}an, but the Master put on
his hat and walked off.^[4](#calibre_link-143){#calibre_link-464
.nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

![Image](images/000002.jpg){.calibre6}

[]{#calibre_link-276}31. Another day, our Master was seated in the
tea-room when Nan Ch'[ü]{.ent}an came down and asked him: 'What is meant
by "A clear insight into the Buddha-Nature results from the study of
dhy[ā]{.ent}na (*mind control*) and prajñ[ā]{.ent} (*wisdom*)"?'

Our Master replied: 'It means that, from morning till night, we should
never rely on a single thing.'

'But isn't that just Your Reverence's own concept of its meaning?

'How could I be so presumptuous?'

'Well, Your Reverence, some people might pay out cash for rice-water,
but whom could you ask to give anything for a pair of home-made straw
sandals like that?'

At this our Master remained silent.

Later, Wei Shan mentioned the incident to Yang Shan, enquiring if our
Master's silence betokened defeat.

'Oh no!' answered Yang. 'Surely you know that Huang Po has a tiger's
cunning?'

'Indeed there's no limit to your profundity,' exclaimed the
other.^[1](#calibre_link-144){#calibre_link-465 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

32\. Once our Master requested a short leave of absence and Nan Shan
asked where he was going.

'I'm just off to gather some vegetables.'

'What are you going to cut them with?'

[]{#calibre_link-319}Our Master held up his knife, whereupon Nan Shan
remarked: 'Well, that's all right for a guest but not for a host.'

Our Master showed his appreciation with a triple
prostration,^[1](#calibre_link-145){#calibre_link-466 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

33\. One day, five new arrivals presented themselves to our Master in a
group. One of them, instead of making the customary prostration,
remained standing and greeted him somewhat casually with a motion of his
clasped hands.

'And do you know how to be a good hunting-dog?' enquired our Master.

'I must follow the antelope's scent.'

'Suppose it leaves no scent, what will you follow then?'

'Then I'd follow its hoof-marks.'

'And if there were no hoof-marks, what then?'

'I could still follow the animal's tracks.'

'But what if there were not even tracks? How would you follow it then?'

'In that case,' said the newcomer, 'it would surely be a dead antelope.'

Our Master said nothing more at the time but, on the following morning
after his sermon, he asked: 'Will yesterday's antelope-hunting monk now
step forward.' The monk complied and our Master enquired: 'Yesterday, my
[]{#calibre_link-320}Reverend friend, you were left without anything to
say. How was that?'

Finding that the other returned no answer, he continued: 'Ah, you may
call yourself a real monk, but you are just an amateur
novice.'^[1](#calibre_link-146){#calibre_link-467 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

34\. Once, when our Master had just dismissed the first of the daily
assemblies at the K'ai Yuan Monastery near Hung Chou,
I^[2](#calibre_link-147){#calibre_link-468 .nounder}^ happened to enter
its precincts. Presently I noticed a wall-painting and, by questioning
the monk in charge of the monastery's administration, learnt that it
portrayed a certain famous monk.

'Indeed?' I said. 'Yes, I can see his likeness before me, but where is
the man himself?' My question was received in
silence.^[3](#calibre_link-148){#calibre_link-469 .nounder}^

So I remarked: 'But surely there [ARE]{.small} Zen monks here in this
temple, aren't there?'

'Yes,' replied the monastery administrator, ['THERE IS
ONE.]{.small}^[4](#calibre_link-149){#calibre_link-470 .nounder}^

After that, I requested an audience with the Master and repeated to him
my recent conversation.

[]{#calibre_link-330}'P'ei Hsiu!' cried the Master.

'Sir!' I answered respectfully.

'Where are [YOU?]{.small}'

Realizing that no reply was possible to such a question, I hastened to
ask our Master to re-enter the hall and continue his sermon.

\*   \*   \*

35.^[1](#calibre_link-150){#calibre_link-471 .nounder}^ When the Master
had taken his place in the assembly hall, he began:

'You people are just like drunkards. I don't know how you manage to keep
on your feet in such a sodden condition. Why, everyone will die of
laughing at you. It all seems [so EASY, SO]{.small} why do we have to
live to see a day like this? Can't you understand that in the whole
Empire of T'ang^[2](#calibre_link-151){#calibre_link-472 .nounder}^
there are [NO]{.small} "teachers skilled in Zen"?'

At this point, one of the monks present asked: 'How can you say that? At
this very moment, as all can see, we are sitting face to face with one
who has appeared in the world^[3](#calibre_link-152){#calibre_link-473
.nounder}^ to be a teacher of monks and a leader of men!'

'Please note that I did not say there is no [ZEN,']{.small} answered our
Master. 'I merely pointed out that there are no [TEACHERS!]{.small}'

Later, Wei Shan reported this conversation to Yang Shan and asked what
it implied.

Said Yang Shan: 'That swan is able to extract the pure milk from the
adulterated mixture. It is very clear that
he^[4](#calibre_link-153){#calibre_link-474 .nounder}^ is not just an
ordinary duck!'

[]{#calibre_link-331}'Ah,' responded the other. 'Yes, the point he made
was very subtle.'^[1](#calibre_link-154){#calibre_link-475 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

36\. One day I brought a statue of the Buddha and, kneeling respectfully
before our Master, begged him to bestow upon me a sacred honorific.

'P'ei Hsiu!' he cried.

'Yes, Master?'

'How is it that you still concern yourself with names?'

All I could do was to prostrate myself in silence.

And there was another time when I offered our Master a poem I had
written. He took it in his hands, but soon sat down and pushed it away.
'Do you understand?' he asked.

'No, Master.'

'But [WHY]{.small} don't you understand? Think a little! If things could
be expressed like this with ink and paper, what would be the purpose of
a sect like ours?'

My poem ran as follows:

When his Master bequeathed him Mind-Intuition,

He of great height with a pearl on his forehead

Dwelt for ten years by the river in Szech'uan.

Now, like a chalice borne by the waters,

[]{#calibre_link-259}

He has come to rest on the banks of the Chang.

A thousand disciples follow behind him

With dragon-mien glorious, bearing the fragrance

Of flowers from afar. These are aspirant Buddhas,

Yet desiring to serve him humbly as pupils.

Who knows upon which the Transmission will fall?

Our Master later replied with another poem:

Mind is a mighty ocean, a sea which knows no bounds.

Words are but scarlet lotus to cure the lesser ills.

Though there be times of leisure when my hands both lie at rest,

'Tis not to welcome idlers that I raise them to my
breast!^[1](#calibre_link-155){#calibre_link-476 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

37\. Our Master said: Those who desire progress along the Way must first
cast out the dross acquired through heterogeneous learning. Above all,
they must avoid seeking for anything objective or permitting themselves
any sort of attachment. Having listened to the profoundest doctrines,
they must behave as though a light breeze had caressed their ears, a
gust had passed away in the blink of an eye. By no means may they
attempt to follow such doctrines. To act in accordance with these
injunctions is to achieve profundity. The motionless contemplation of
the Tath[ā]{.ent}gatas implies the Zen-mindedness of one who has left
the round of birth and death forever. From the days when Bodhidharma
first transmitted naught but the One Mind, there
[]{#calibre_link-222}has been no other valid Dharma. Pointing to the
identity of Mind and the
Buddha,^[1](#calibre_link-156){#calibre_link-477 .nounder}^ he
demonstrated how the highest forms of Enlightenment could be
transcended. Assuredly he left no other thought but this. If you wish to
enter by the gate of our sect, this must be your only Dharma.

If you expect to gain anything from teachers of other doctrines, what is
your purpose in coming here? So it is said that if you have the merest
intention to indulge in conceptual thinking, behold, your very intention
will place you in the clutch of demons. Similarly, a conscious lack of
such intention, or even a consciousness that you do [NOT]{.small} have
[NO]{.small} such intention, will be sufficient to deliver you into the
demons' power. But they will not be demons from outside; they will be
the self-creations of your own mind. The only reality is that
'Bodhisattva' whose existence is totally un-manifested even in a
spiritual sense---the Trackless One. If ever you should allow yourselves
to believe in the more than purely transitory existence of phenomena,
you will have fallen into a grave error known as the heretical belief in
eternal life; but if, on the contrary, you take the intrinsic voidness
of phenomena to imply mere emptiness, then you will have fallen into
another error, the heresy of total
extinction.^[2](#calibre_link-157){#calibre_link-478 .nounder}^

Thus, 'the Triple World is only Mind; the myriad phenomena are only
consciousness' is the sort of thing taught to people who previously
maintained even falser views and suffered from even graver errors of
perception.^[3](#calibre_link-158){#calibre_link-479 .nounder}^
Similarly, []{#calibre_link-223}the doctrine that the
Dharmak[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}^[1](#calibre_link-159){#calibre_link-480
.nounder}^ is something attained only after reaching full Enlightenment
was merely intended as a means of converting the Therav[ā]{.ent}din
saints from graver errors. Finding these mistaken views prevalent,
Gautama Buddha refuted two sorts of misunderstanding---the notions that
Enlightenment will lead to the perception of a universal substance,
composed of particles which some hold to be gross and others
subtle.^[2](#calibre_link-160){#calibre_link-481 .nounder}^

How is it possible that Gautama Buddha, who denied all such views as
those I have mentioned, could have originated the present conceptions of
Enlightenment? But, as these doctrines are still commonly taught, people
become involved in the duality of longing for 'light' and eschewing
'darkness'. In their anxiety to [SEEK]{.small} Enlightenment on the one
hand and to [ESCAPE]{.small} from the passions and ignorance of
corporeal existence on the other, they conceive of an Enlightened Buddha
and unenlightened sentient beings as separate entities. Continued
indulgence in such dualistic concepts as these will lead to your rebirth
among the six orders of beings, life after life, aeon upon aeon, forever
and forever! And why is it thus? Because of falsifying the doctrine that
the original source of the Buddhas is that self-existent Nature. Let me
assure you again that the Buddha dwells not in light, nor sentient
beings in darkness, for the Truth allows no such distinctions. The
Buddha is not mighty, nor sentient beings feeble, for the Truth allows
no such distinctions. The Buddha is not
[]{#calibre_link-322}Enlightened, nor sentient beings ignorant, for the
Truth allows no such distinctions. It is all because you take it upon
yourself to talk of [EXPLAINING]{.small} Zen!

As soon as the mouth is opened, evils spring forth. People either
neglect the root and speak of the branches, or neglect the reality of
the 'illusory' world and speak only of Enlightenment. Or else they
chatter of cosmic activities leading to transformations, while
neglecting the Substance from which they spring---indeed, there is
[NEVER]{.small} any profit in discussion.

Once more, [ALL]{.small} phenomena are basically without existence,
though you cannot now say that they are [NONEXISTENT]{.small}. Karma
having arisen does not thereby exist; karma destroyed does not thereby
cease to exist. Even its root does not exist, for that root is no root.
Moreover, Mind is not Mind, for whatever that term connotes is far from
the reality it symbolizes. Form, too, is not really form. So if I now
state that there are no phenomena and no Original Mind, you will begin
to understand something of the intuitive Dharma silently conveyed to
Mind with Mind. Since phenomena and no-phenomena are one, there is
neither phenomena nor no-phenomena, and the only possible transmission
is to Mind with Mind.

When a sudden flash of thought occurs in your mind and you recognize it
for a dream or an illusion, then you can enter into the state reached by
the Buddhas of the past---not that the Buddhas of the past really exist,
or that the Buddhas of the future have not yet come into existence.
Above all, have no longing to become a future Buddha; your sole concern
should be, as thought succeeds thought, to avoid clinging to any of
them. Nor may you entertain the least ambition to be a Buddha here and
now. Even if []{#calibre_link-325}a Buddha arises, do not think of him
as 'Enlightened' or 'deluded', 'good' or 'evil'. Hasten to rid yourself
of any desire to cling to him. Cut him off in the twinkling of an eye!
On no account seek to hold him fast, for a thousand locks could not stay
him, nor a hundred thousand feet of rope bind him. This being so,
valiantly strive to banish and annihilate him.

I will now make luminously clear how to set about being rid of that
Buddha. Consider the sunlight. You may say it is near, yet if you follow
it from world to world you will never catch it in your hands. Then you
may describe it as far away and, lo, you will see it just before your
eyes. Follow it and, behold, it escapes you; run from it and it follows
you close. You can neither possess it nor have done with it. From this
example you can understand how it is with the true Nature of all things
and, henceforth, there will be no need to grieve or to worry about such
things.

Now, beware of going on to say that my recommendation to cut off the
Buddha was profane, or that my comparing him to the sunshine was pious,
as though I had wavered from the one extreme to the other! Followers of
the other sects would then agree with you, but our Zen Sect will not
admit either the profanity of the first nor the pious quality of the
second. Nor do we regard the first as Buddha-like, or the second as
something to be expected only from ignorant sentient
beings.^[1](#calibre_link-161){#calibre_link-482 .nounder}^

Thus all the visible universe is the Buddha; so are all
[]{#calibre_link-242}sounds; hold fast to one principle and all the
others are Identical. On seeing one thing, you see [ALL]{.small}. On
perceiving any individual's mind, you are perceiving [ALL]{.small} Mind.
Obtain a glimpse of one way and [ALL]{.small} ways are embraced in your
vision, for there is nowhere at all which is devoid of the Way. When
your glance falls upon a grain of dust, what you see is identical with
all the vast world-systems with their great rivers and mighty hills. To
gaze upon a drop of water is to behold the nature of all the waters of
the universe. Moreover, in thus contemplating the totality of phenomena,
you are contemplating the totality of Mind. All these phenomena are
intrinsically void and yet this Mind with which they are identical is no
mere nothingness. By this I mean that it does exist, but in a way too
marvellous for us to comprehend. It is an existence which is no
existence, a non-existence which is nevertheless existence. So this true
Void does in some marvellous way
'exist'.^[1](#calibre_link-162){#calibre_link-483 .nounder}^

According to what has been said, we can encompass all the vast
world-systems, though numberless as grains of sand, with our One Mind.
Then, why talk of 'inside' and 'outside'? Honey having the invariable
characteristic of sweetness, it follows that all honey is sweet. To
speak of this honey as sweet and that honey as bitter would be
nonsensical! How [COULD]{.small} it be so? Hence we say that the Void
has no inside and outside. There is only the spontaneously existing
Bh[ū]{.ent}tatathat[ā]{.ent} (*Absolute*). And, for this same reason, we
say it has no centre. There is only the spontaneously existing
Bh[ū]{.ent}tatathat[ā]{.ent}.

Thus, sentient beings [ARE]{.small} the Buddha. The Buddha is one with
them. Both consist entirely of the one 'substance'.
[]{#calibre_link-235}The phenomenal universe and Nirv[ā]{.ent}na,
activity and motionless placidity---[ALL]{.small} are of the one
'substance'. So also are the worlds and with the state that transcends
worlds. Yes, the beings passing through the six stages of existence,
those who have undergone the four kinds of birth, all the vast
world-systems with their mountains and river, the Bodhi-Nature and
illusion---[ALL]{.small} of them are thus. By saying that they are all
of one substance, we mean that their names and forms, their existence
and nonexistence, are void. The great world-systems, uncountable as
Gang[ā]{.ent}'s sands, are in truth comprised in the one boundless void.
Then where [CAN]{.small} there be Buddhas who deliver or sentient beings
to be delivered? When the true nature of all things that 'exist' is an
identical Thusness, how [CAN SUCH]{.small} distinctions have any
reality?

If you suppose that phenomena arise of themselves, you will fall into
the heresy of regarding things as having a spontaneous existence of
their own. On the other hand, if you accept the doctrine of
[AN[ĀTMAN]{.ent}]{.small}, the concept '[AN[ĀTMAN']{.ent}]{.small} may
land you among the
Therav[ā]{.ent}dins.^[1](#calibre_link-163){#calibre_link-484 .nounder}^

[]{#calibre_link-224}You people seek to measure all within the void,
foot by foot and inch by inch, I repeat to you that all phenomena are
devoid of distinctions of form. Intrinsically they belong to that
perfect tranquillity which lies beyond the transitory sphere of
form-producing activities, so all of them are coexistent with space and
one with reality. Since no bodies possess real form, we speak of
phenomena as void; and, since Mind is formless, we speak of the nature
of all things as void. Both are formless and both are termed void.
Moreover, none of the numerous doctrines has any existence outside your
original Mind. All this talk of Bodhi, Nirv[ā]{.ent}na, the Absolute,
the Buddha-Nature, Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na, Theravada, Bodhisattvas and
so on is like taking autumn leaves for gold. To use the symbol of the
closed fist: when it is opened, all beings---both gods and men---will
perceive there is not a single thing inside. Therefore is it written:

There's never been a single thing;

Then where's defiling dust to
cling?^[2](#calibre_link-164){#calibre_link-485 .nounder}^

If 'there's never been a single thing', past, present and future are
meaningless. So those who seek the Way must []{#calibre_link-260}enter
it with the suddenness of a knife-thrust. Full understanding of this
must come before they can enter. Hence, though Bodhidharma traversed
many countries on his way from India to China, he encountered only one
man, the Venerable Ko, to whom he could silently transmit the Mind-Seal,
the Seal of your own [REAL]{.small} Mind. Phenomena are the Seal of
Mind, just as the latter is the Seal of phenomena. Whatever Mind is, so
also are phenomena---both are equally real and partake equally of the
Dharma-Nature, which hangs in the void. He who receives an intuition of
this truth has become a Buddha and attained to the Dharma. Let me repeat
that Enlightenment cannot be bodily grasped (*attained perceived,
etc*.), for the body is formless; nor mentally grasped (*etc.*), for the
mind is formless; nor grasped (*etc.*), through its essential nature,
since that nature is the Original Source of all things, the real Nature
of all things, permanent Reality, of Buddha! How can you use the Buddha
to grasp the Buddha, formlessness to grasp formlessness, mind to grasp
mind, void to grasp void, the Way to grasp the Way? In reality, there is
nothing to be grasped (*perceived, attained, conceived, etc.*)---even
not-grasping cannot be grasped. So it is said: 'There is
[NOTHING]{.small} to be grasped.' We simply teach you how to understand
your original Mind.

Moreover, when the moment of understanding comes, do not think in terms
of understanding, not understanding or not not-understanding, for none
of these is something to be grasped. This Dharma of Thusness when
'grasped' is 'grasped', but he who 'grasps' it is no more conscious of
having done so than someone ignorant of it is conscious of his failure.
Ah, this Dharma of Thusness---until now so few people have come to
understand it that it is written: 'In []{#calibre_link-261}this world,
how few are they who lose their egos!' As for those people who seek to
grasp it through the application of some particular principle or by
creating a special environment, or through some scripture, or doctrine,
or age, or time, or name, or word, or through their six senses---how do
they differ from wooden dolls? But if, unexpectedly, one man were to
appear, one who formed no concept based on any name or form, I assure
you that this man might be sought through world after world, always in
vain! His uniqueness would assure him of succeeding to the Patriarch's
place and earn for him the name of [Ś]{.ent}[ā]{.ent}kya-muni's true
spiritual son: the conflicting aggregates of his ego-self would have
vanished, and he would indeed be the One! Therefore is it written: 'When
the King attains to Buddhahood, the princes accordingly leave their home
to become monks. Hard is the meaning of this saying! It is to teach you
to refrain from seeking Buddhahood, since any [SEARCH]{.small} is doomed
to failure. Some madman shrieking on the mountain-top, on hearing the
echo far below, may go to seek it in the valley. But, oh, how vain his
search! Once in the valley, he shrieks again and straightway climbs to
search among the peaks---why, he may spend a thousand rebirths or ten
thousand aeons searching for the source of those sounds by following
their echoes! How vainly will he breast the troubled waters of life and
death! Far better that you make [NO]{.small} sound, for then will there
be no echo---and thus it is with the dwellers in
Nirv[ā]{.ent}[ņ]{.ent}a! No listening, no knowing, no sound, no track,
no trace---make yourselves thus and you will be scarcely less than
neighbours of Bodhidharma!

\*   \*   \*

[]{#calibre_link-243}38. Q: Pray instruct me concerning the passage in
the s[ū]{.ent}tras denying the existence of a Sword of Thusness in the
Royal Treasury.^[1](#calibre_link-165){#calibre_link-486 .nounder}^

A: The Royal Treasury is the nature of the Void. Though all the vast
world-systems of the universe are contained therein, none of them have
existence outside your Mind. Another name for it is the Bodhisattva
Treasury of the Great Void. If you speak of it as existing or not
existing, or as neither the one nor the other, in every case it becomes
a mere ram's horn!^[2](#calibre_link-166){#calibre_link-487 .nounder}^
It is a ram's horn in the sense that you have made it an object of your
useless search.

\*   \*   \*

39\. Q: But is there not a Sword of Truth within the Royal Treasury?

A: Another ram's horn!

Q: Yet if there is no Sword of Truth why is it written: 'The Prince
seized the Sword of Truth from the Royal Treasury and set out upon his
conquests'? Why do you tell us nothing of it beyond denying its
objective existence?

A: The prince who took the sword connotes a true spiritual son of the
Tath[ā]{.ent}gata; but, if you say that he carried it off, you imply
that he [DEPRIVED]{.small} the Treasury of something. What nonsense it
is to speak of carrying off a piece of that Void Nature which is the
Source of all things! It would appear that, if you have got hold of
anything at all, it may be called a collection of rams' horns!

\*   \*   \*

[]{#calibre_link-234}40. Q: When K[ā]{.ent}[Ṡ]{.ent}yapa received the
seal of Buddhahood from Gautama Buddha, did he make use of words during
its further transmission?

A: Yes.

Q: Then, since he attempted its transmission in words, even he should be
included among the people with rams' horns.

A: K[ā]{.ent}[ṡ]{.ent}yapa obtained a direct self-realization of
original Mind, so he is not one of those with horns. Whosoever obtains
this direct realization of the Tath[ā]{.ent}gata Mind, thereby
understanding the true identity of the Tath[ā]{.ent}gata and perceiving
his real appearance and real form, can speak to others with the
authority of the Buddha's true spiritual son. But
[Ā]{.ent}nanda,^[1](#calibre_link-167){#calibre_link-488 .nounder}^
though he served his Master for twenty years, was unable to perceive
more than his outward appearance and form, and was therefore admonished
by the Buddha in these words: 'Those who concentrate entirely upon
helping the world cannot escape from among the horned
ones.'^[2](#calibre_link-168){#calibre_link-489 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

41\. Q: What is the meaning of the passage: 'Mañju[ś]{.ent}r[ī]{.ent}
stood before Gautama with a drawn sword'?

A: The 'Five Hundred Bodhisattvas' attained knowledge of their previous
lives and discovered how their previous karma had been constructed. This
a fable in which the 'Five Hundred' really refers to your five senses.
On account of their knowledge of their previous karma, they
[SOUGHT]{.small} the Buddha, Bodhisattvahood and Nirv[ā]{.ent}na
objectively.^[1](#calibre_link-169){#calibre_link-490 .nounder}^ It was
for this reason that Mañju[ś]{.ent}r[ī]{.ent} took up the Sword of Bodhi
and used it to destroy the concept of a tangible
Buddha;^[2](#calibre_link-170){#calibre_link-491 .nounder}^ and it is
for this that he is known as the destroyer of human virtues!

[]{#calibre_link-306}Q: What does the Sword really signify?

A: It signifies the apprehension of Mind.

Q: So the Sword used to destroy the concept of a tangible
Buddha^[3](#calibre_link-171){#calibre_link-492 .nounder}^ is the
apprehension of Mind. Well, then, if we are able to put an end to such
concepts by this means, how is their destruction actually accomplished?

A: You must use that wisdom which comes from non-dualism to destroy your
concept-forming, dualistic mentality.

Q: Assuming that the concepts of something perceptible and of
Enlightenment as something to be sought can be destroyed by drawing the
Sword of Non-Discriminatory Wisdom, where precisely is such a sword to
be found?

A: Since non-discriminatory wisdom is the destroyer both of perception
and of its opposite, it must also belong to the
Non-perceptible.^[4](#calibre_link-172){#calibre_link-493 .nounder}^

Q: Knowledge cannot be used to destroy knowledge, nor a sword to destroy
a sword.^[5](#calibre_link-173){#calibre_link-494 .nounder}^

[]{#calibre_link-326}A: Sword [DOES]{.small} destroy sword---they
destroy each other---and the no sword remains for you to grasp.
Knowledge [DOES]{.small} destroy knowledge---this knowledge invalidates
that knowledge---and then no knowledge remains for you to grasp. It is
as though mother and son perished
together.^[1](#calibre_link-174){#calibre_link-495 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

42\. Q: What is implied by 'seeing into the real Nature'?

A: That Nature and your perception of it are one. You cannot use it to
see something over and above itself. That Nature and your hearing of it
are one. You cannot use it to hear something over and above itself. If
you form a concept of the true nature of anything as being visible or
audible, you allow a dharma of distinction to arise. Let me repeat that
the perceived cannot perceive. Can there, I ask you, be a head attached
to the crown of your head? I will give you an example to make my meaning
clearer. Imagine some loose pearls in a bowl, some large globules and
some small. Each one is completely unaware of the others and none causes
the least obstruction to the rest. During their formation, they did not
say: 'Now I am coming into being': and when they begin to decay, they
will not say: 'Now I am decaying.' None of the beings born into the six
forms of life through the four kinds of birth are exceptions to this
rule. Buddhas and sentient creatures have no mutual perception of each
other. The four grades of Therav[ā]{.ent}din adepts who are able to
enter Nirv[ā]{.ent}[ņ]{.ent}a do not perceive, nor are they perceived by
Nirv[ā]{.ent}na. Those []{#calibre_link-225}Therav[ā]{.ent}dins who have
reached the 'three stages of holiness' and who possess the 'ten
excellent characteristics' neither perceive nor are perceived by
Enlightenment. So it is with everything else, down to fire and water, or
earth and sky. These pairs of elements have no mutual perception of each
other. Sentient beings do not [ENTER]{.small} the
Dharmadh[ā]{.ent}tu,^[1](#calibre_link-175){#calibre_link-496 .nounder}^
nor do the Buddhas [ISSUE FROM]{.small} it. There is no coming and going
within the Dharmat[ā]{.ent},^[2](#calibre_link-176){#calibre_link-497
.nounder}^ nor anything perceptible (*etc.*). This being so, why this
talk of 'I see', 'I hear', 'I receive an intuition through
Enlightenment', 'I hear the Dharma from the lips of an Enlightened One',
or of 'Buddhas appearing in the world to preach the Dharma'?
K[ā]{.ent}ty[ā]{.ent}yana was rebuked by
Vimalak[ī]{.ent}rti^[3](#calibre_link-177){#calibre_link-498 .nounder}^
for using that transitory mentality which belongs to the ephemeral state
to transmit the doctrine of the real existence of matter.

I assure you that all things have been free from bondage since the very
beginning.^[4](#calibre_link-178){#calibre_link-499 .nounder}^ So why
attempt to [EXPLAIN]{.small} them? Why attempt to purify what has never
been defiled?^[5](#calibre_link-179){#calibre_link-500 .nounder}^
Therefore it is written: 'The Absolute is [THUSNESS]{.small}---how can
it be discussed? You people still conceive of Mind as existing or not
existing, as pure or defiled, as something to be studied in the way that
one studies a piece of categorical knowledge, or as a concept---any of
these definitions is sufficient to throw you back into the endless round
of birth and death. The man who [PERCEIVES]{.small} things always wants
to identify them, to get a hold on them. Those who use their minds like
eyes in this way are sure to suppose that []{#calibre_link-226}progress
is a matter of stages. If you are that kind of person, you are as far
from the truth as earth is far from heaven. Why this talk of 'seeing
into your own nature'?

\*   \*   \*

43\. Q: You say that our original nature and the act of seeing into it
are one and the same' This can only be so if that nature is totally
undifferentiated. Pray explain how it is that, even allowing that there
are no real objects for us to perceive, nevertheless we do in fact see
what is near to us and are unable to see what is far away.

A: This is due to a misunderstanding arising from your own delusions.
You cannot argue that the Universal Nature does in fact contain real
objects on the grounds that 'no real objects to be perceived' would only
be true if there were nothing of the kind we [CALL]{.small} perceptible.
The nature of the Absolute is neither perceptible nor imperceptible; and
with phenomena it is just the same. But to one who has discovered his
real nature, how can there be anywhere or anything separate from it?
Thus, the six forms of life arising from the four kinds of birth,
together with the great world-systems of the universe with their rivers
and mountains, are [ALL]{.small} of one pure substance with our own
nature. Therefore is it said: 'The perception of a phenomenon is the
perception of the Universal Nature, since phenomena and Mind are one and
the same.' It is only because you cling to outward forms that you come
to 'see', 'hear', 'feel' and 'know' things as individual entities. True
perception is beyond your powers so long as you indulge in
these.^[1](#calibre_link-180){#calibre_link-501 .nounder}^

[]{#calibre_link-323}By such means you will fall among the followers of
the usual Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na and Therav[ā]{.ent}din doctrines who
rely upon deep [PERCEPTION]{.small} to arrive at a true understanding.
Therefore they see what is near and fail to see what is far away, but no
one on the right path thinks thus. I assure you there is no 'inner' or
'outer', or 'near' or 'far'. The fundamental nature of all phenomena is
close beside you, but you do not [SEE]{.small} even that; yet you still
go on talking of your inability to see what is far away. What meaning
can this sort of talk possibly have?

\*   \*   \*

44\. Q: What guidance does Your Reverence offer to those of us who find
all this very difficult to understand?

A: I have [NO THING]{.small} to offer. I have never had anything to
offer others. It is because you allow certain people to lead you astray
that you are forever [SEEKING]{.small} intuition and [SEARCHING]{.small}
for understanding. Isn't this a case of disciples and teachers all
falling into the same insoluble muddle? All you need to remember are the
following injunctions:

[FIRST, LEARN HOW TO BE ENTIRELY UNRECEPTTVE TO SENSATIONS ARISING FROM
EXTERNAL FORMS, THEREBY PURGING YOUR BODIES OF RECEPTIVITY TO
EXTERNALS.]{.small}

[SECOND, LEARN NOT TO PAY ATTENTION TO ANY DISTINCTIONS BETWEEN THIS AND
THAT ARISING FROM YOUR SENSATIONS, THEREBY PURGING YOUR BODIES OF
USELESS DISCERNMENTS BETWEEN ONE PHENOMENON AND ANOTHER.]{.small}

[THIRD, TAKE GREAT CARE TO AVOID DISCRIMINATING IN TERMS OF PLEASANT AND
UNPLEASANT SENSATIONS, THEREBY PURGING YOUR BODIES OF VAIN
DISCRIMINATIONS.]{.small}

[]{#calibre_link-249}[FOURTH, AVOID PONDERING THINGS IN YOUR MIND,
THEREBY PURGING YOUR BODIES OF DISCRIMINATORY
COGNITION.^[1](#calibre_link-181){#calibre_link-502 .nounder}^]{.small}

A single moment's dualistic thought is sufficient to drag you back to
the twelvefold chain of
causation.^[2](#calibre_link-182){#calibre_link-503 .nounder}^ It is
ignorance which turns the wheel of causation, thereby creating an
endless chain of karmic causes and results. This is the law which
governs our whole lives up to the time of senility and
death.^[3](#calibre_link-183){#calibre_link-504 .nounder}^

In this connection, we are told that Sudhana, after vainly seeking Bodhi
in a hundred and ten places within the twelvefold causal sphere, at last
encountered Maitreya who sent him to Mañju[ś]{.ent}r[ī]{.ent}.
Mañju[ś]{.ent}r[ī]{.ent} here represents your primordial ignorance of
reality. If, as thought succeeds thought, you go on seeking for wisdom
outside yourselves, then there is a continual process of thoughts
arising, dying away and being succeeded by others. And that is why all
you monks go on experiencing birth, old age, sickness and
death---building up karma which produces corresponding effects. For such
is the arising and passing away of the 'five bubbles' or, in other
words, the five skandhas. Ah, could you but restrain each single thought
from arising, then would the Eighteen Sense
Realms^[4](#calibre_link-184){#calibre_link-505 .nounder}^ be made to
vanish! How godlike, then, your bodily rewards and how exalted the
[]{#calibre_link-267}knowledge that would dawn within your minds! A mind
like that could be called the Terrace of the Spirit. But while you
remain lost in attachments, you condemn your bodies to be corpses or, as
it is sometimes expressed, to be lifeless corpses inhabited by demons!

\*   \*   \*

45\. Q: 'Vimalak[ī]{.ent}rti dwells in silence. Mañju[ś]{.ent}r[ī]{.ent}
offers praise.' How can they have really entered the Gateway of
Non-Duality?

A: The Gateway of Non-Duality is your original Mind. Speech and silence
are relative concepts belonging to the ephemeral sphere. When nothing is
sa[ī]{.ent}d, nothing is
manifested.^[1](#calibre_link-185){#calibre_link-506 .nounder}^ That is
why Mañju[ś]{.ent}r[ī]{.ent} offered praise.

Q: Vimalak[ī]{.ent}rti did not speak. Does this imply that sound is
subject to cessation?^[2](#calibre_link-186){#calibre_link-507
.nounder}^

A: Speech and silence are one! There is no distinction between them.
Therefore is it written: 'Neither the true nature nor the root of
Mañju[ś]{.ent}r[ī]{.ent}'s hearing are subject to cessation.' Thus, the
sound of the Tath[ā]{.ent}gata's voice is everlasting, nor can there be
any such reality as the time before he began to preach or the time after
he finished preaching. The preaching of the Tath[ā]{.ent}gata is
identical with the Dharma he taught, for there is no distinction between
the preaching and the thing preached; just as there is none between such
varied phenomena as the Glorified and Revealed Bodies of a Buddha, the
Bodhisattvas, the [Ś]{.ent}r[ā]{.ent}vakas, the world-systems with their
mountains and rivers, or water, birds, trees, forests and the rest. The
[]{#calibre_link-250}preaching of the Dharma is at one and the same time
both vocal and silent. Though one talks the day long, no word is spoken.
This being so, only silence belongs to the Essential.

\*   \*   \*

46\. Q: Is it true that the
[Ś]{.ent}r[ā]{.ent}vakas^[1](#calibre_link-187){#calibre_link-508
.nounder}^ can only merge their forms into the formless sphere which
still belongs to the transitory Triple World, and that they are
incapable of losing themselves utterly in Bodhi?

A: Yes. Form implies matter. Those saints are only proficient in casting
off worldly views and activities, by which means they escape from
worldly delusions and afflictions. They cannot lose themselves utterly
in Bodhi; thus, there is still the danger that demons may come and pluck
them from within the orbit of Bodhi itself. Aloofly seated in their
forest dwellings, they perceive the Bodhi-Mind but vaguely. Whereas
those who are vowed to become Bodhisattvas and who are already within
the Bodhi of the Three Worlds, neither reject nor grasp at anything.
Non-grasping, it were vain to seek them upon any plane; non-rejecting,
demons will strive in vain to find them.

Nevertheless, with the merest desire to attach yourselves to this or
that, a mental symbol is soon formed, such symbols in turn giving rise
to all those 'sacred writings' which lead you back to undergo the
various kinds of rebirth. So let your symbolic conception be that of a
void, for then the wordless teaching of Zen will make itself apparent to
you. Know only that you must decide to []{#calibre_link-307}eschew all
symbolizing whatever, for by this eschewal is 'symbolized' the Great
Void in which there is neither unity nor multiplicity---that Void which
is not really void, that Symbol which is no symbol. Then will the
Buddhas of all the vast world-systems manifest themselves to you in a
flash; you will recognize the hosts of squirming, wriggling sentient
beings as no more than shadows! Continents as innumerable as grains of
dust will seem no more to you than a single drop in the great ocean. To
you, the pro-foundest doctrines ever heard will seem but dreams and
illusions. You will recognize all minds as One and behold all things as
One---including those thousands of sacred books and myriads of pious
commentaries! All of them are just your One Mind. Could you but cease
your groping after forms, all these true perceptions would be yours!
Therefore is it written: 'Within the Thusness of the One Mind, the
various means to Enlightenment are no more than showy ornaments.'

\*   \*   \*

47\. Q: But what if in previous lives I have behaved like
Kalir[ā]{.ent}ja, slicing the limbs from living men?

A: The holy sages tortured by him represent your own Mind, while
Kalir[ā]{.ent}ja symbolizes that part of you which goes out
[SEEKING.]{.small} Such unkingly behaviour is called lust for personal
advantage. If you students of the Way, without making any attempt to
live virtuously, just want to make a study of everything you perceive,
then how are you different from
him?^[1](#calibre_link-188){#calibre_link-509 .nounder}^ By allowing
your gaze to linger []{#calibre_link-300}on a form, you wrench out the
eyes of a sage (*yourself*). And when you linger upon a sound, you slice
off the ears of a sage---thus it is with all your senses and with
cognition, for their varied perceptions are called slicers.

Q: When we meet all suffering with sagelike patience and avoid all
mind-slicing perceptions, that which suffers with resignation surely
cannot be the One Mind, for that cannot be subject to the endurance of
pain.

A: You are one of those people who force the Unbecoming into conceptual
moulds, such as the [CONCEPT]{.small} of patient suffering or the
[CONCEPT]{.small} of seeking nothing outside yourself. Thereby you do
yourself violence!

Q: When the holy sages were dismembered, were they conscious of pain;
and, if among them there were no entities capable of suffering, who or
what did suffer?

A: If you are not suffering pain now, what is the point of chiming in
like that?^[1](#calibre_link-189){#calibre_link-510 .nounder}^

\*   \*   \*

48\. Q: Did D[ī]{.ent}pamkara
Buddha^[2](#calibre_link-190){#calibre_link-511 .nounder}^ attain his
intuition of reality within a single five-hundred-year period or not?

A: There is no attaining it within such a period. You must never forget
that this so-called 'attaining' of intuition implies neither a
withdrawal from daily life nor a [SEARCH]{.small} for Enlightenment. You
have just to understand that time-periods have no real existence; hence
the attainment of the vital intuition occurs neither within nor without
a five-hundred-year period.

[]{#calibre_link-262}Q: Is it not possible to attain the omniscience in
which all the events of past, present and future are known to us?

A: There is absolutely [NOTHING]{.small} which can be attained.

Q: How long is a cycle of five hundred yugas?

A: One such period should be ample for you to become a liberated sage.
For, when D[ī]{.ent}pa[ṃ]{.ent}kara Buddha 'attained, his intuitive
knowledge of the Dharma, there was not really a grain of anything
attainable.

\*   \*   \*

49\. Q: The s[ū]{.ent}tras teach that the fettering of passions and
illusions produced during millions of kalpas is a sufficient means of
obtaining the Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya, even without going through the stage
of being monks. What does this mean?

A: If you practise [MEANS]{.small} of attaining Enlightenment for three
myriad aeons but without losing your belief in something really
attainable, you will still be as many aeons from your goal as there are
grains of sand in the Ganges. But if, by a direct perception of the
Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya's true nature, you grasp it in a flash, you will have
reached the highest goal taught in the Three Vehicles. Why? Because the
belief that the Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya can be obtained belongs to the
doctrines of those sects which do not understand the truth.

\*   \*   \*

50\. Q: If on perceiving a phenomenon I gain a sudden comprehension of
it, is that tantamount to understanding Bodhidharma's meaning?

[]{#calibre_link-227}A: Bodhidharma's mind penetrated even beyond the
void.^[1](#calibre_link-191){#calibre_link-512 .nounder}^

Q: Then individual objects [DO]{.small} exist?

A: The existence of things as separate entities and not as separate
entities are both dualistic concepts. As Bodhidharma said: 'There are
separate entities and there are not, but at the same time they are
neither the one nor the other, for relativity is transient.' If you
disciples cannot get beyond those incorrect orthodox treachings, why do
you call yourselves Zen monks? I exhort you to apply yourselves solely
to Zen and not to go seeking after wrong methods which only result in a
multiplicity of concepts. A man drinking water knows well enough if it
is cold or warm. Whether you be walking or sitting, you must restrain
all discriminatory thoughts from one moment to the next. If you do not,
you will never escape the chain of rebirth.

\*   \*   \*

51\. Q: If the Buddha really dwells in matchless tranquillity beyond the
multiplicity of forms, how is it that his body yielded eighty-four pecks
of relics?^[2](#calibre_link-192){#calibre_link-513 .nounder}^

A: If you really think like that, you are confusing the transitory
relics with the real.

Q: Are there really such things as
[ś]{.ent}ar[ī]{.ent}ras,^[3](#calibre_link-193){#calibre_link-514
.nounder}^ or are they the Buddha's accumulated merits?

A: There are no such things. They are not merits.

[]{#calibre_link-277}Q: Then, why is it written: 'The Buddha-relics are
ethereal and subtle; the golden ones are indestructible'? What does Your
Reverence say to that?

A: If you harbour such beliefs, why call yourself a student of Zen? Can
you imagine bones in the Void? The minds of all the Buddhas are one with
the Great Void. What bones do you expect to find there?

Q: But if I had actually seen some of these relics, what then?

A: You would have seen the products of your own wrongthinking.

Q: Does Your Reverence have any of those relics? Please let us see them.

A: A true relic would be hard to see! To find it, you would have to
crush mighty Mount Sumeru to fine dust, using only your bare hands!

\*   \*   \*

52\. The Master said: Only when your minds cease dwelling upon anything
whatsoever will you come to an understanding of the true way of Zen. I
may express it thus---the way of the Buddhas flourishes in a mind
utterly freed from conceptual thought processes, while discrimination
between this and that gives birth to a legion of demons! Finally,
remember that from first to last not even the smallest grain of anything
perceptible^[1](#calibre_link-194){#calibre_link-515 .nounder}^ has ever
existed or ever will exist.

\*   \*   \*

53\. Q: To whom did the Patriarch silently transmit the Dharma?

[]{#calibre_link-239}A: No Dharma was transmitted to
anybody.^[1](#calibre_link-195){#calibre_link-516 .nounder}^

Q: Then why did the Second Patriarch ask Bodhidharma for the
transmission of Mind?

A: If you hold that something was transmitted, you imply that the Second
Patriarch reached Mind by [SEEKING,]{.small} but no amount of seeking
can ever lead to Mind; so we [TALK]{.small} of only transmitting Mind to
you. If you really [GET]{.small} something, you will find yourself back
on the wheel of life and death!

\*   \*   \*

54\. Q: Did the Buddha pierce right through the primordial darkness of
ignorance?

A: Yes. The primordial darkness is the sphere in which every Buddha
achieves Enlightenment. Thus, the very sphere in which karma arises may
be called a Bodhimandala.^[2](#calibre_link-196){#calibre_link-517
.nounder}^ Every grain of matter, every appearance is one with Eternal
and Immutable Reality! Wherever your foot may fall, you are still within
that Sanctuary for Enlightenment, though it is nothing perceptible. I
assure you that one who comprehends the truth of 'nothing to be
attained' is already seated in the sanctuary where he will gain his
Enlightenment.

Q: Is primordial ignorance bright or dark?

A: It is neither. Both terms are dualistic. Primordial ignorance is at
once neither bright nor dark; and by 'the
non-bright'^[3](#calibre_link-197){#calibre_link-518 .nounder}^ is just
meant that Original Brightness which is above the distinction made
between bright and dark. Just this one sentence is enough to give most
people a []{#calibre_link-268}headache! That is why we say the world is
full of vexations arising from the transitory phenomena around
us.^[1](#calibre_link-198){#calibre_link-519 .nounder}^

Though, like [Ś]{.ent}[ā]{.ent}riputra, we were all to strain our minds
trying to discover a means of liberation, that would be no way to fathom
the wisdom and omniscience by which the Buddhas transcend all space.
There can be no argument about it. Once when Gautama had measured out
three thousand chiliochosms,^[2](#calibre_link-199){#calibre_link-520
.nounder}^ a Bodhisattva suddenly appeared and passed over them in a
single stride. Yet even that prodigious stride failed to cover the width
of one pore of Samantabhadra's skin! Now, what sort of mental
attainments have you that will help you to study the meaning of that?

Q: But if such things are entirely unlearnable, then why is it written:
'On returning to our Original Nature, we transcend duality; but the
relative means form many gates to the truth'?

A: We return to our Original Nature beyond duality, which in fact is
also the real nature of the universe of primordial
darkness,^[3](#calibre_link-200){#calibre_link-521 .nounder}^ which
again is the Buddha-Nature. The 'relative means forming many gates'
applies to [Ś]{.ent}r[ā]{.ent}vakas who hold that our universe is
subject to becoming and cessation, and to Pratyeka Buddhas who, though
acknowledging the infinity of its past, regard it as subject to future
destruction; so they all concentrate entirely on the means of overcoming
it.^[4](#calibre_link-201){#calibre_link-522 .nounder}^ But the real
Buddhas perceived []{#calibre_link-228}that the becoming and destruction
of the sentient world are both one with
eternity.^[1](#calibre_link-202){#calibre_link-523 .nounder}^ In another
sense, there is no becoming or cessation. To perceive all this is to be
truly Enlightened. Thus Nirv[ā]{.ent}[ņ]{.ent}a and Enlightenment are
one.

When the lotus opened and the universe lay disclosed, there arose the
duality of Absolute and sentient world; or, rather, the Absolute
appeared in two aspects which, taken together, comprise pure perfection.
These aspects are unchanging reality and potential form. For sentient
beings, there are such pairs of opposites as becoming and cessation,
together with all the others. Therefore, beware of clinging to one half
of a pair. Those who, in their singleminded attempt to reach Buddhahood,
detest the sentient world, thereby blaspheme all the Buddhas of the
universe. The Buddhas, on manifesting themselves in the world, seized
dung-shovels to rid themselves of all such rubbish as books containing
metaphysics and sophistry.^[2](#calibre_link-203){#calibre_link-524
.nounder}^

My advice to you is to rid yourselves of all your previous ideas about
[STUDYING]{.small} Mind or [PERCEIVING]{.small} it. When you are rid of
them, you will no longer lose yourselves amid sophistries. Regard the
process exactly as you would regard the shovelling of dung.

Yes, my advice is to give up all indulgence in conceptual thought and
intellectual processes. When such things no longer trouble you, you will
unfailingly reach Supreme Enlightenment. On no account make a
distinction between the Absolute and the sentient world. As a real
student of Ts'ao Hsi Zen,^[3](#calibre_link-204){#calibre_link-525
.nounder}^ you must make no distinctions of any kind.
[]{#calibre_link-296}From the earliest times the
Sages^[1](#calibre_link-205){#calibre_link-526 .nounder}^ have taught
that a minimum of activity is the gateway of their Dharma; so let
[NO]{.small} activity be the gateway of my Dharma! Such is the Gateway
of the One Mind, but all who reach this gate fear to enter. I do
[NOT]{.small} teach a doctrine of extinction! Few understand this, but
those who do understand are the only ones to become Buddhas. Treasure
this gem!

\*   \*   \*

55\. Q: But how can we prevent ourselves from falling into the error of
making distinctions between this and that?

A: By realizing that, though you eat the whole day through, no single
grain has passed your lips; and that a day's journey has not taken you a
single step forward---also by uniformly abstaining from such notions as
'self' and 'other', [DO NOT PERMIT THE EVENTS OF YOUR DAILY LIVES TO
BIND YOU, BUT NEVER WITHDRAW YOURSELVES FROM THEM.]{.small} Only by
acting thus can you earn the title of 'A Liberated One'.

Never allow yourselves to mistake outward appearance for reality. Avoid
the error of thinking in terms of past, present and future. The past has
not gone; the present is a fleeting moment; the future is not yet to
come. When you practise
mind-control,^[2](#calibre_link-206){#calibre_link-527 .nounder}^ sit in
the proper position, stay perfectly tranquil, and do not permit the
least movement of your minds to disturb you. This alone is what is
called liberation.^[3](#calibre_link-207){#calibre_link-528 .nounder}^

Ah, be diligent! Be diligent! Of a thousand or ten thousand attempting
to enter by this Gate, only three or perhaps five pass through. If you
are heedless of my warnings, calamity is sure to follow. Therefore is it
written:

[]{#calibre_link-315}

Exert your strength in [THIS]{.small} life to attain!

Or else incur long aeons of further pain!

\*   \*   \*

56\. The Master passed away on this mountain during the T'ai Chung Reign
[(A.D.]{.small} 847-859) of the T'ang Dynasty. The Emperor Hs[ü]{.ent}an
Tsung bestowed upon him the posthumous titlee of 'The Zen Master Who
Destroys All Limitations'. The memorial pagoda is known as 'The Tower of
Spacious Karma'.
:::

::: {#calibre_link-208 .calibre}
## []{#calibre_link-540 .calibre3}**INDEX** {#calibre_link-9 .h1}

A[BSOLUTE]{.small}, The, [18](#calibre_link-209){.nounder},
[19](#calibre_link-210){.nounder}, [21](#calibre_link-211){.nounder},
[31](#calibre_link-212){.nounder}, [46](#calibre_link-213){.nounder},
[56](#calibre_link-214){.nounder}, [67](#calibre_link-215){.nounder}
fn., [69](#calibre_link-216){.nounder},
[83](#calibre_link-217){.nounder}, [84](#calibre_link-218){.nounder},
[87](#calibre_link-219){.nounder}, [93](#calibre_link-220){.nounder},
[95](#calibre_link-221){.nounder}, [104](#calibre_link-222){.nounder},
[105](#calibre_link-223){.nounder} fn.,
[110](#calibre_link-224){.nounder}, [117](#calibre_link-225){.nounder},
[118](#calibre_link-226){.nounder}, [126](#calibre_link-227){.nounder},
[130](#calibre_link-228){.nounder}

Amida, [91](#calibre_link-229){.nounder} fn.,
[92](#calibre_link-230){.nounder} fn.

Amidism, [25](#calibre_link-231){.nounder}

[Ā]{.ent}nanda, [12](#calibre_link-232){.nounder},
[66](#calibre_link-233){.nounder}, [114](#calibre_link-234){.nounder}

An[ā]{.ent}tman, [109](#calibre_link-235){.nounder}

Anuttara-samyak-sa[ṁ]{.ent}bodhi, [72](#calibre_link-236){.nounder}

Avalokite[ś]{.ent}vara, [32](#calibre_link-237){.nounder}

Avidy[ā]{.ent}, [76](#calibre_link-238){.nounder},
[128](#calibre_link-239){.nounder}

B[EING]{.small}, State of, [34](#calibre_link-240){.nounder}

Bhisma R[ā]{.ent}ja, [97](#calibre_link-241){.nounder}

Bh[ū]{.ent}tatathat[ā]{.ent}, [93](#calibre_link-220){.nounder},
[108](#calibre_link-242){.nounder}, [113](#calibre_link-243){.nounder}
fn.

Blofeld, John, [28](#calibre_link-244){.nounder}

Blofeld, Meifang, [28](#calibre_link-244){.nounder}

Bo Tree, [11](#calibre_link-245){.nounder}

Bodhi, [38](#calibre_link-246){.nounder},
[39](#calibre_link-247){.nounder}, [82](#calibre_link-248){.nounder},
[110](#calibre_link-224){.nounder}, [120](#calibre_link-249){.nounder},
[122](#calibre_link-250){.nounder}

Bodhi-Mind, [83](#calibre_link-217){.nounder}

Bodhi-Nature, [109](#calibre_link-235){.nounder}

Bodhidharma, [12](#calibre_link-232){.nounder},
[13](#calibre_link-251){.nounder}, [14](#calibre_link-252){.nounder},
[42](#calibre_link-253){.nounder}, [44](#calibre_link-254){.nounder},
[58](#calibre_link-255){.nounder}, [59](#calibre_link-256){.nounder},
[69](#calibre_link-216){.nounder}, [70](#calibre_link-257){.nounder},
[76](#calibre_link-238){.nounder}, [78](#calibre_link-258){.nounder},
[87](#calibre_link-219){.nounder}, [93](#calibre_link-220){.nounder},
[103](#calibre_link-259){.nounder}, [111](#calibre_link-260){.nounder},
[112](#calibre_link-261){.nounder}, [125](#calibre_link-262){.nounder},
[126](#calibre_link-227){.nounder}, [128](#calibre_link-239){.nounder}

Bodhisattva of Infinite Extent, [74](#calibre_link-263){.nounder}

Bodhisattva Treasury of the Great Void,
[113](#calibre_link-243){.nounder}

Bodhisattva's Progress, [33](#calibre_link-264){.nounder},
[34](#calibre_link-240){.nounder}, [46](#calibre_link-213){.nounder}

Bodhisattvas, [32](#calibre_link-237){.nounder},
[42](#calibre_link-253){.nounder}, [47](#calibre_link-265){.nounder},
[49](#calibre_link-266){.nounder}, [84](#calibre_link-218){.nounder},
[91](#calibre_link-229){.nounder}, [104](#calibre_link-222){.nounder},
[110](#calibre_link-224){.nounder}, [121](#calibre_link-267){.nounder},
[122](#calibre_link-250){.nounder}, [129](#calibre_link-268){.nounder}

Body of Bliss, [68](#calibre_link-269){.nounder} fn.

Book-knowledge, [56](#calibre_link-214){.nounder}

Book-learning, [55](#calibre_link-270){.nounder}

Buddha, [44](#calibre_link-254){.nounder}; what is the,
[67](#calibre_link-215){.nounder}-8, [78](#calibre_link-258){.nounder};
where is the, [80](#calibre_link-271){.nounder}

Buddha's Eye of Wisdom, [82](#calibre_link-248){.nounder}

Buddha Vehicle, [73](#calibre_link-272){.nounder}

Buddha-Essence, [46](#calibre_link-213){.nounder},
[47](#calibre_link-265){.nounder}

Buddha-Mind, [37](#calibre_link-273){.nounder},
[69](#calibre_link-216){.nounder}

Buddha-nature, [7](#calibre_link-274){.nounder},
[35](#calibre_link-275){.nounder}, [42](#calibre_link-253){.nounder},
[73](#calibre_link-272){.nounder}, [83](#calibre_link-217){.nounder},
[87](#calibre_link-219){.nounder}, [98](#calibre_link-276){.nounder},
[110](#calibre_link-224){.nounder}, [129](#calibre_link-268){.nounder}

Buddha-relics, [126](#calibre_link-227){.nounder} fn.,
[127](#calibre_link-277){.nounder}

Buddha-Source, [35](#calibre_link-275){.nounder}

Buddha-Substance, [84](#calibre_link-218){.nounder},
[91](#calibre_link-229){.nounder} fn.

Buddhak[ā]{.ent}ya, [74](#calibre_link-263){.nounder}

*Buddhist Dictionary*, [28](#calibre_link-244){.nounder}

Buddhist Society, [9](#calibre_link-278){.nounder}

C[ANTON]{.small}, [13](#calibre_link-251){.nounder}

Celestial Brilliance, [72](#calibre_link-236){.nounder}

Chariot of the Buddhas, [44](#calibre_link-254){.nounder}

Chih Kung, [62](#calibre_link-279){.nounder},
[63](#calibre_link-280){.nounder}, [89](#calibre_link-281){.nounder},
[90](#calibre_link-282){.nounder}

Chinese Buddhists, [14](#calibre_link-252){.nounder}

Ch'ing Ming, [88](#calibre_link-283){.nounder},
[89](#calibre_link-281){.nounder}, [92](#calibre_link-230){.nounder},
[117](#calibre_link-225){.nounder} fn.

Chuang Tzû, [15](#calibre_link-284){.nounder},
[55](#calibre_link-270){.nounder} fn.

Chung Lin, [8](#calibre_link-285){.nounder}

City of Illusion, [46](#calibre_link-213){.nounder},
[47](#calibre_link-265){.nounder}

City of Precious Things, [46](#calibre_link-213){.nounder}-7

Conceptual thought, [45](#calibre_link-286){.nounder}

Confucianism, [15](#calibre_link-284){.nounder}

Coomaraswamy, [109](#calibre_link-235){.nounder} fn.

D[ARKNESS]{.small}, [76](#calibre_link-238){.nounder}

Dharma, [34](#calibre_link-240){.nounder},
[36](#calibre_link-287){.nounder}, [37](#calibre_link-273){.nounder},
[39](#calibre_link-247){.nounder}, [41](#calibre_link-288){.nounder},
[42](#calibre_link-253){.nounder}, [43](#calibre_link-289){.nounder},
[44](#calibre_link-254){.nounder}, [47](#calibre_link-265){.nounder},
[50](#calibre_link-290){.nounder}, [51](#calibre_link-291){.nounder},
[52](#calibre_link-292){.nounder}, [65](#calibre_link-293){.nounder}
fn., [76](#calibre_link-238){.nounder},
[77](#calibre_link-294){.nounder}, [79](#calibre_link-295){.nounder},
[84](#calibre_link-218){.nounder}, [88](#calibre_link-283){.nounder},
[93](#calibre_link-220){.nounder}, [104](#calibre_link-222){.nounder},
[121](#calibre_link-267){.nounder}, [122](#calibre_link-250){.nounder},
[125](#calibre_link-262){.nounder}, [127](#calibre_link-277){.nounder},
[128](#calibre_link-239){.nounder}, [131](#calibre_link-296){.nounder}

Dharma R[ā]{.ent}ja, [56](#calibre_link-214){.nounder}

Dharma-Nature, [111](#calibre_link-260){.nounder}

Dharma-practice, [56](#calibre_link-214){.nounder},
[65](#calibre_link-293){.nounder}

Dharma-principles, [58](#calibre_link-255){.nounder}

Dharmadh[ā]{.ent}tu, [117](#calibre_link-225){.nounder}

Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya, [25](#calibre_link-231){.nounder},
[41](#calibre_link-288){.nounder}, [50](#calibre_link-290){.nounder},
[51](#calibre_link-291){.nounder} fn.,
[62](#calibre_link-279){.nounder}, [64](#calibre_link-297){.nounder},
[67](#calibre_link-215){.nounder}, [69](#calibre_link-216){.nounder},
[105](#calibre_link-223){.nounder}, [125](#calibre_link-262){.nounder}

Dharmat[ā]{.ent}, [117](#calibre_link-225){.nounder}

Dhy[ā]{.ent}na, [131](#calibre_link-296){.nounder} fn.

Dhy[ā]{.ent}na Sect, [9](#calibre_link-278){.nounder}

Dhy[ā]{.ent}na-practice, [13](#calibre_link-251){.nounder},
[21](#calibre_link-211){.nounder}-3, [52](#calibre_link-292){.nounder},
[94](#calibre_link-298){.nounder} fn.

Dialogues, [52](#calibre_link-292){.nounder}--4,
[57](#calibre_link-299){.nounder}--63,
[64](#calibre_link-297){.nounder}--6,
[67](#calibre_link-215){.nounder}--132

*Diamond S[ū]{.ent}tra,* 9, [36](#calibre_link-287){.nounder} fn.

*Dictionary of Buddhist Terms*, [28](#calibre_link-244){.nounder}

D[ī]{.ent}pamkara Buddha, [35](#calibre_link-275){.nounder},
[36](#calibre_link-287){.nounder} fn.,
[57](#calibre_link-299){.nounder}, [83](#calibre_link-217){.nounder},
[124](#calibre_link-300){.nounder}, [125](#calibre_link-262){.nounder}

Doctrine of Mental Origins, [43](#calibre_link-289){.nounder}

Doctrine of No--Dharma, [64](#calibre_link-297){.nounder},
[65](#calibre_link-293){.nounder}

Doctrine of the Mind, [37](#calibre_link-273){.nounder}

Doctrine of Words, [24](#calibre_link-301){.nounder}

E[IGHTEEN]{.small} S[ENSE]{.small} R[EALMS]{.small},
[120](#calibre_link-249){.nounder}

Eightfold Path, [14](#calibre_link-252){.nounder}

[]{#calibre_link-541}Eighth Step, [14](#calibre_link-252){.nounder}

Eighty Excellencies, [73](#calibre_link-272){.nounder}

Eighty--Four Deeply Enlightened Ones, [95](#calibre_link-221){.nounder}

Ekhart, [11](#calibre_link-245){.nounder}

Enlightened Mind, [57](#calibre_link-299){.nounder},
[58](#calibre_link-255){.nounder}

Enlightenment, [11](#calibre_link-245){.nounder},
[13](#calibre_link-251){.nounder}, [15](#calibre_link-284){.nounder},
[16](#calibre_link-302){.nounder}, [22](#calibre_link-303){.nounder},
[24](#calibre_link-301){.nounder}, [25](#calibre_link-231){.nounder},
[26](#calibre_link-304){.nounder}, [33](#calibre_link-264){.nounder},
[34](#calibre_link-240){.nounder}, [35](#calibre_link-275){.nounder}
fn., [39](#calibre_link-247){.nounder},
[42](#calibre_link-253){.nounder}, [43](#calibre_link-289){.nounder},
[45](#calibre_link-286){.nounder}, [62](#calibre_link-279){.nounder},
[64](#calibre_link-297){.nounder}, [68](#calibre_link-269){.nounder},
[69](#calibre_link-216){.nounder}, [81](#calibre_link-305){.nounder},
[88](#calibre_link-283){.nounder}, [93](#calibre_link-220){.nounder},
[95](#calibre_link-221){.nounder} fn.,
[105](#calibre_link-223){.nounder}, [111](#calibre_link-260){.nounder},
[115](#calibre_link-306){.nounder}, [117](#calibre_link-225){.nounder},
[123](#calibre_link-307){.nounder}, [124](#calibre_link-300){.nounder},
[125](#calibre_link-262){.nounder}, [128](#calibre_link-239){.nounder},
[130](#calibre_link-228){.nounder}

Environmental phenomena, [45](#calibre_link-286){.nounder},
[48](#calibre_link-308){.nounder}

Error, [80](#calibre_link-271){.nounder}

Evans--Wentz, Dr., [26](#calibre_link-304){.nounder},
[91](#calibre_link-229){.nounder}

Evil, good and, [34](#calibre_link-240){.nounder}

F[A]{.small} C[HIEN]{.small}, [8](#calibre_link-285){.nounder}

Five Hundred Bodhisattvas, [114](#calibre_link-234){.nounder}

Flux, [126](#calibre_link-227){.nounder} fn.

Four Grades of Sainthood, [62](#calibre_link-279){.nounder},
[89](#calibre_link-281){.nounder}

Four Rewards, [69](#calibre_link-216){.nounder}

Fukien, [94](#calibre_link-298){.nounder}

Full Enlightenment, [46](#calibre_link-213){.nounder}

G[ATEWAY OF]{.small} N[ON]{.small}--D[UALITY]{.small},
[121](#calibre_link-267){.nounder}

Gateway of the One Mind, [131](#calibre_link-296){.nounder}

Gateway of the Stillness beyond all Activity,
[79](#calibre_link-295){.nounder}

Gautama Buddha, [9](#calibre_link-278){.nounder},
[10](#calibre_link-309){.nounder}, [11](#calibre_link-245){.nounder},
[12](#calibre_link-232){.nounder}, [16](#calibre_link-302){.nounder},
[36](#calibre_link-287){.nounder} fn.,
[70](#calibre_link-257){.nounder}, [79](#calibre_link-295){.nounder},
[83](#calibre_link-217){.nounder}, [85](#calibre_link-310){.nounder}
fn., [87](#calibre_link-219){.nounder},
[91](#calibre_link-229){.nounder}, [105](#calibre_link-223){.nounder},
[114](#calibre_link-234){.nounder}, [124](#calibre_link-300){.nounder},
[126](#calibre_link-227){.nounder}, [129](#calibre_link-268){.nounder},
[130](#calibre_link-228){.nounder}

Glorious Victory, [72](#calibre_link-236){.nounder}

God, Christian ideas of, [17](#calibre_link-311){.nounder}--18

Good and evil, [34](#calibre_link-240){.nounder}

Gradual School, [15](#calibre_link-284){.nounder}

Great Void, [75](#calibre_link-312){.nounder},
[86](#calibre_link-313){.nounder} fn.,
[123](#calibre_link-307){.nounder}, [126](#calibre_link-227){.nounder}
fn., [127](#calibre_link-277){.nounder}

Great Way, [70](#calibre_link-257){.nounder}

H[EARER]{.small}-B[UDDHAS]{.small}, [47](#calibre_link-265){.nounder}

Highest vehicle, [7](#calibre_link-274){.nounder}

H[ī]{.ent}nay[ā]{.ent}na, [10](#calibre_link-309){.nounder},
[12](#calibre_link-232){.nounder}

H[ī]{.ent}nay[ā]{.ent}na School, [23](#calibre_link-314){.nounder}

H[ī]{.ent}nay[ā]{.ent}nists, [14](#calibre_link-252){.nounder},
[39](#calibre_link-247){.nounder}, [44](#calibre_link-254){.nounder}
fn., [47](#calibre_link-265){.nounder}

Hridaya S[ū]{.ent}tra, [32](#calibre_link-237){.nounder} fn.

Hsi Y[ü]{.ent}n, [7](#calibre_link-274){.nounder},
[94](#calibre_link-298){.nounder} fn.

Hsin, [21](#calibre_link-211){.nounder}

Hs[ü]{.ent}an Tsung, Emperor, [132](#calibre_link-315){.nounder}

Hu Shih, Dr., [13](#calibre_link-251){.nounder}

Huang Po, [10](#calibre_link-309){.nounder},
[11](#calibre_link-245){.nounder}, [15](#calibre_link-284){.nounder},
[16](#calibre_link-302){.nounder}, [20](#calibre_link-316){.nounder},
[21](#calibre_link-211){.nounder}, [23](#calibre_link-314){.nounder},
[24](#calibre_link-301){.nounder}, [25](#calibre_link-231){.nounder},
[39](#calibre_link-247){.nounder} fn., [40](#calibre_link-317){.nounder}
fn., [44](#calibre_link-254){.nounder} fn.,
[51](#calibre_link-291){.nounder} fn., [52](#calibre_link-292){.nounder}
fn., [54](#calibre_link-318){.nounder} fn.,
[73](#calibre_link-272){.nounder} fn., [76](#calibre_link-238){.nounder}
fn., [80](#calibre_link-271){.nounder} fn.,
[82](#calibre_link-248){.nounder} fn.,
[95](#calibre_link-221){.nounder}, [97](#calibre_link-241){.nounder}
fn., [98](#calibre_link-276){.nounder},
[99](#calibre_link-319){.nounder} fn.,
[100](#calibre_link-320){.nounder} fn.,
[105](#calibre_link-223){.nounder} fn.

*Huang Po Ch'uan Hsin Fa ϒao*, [9](#calibre_link-278){.nounder}

*Huang Po Doctrine of Universal Mind, The*,
[27](#calibre_link-321){.nounder}

Huang Po, Mount, [7](#calibre_link-274){.nounder}

Hui Ch'ang, [8](#calibre_link-285){.nounder}

Hui Hai, [7](#calibre_link-274){.nounder}

Hui Nêng (Wei Lang), [7](#calibre_link-274){.nounder},
[12](#calibre_link-232){.nounder}, [15](#calibre_link-284){.nounder},
[64](#calibre_link-297){.nounder}, [78](#calibre_link-258){.nounder},
[117](#calibre_link-225){.nounder} fn.

Humphreys, Christmas, [16](#calibre_link-302){.nounder}

Hung Chou, [7](#calibre_link-274){.nounder},
[100](#calibre_link-320){.nounder}

Huxley, Aldous, [80](#calibre_link-271){.nounder} fn.

I [HSÜAN,]{.small} 16

Icchantikas, [47](#calibre_link-265){.nounder}

Illusion, [59](#calibre_link-256){.nounder}

Imperial Salt Commissioners, Bureau of,
[95](#calibre_link-221){.nounder}

Inner Light, [11](#calibre_link-245){.nounder}

Intuitive Knowledge, [17](#calibre_link-311){.nounder},
[19](#calibre_link-210){.nounder}

J Ê[N]{.small} WÊ[N]{.small}, [99](#calibre_link-319){.nounder} fn.

*Jewel of Transcendental Wisdom*, [9](#calibre_link-278){.nounder}

*Journal of Oriental Studies of the Catholic University of Peiping*,
[62](#calibre_link-279){.nounder}

K' [AI]{.small} [YUAN]{.small} M[ONASTERY]{.small},
[8](#calibre_link-285){.nounder}, [100](#calibre_link-320){.nounder}

Kalir[ā]{.ent}ja, [85](#calibre_link-310){.nounder},
[123](#calibre_link-307){.nounder}

Kao An, [7](#calibre_link-274){.nounder}

Karma, [35](#calibre_link-275){.nounder},
[106](#calibre_link-322){.nounder}

K[ā]{.ent}[ş]{.ent}yapa, [50](#calibre_link-290){.nounder},
[52](#calibre_link-292){.nounder}, [66](#calibre_link-233){.nounder},
[114](#calibre_link-234){.nounder}

K[ā]{.ent}ty[ā]{.ent}yana, [117](#calibre_link-225){.nounder}

Kiangsi, [7](#calibre_link-274){.nounder} fn.

Ko, Venerable Master, [70](#calibre_link-257){.nounder},
[111](#calibre_link-260){.nounder}

K[ş]{.ent}[ā]{.ent}nti-rishi, [85](#calibre_link-310){.nounder}

Kuang T'ang Monastery, [8](#calibre_link-285){.nounder}

Kuei Tsung, [94](#calibre_link-298){.nounder},
[95](#calibre_link-221){.nounder}, [95](#calibre_link-221){.nounder} fn.

L[AMAISM]{.small}, [25](#calibre_link-231){.nounder}

La[ņ]{.ent}k[ā]{.ent}vat[ā]{.ent}ra S[ū]{.ent}tra,
[13](#calibre_link-251){.nounder}

Lao Tzû, [15](#calibre_link-284){.nounder}

Law of All the Buddhas, [79](#calibre_link-295){.nounder}

Liebenthal, Dr. W., [62](#calibre_link-279){.nounder} fn.

Lin Chi Sect, [16](#calibre_link-302){.nounder}

Lotus S[ū]{.ent}tra, [45](#calibre_link-286){.nounder},
[46](#calibre_link-213){.nounder} fn., [92](#calibre_link-230){.nounder}

Lung Hsing Monastery, [8](#calibre_link-285){.nounder}

MA T[SU]{.small} (Tao I), [16](#calibre_link-302){.nounder}

M[ā]{.ent}dhyamikists, [44](#calibre_link-254){.nounder} fn.

Mah[ā]{.ent}k[ā]{.ent}[ş]{.ent}yapa, [10](#calibre_link-309){.nounder},
[12](#calibre_link-232){.nounder}, [79](#calibre_link-295){.nounder}

Mah[ā]{.ent}sth[ā]{.ent}ma, [32](#calibre_link-237){.nounder}

Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na, [12](#calibre_link-232){.nounder},
[110](#calibre_link-224){.nounder}

[]{#calibre_link-542}Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na Canon,
[86](#calibre_link-313){.nounder}

Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na Dharma, [90](#calibre_link-282){.nounder}

Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na Mind, [55](#calibre_link-270){.nounder}

Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}nists, [10](#calibre_link-309){.nounder},
[14](#calibre_link-252){.nounder}, [23](#calibre_link-314){.nounder},
[47](#calibre_link-265){.nounder}, [119](#calibre_link-323){.nounder}

Maitreya, [120](#calibre_link-249){.nounder}

Manas, [76](#calibre_link-238){.nounder} fn.

Mañju[ś]{.ent}ri, [32](#calibre_link-237){.nounder},
[75](#calibre_link-312){.nounder}, [81](#calibre_link-305){.nounder},
[114](#calibre_link-234){.nounder}, [115](#calibre_link-306){.nounder},
[120](#calibre_link-249){.nounder}, [121](#calibre_link-267){.nounder}

M[ā]{.ent}ra, [62](#calibre_link-279){.nounder}

Mental Origins, Doctrine of, [43](#calibre_link-289){.nounder}

Merit, [34](#calibre_link-240){.nounder} fn.

Middle Vehicle, [44](#calibre_link-254){.nounder} fn.

Mind, [34](#calibre_link-240){.nounder} fn.,
[42](#calibre_link-253){.nounder}, [50](#calibre_link-290){.nounder},
[72](#calibre_link-236){.nounder}, [87](#calibre_link-219){.nounder};

is the Buddha, [57](#calibre_link-299){.nounder};

pure, [36](#calibre_link-287){.nounder}

*et seq*.; transmission, [59](#calibre_link-256){.nounder};

using minds to seek, [56](#calibre_link-214){.nounder}

Mind-Buddha, [78](#calibre_link-258){.nounder}

Mind-Seal, [111](#calibre_link-260){.nounder}

Mind-Source, [39](#calibre_link-247){.nounder},
[44](#calibre_link-254){.nounder}

Mirror of Concentration and Wisdom, [43](#calibre_link-289){.nounder}

Mount Huang Po, [94](#calibre_link-298){.nounder}

Mount T'ien T'ai, [94](#calibre_link-298){.nounder}

N[[ĀMO]{.ent}]{.small} A[MIDA]{.small} B[UDDHA]{.small},
[25](#calibre_link-231){.nounder}

Nan Ch'[ü]{.ent}an, [96](#calibre_link-324){.nounder},
[97](#calibre_link-241){.nounder}, [98](#calibre_link-276){.nounder}

Nan Shan, [98](#calibre_link-276){.nounder},
[99](#calibre_link-319){.nounder}

Nirm[ā]{.ent}[ņ]{.ent}ak[ā]{.ent}ya, [50](#calibre_link-290){.nounder},
[51](#calibre_link-291){.nounder}, [83](#calibre_link-217){.nounder}

Nirv[ā]{.ent}[ņ]{.ent}a, [18](#calibre_link-209){.nounder},
[25](#calibre_link-231){.nounder}, [39](#calibre_link-247){.nounder},
[41](#calibre_link-288){.nounder}, [44](#calibre_link-254){.nounder}
fn., [46](#calibre_link-213){.nounder} fn.,
[50](#calibre_link-290){.nounder}, [73](#calibre_link-272){.nounder}
fn., [75](#calibre_link-312){.nounder} fn.,
[93](#calibre_link-220){.nounder}, [107](#calibre_link-325){.nounder}
fn., [108](#calibre_link-242){.nounder} fn.,
[109](#calibre_link-235){.nounder}, [110](#calibre_link-224){.nounder},
[110](#calibre_link-224){.nounder} fn.,
[112](#calibre_link-261){.nounder}, [115](#calibre_link-306){.nounder},
[116](#calibre_link-326){.nounder}, [129](#calibre_link-268){.nounder}
fn., [130](#calibre_link-228){.nounder}

Non-existent, [78](#calibre_link-258){.nounder}

Northern School, [15](#calibre_link-284){.nounder},
[117](#calibre_link-225){.nounder} fn.

O[BAKU]{.small}, [16](#calibre_link-302){.nounder}

One Mind, [18](#calibre_link-209){.nounder},
[20](#calibre_link-316){.nounder}--21,
[22](#calibre_link-303){.nounder}, [29](#calibre_link-327){.nounder},
[32](#calibre_link-237){.nounder}, [51](#calibre_link-291){.nounder},
[52](#calibre_link-292){.nounder}, [70](#calibre_link-257){.nounder},
[71](#calibre_link-328){.nounder}, [72](#calibre_link-236){.nounder},
[73](#calibre_link-272){.nounder}, [76](#calibre_link-238){.nounder},
[79](#calibre_link-295){.nounder}, [80](#calibre_link-271){.nounder},
[93](#calibre_link-220){.nounder}, [97](#calibre_link-241){.nounder}
fn., [103](#calibre_link-259){.nounder},
[103](#calibre_link-259){.nounder} fn.,
[108](#calibre_link-242){.nounder}, [109](#calibre_link-235){.nounder}
fn., [123](#calibre_link-307){.nounder},
[124](#calibre_link-300){.nounder}; doctrine of,
[7](#calibre_link-274){.nounder}; is the Buddha,
[29](#calibre_link-327){.nounder}

One Vehicle, [73](#calibre_link-272){.nounder}

One-Vehicle Way, [52](#calibre_link-292){.nounder}

Ordinary Mind, [57](#calibre_link-299){.nounder},
[58](#calibre_link-255){.nounder}

Original Nature, [129](#calibre_link-268){.nounder}

Original Source, [111](#calibre_link-260){.nounder}

Our Founder, [69](#calibre_link-216){.nounder}

Oxford University Press, [9](#calibre_link-278){.nounder}

P[ADMA]{.small} S[AMBHAVA]{.small}, [11](#calibre_link-245){.nounder}

P[ā]{.ent}ramit[ā]{.ent}s, Six, [30](#calibre_link-329){.nounder},
[69](#calibre_link-216){.nounder}

Pearl, The warrior and the, [37](#calibre_link-273){.nounder}

P'ei Hsiu, [20](#calibre_link-316){.nounder},
[23](#calibre_link-314){.nounder}, [26](#calibre_link-304){.nounder},
[27](#calibre_link-321){.nounder}, [29](#calibre_link-327){.nounder},
[100](#calibre_link-320){.nounder} fn.,
[101](#calibre_link-330){.nounder}, [102](#calibre_link-331){.nounder}

*Perennial Philosophy, The*, [80](#calibre_link-271){.nounder} fn.

Place of Precious Things, [46](#calibre_link-213){.nounder},
[47](#calibre_link-265){.nounder}

Plotinus, [11](#calibre_link-245){.nounder}

Prajñ[ā]{.ent}, [44](#calibre_link-254){.nounder},
[45](#calibre_link-286){.nounder}

Pratyeka-Buddhas, [47](#calibre_link-265){.nounder},
[84](#calibre_link-218){.nounder}, [129](#calibre_link-268){.nounder}

Pratyekas, [44](#calibre_link-254){.nounder}

Price, Arnold, [9](#calibre_link-278){.nounder}

Primordial ignorance, [128](#calibre_link-239){.nounder}

Pun, I. T., [65](#calibre_link-293){.nounder}

Pure Land Sect, [25](#calibre_link-231){.nounder},
[91](#calibre_link-229){.nounder}, [91](#calibre_link-229){.nounder} fn.

Pure Mind, [44](#calibre_link-254){.nounder}

R[Ā]{.ent}JA, Dharma, [56](#calibre_link-214){.nounder}

Real Nature, Seeing into, [116](#calibre_link-326){.nounder}

Reality, [17](#calibre_link-311){.nounder},
[18](#calibre_link-209){.nounder}, [55](#calibre_link-270){.nounder}
fn., [61](#calibre_link-332){.nounder},
[69](#calibre_link-216){.nounder}

Relative truth, [61](#calibre_link-332){.nounder}

Right Meditation, [14](#calibre_link-252){.nounder}

Rinzai Sect, [16](#calibre_link-302){.nounder}

Roots of goodness, [43](#calibre_link-289){.nounder}

Royal Treasury, [113](#calibre_link-243){.nounder}

S[T]{.small}. J [OHN]{.small} , [121](#calibre_link-267){.nounder} fn.

[Ś]{.ent}[ā]{.ent}kyamuni, [112](#calibre_link-261){.nounder}

Samantabhadra, [32](#calibre_link-237){.nounder},
[75](#calibre_link-312){.nounder}, [129](#calibre_link-268){.nounder}

Sambhogak[ā]{.ent}ya, [50](#calibre_link-290){.nounder},
[51](#calibre_link-291){.nounder} fn.,
[68](#calibre_link-269){.nounder}, [83](#calibre_link-217){.nounder}

Samm[ā]{.ent}sam[ā]{.ent}hdi, [14](#calibre_link-252){.nounder},
[25](#calibre_link-231){.nounder}

Sa[ṁ]{.ent}s[ā]{.ent}ra, [41](#calibre_link-288){.nounder},
[44](#calibre_link-254){.nounder} fn.,
[52](#calibre_link-292){.nounder}, [69](#calibre_link-216){.nounder},
[107](#calibre_link-325){.nounder} fn.,
[129](#calibre_link-268){.nounder} fn.

Samyak-Sa[ṁ]{.ent}bodhi, [91](#calibre_link-229){.nounder}

Sanctuary for Enlightment, [128](#calibre_link-239){.nounder}

Sangha, [76](#calibre_link-238){.nounder},
[77](#calibre_link-294){.nounder}, [96](#calibre_link-324){.nounder}

[Ś]{.ent}[ā]{.ent}riputra, [129](#calibre_link-268){.nounder}

[Ś]{.ent}ar[ī]{.ent}ras, [126](#calibre_link-227){.nounder}

Satori, [95](#calibre_link-221){.nounder} fn.

Seal of the Mind, [111](#calibre_link-260){.nounder}

Seat of Proclaiming of the Law, [52](#calibre_link-292){.nounder}

Sense organs, Six, [51](#calibre_link-291){.nounder}

Sensory perceptions, Six, [51](#calibre_link-291){.nounder}

Sentient beings, [70](#calibre_link-257){.nounder},
[71](#calibre_link-328){.nounder}, [73](#calibre_link-272){.nounder}

Shantung, [12](#calibre_link-232){.nounder}

Shên Hsiu, [64](#calibre_link-297){.nounder}

Skandhas, The, [120](#calibre_link-249){.nounder}

Sole Vehicle of Liberation, [70](#calibre_link-257){.nounder}

*Song of Enlightenment*, [62](#calibre_link-279){.nounder} fn.

Southern School, [10](#calibre_link-309){.nounder},
[14](#calibre_link-252){.nounder}

[Ś]{.ent}ramana, [55](#calibre_link-270){.nounder},
[96](#calibre_link-324){.nounder}

[Ś]{.ent}r[ā]{.ent}vakas, [39](#calibre_link-247){.nounder},
[40](#calibre_link-317){.nounder}, [44](#calibre_link-254){.nounder},
[47](#calibre_link-265){.nounder}, [121](#calibre_link-267){.nounder},
[122](#calibre_link-250){.nounder}, [129](#calibre_link-268){.nounder}

State of Holiness and Wisdom, [69](#calibre_link-216){.nounder}

[]{#calibre_link-543}Sudden Attainment,
[69](#calibre_link-216){.nounder}

Sudden Enlightenment, [16](#calibre_link-302){.nounder}

Sudhana, [120](#calibre_link-249){.nounder}

Supreme Enlightenment, [130](#calibre_link-228){.nounder}

Supreme Experience, [20](#calibre_link-316){.nounder}

Supreme Way, [40](#calibre_link-317){.nounder}

S[ū]{.ent}tra of Hui N[ė]{.ent}ng, [110](#calibre_link-224){.nounder}
fn.

*Sutra of Wei Lang, The*, [9](#calibre_link-278){.nounder}

Suzuki, Dr. D. T., [13](#calibre_link-251){.nounder},
[16](#calibre_link-302){.nounder}, [25](#calibre_link-231){.nounder},
[32](#calibre_link-237){.nounder} fn., [95](#calibre_link-221){.nounder}
fn.

Sword of Bodhi, [115](#calibre_link-306){.nounder}

Sword of Non-Discriminating Wisdom, [115](#calibre_link-306){.nounder}

Sword of Thusness, [56](#calibre_link-214){.nounder},
[113](#calibre_link-243){.nounder}

Sword of Truth, [113](#calibre_link-243){.nounder}

T' [AI]{.small} C[HOU]{.small}, [8](#calibre_link-285){.nounder}

T'ai Chung, [8](#calibre_link-285){.nounder},
[96](#calibre_link-324){.nounder}, [132](#calibre_link-315){.nounder}

T'ai Hs[ü]{.ent} , [14](#calibre_link-252){.nounder}

T'ang Dynasty, [8](#calibre_link-285){.nounder},
[28](#calibre_link-244){.nounder}, [132](#calibre_link-315){.nounder}

Ta Y[ü]{.ent} Mountain, [65](#calibre_link-293){.nounder}

Tao, [55](#calibre_link-270){.nounder} fn.

Tao I (*see* Ma Tsu)

Taoism, [55](#calibre_link-270){.nounder} fn.,
[131](#calibre_link-296){.nounder}

Tath[ā]{.ent}gata, [35](#calibre_link-275){.nounder},
[50](#calibre_link-290){.nounder}, [52](#calibre_link-292){.nounder},
[57](#calibre_link-299){.nounder}, [63](#calibre_link-280){.nounder},
[64](#calibre_link-297){.nounder}, [70](#calibre_link-257){.nounder},
[71](#calibre_link-328){.nounder}, [74](#calibre_link-263){.nounder},
[113](#calibre_link-243){.nounder}, [121](#calibre_link-267){.nounder}

Tath[ā]{.ent}gata Mind, [114](#calibre_link-234){.nounder}

Tath[ā]{.ent}gatas, Womb of, [56](#calibre_link-214){.nounder},
[77](#calibre_link-294){.nounder}, [92](#calibre_link-230){.nounder}

Ten Activities, [33](#calibre_link-264){.nounder}

Ten Beliefs, [33](#calibre_link-264){.nounder}

Ten Bestowals of Merit, [33](#calibre_link-264){.nounder}

Ten Stages of Progress Leading to Enlightment,
[33](#calibre_link-264){.nounder}, [34](#calibre_link-240){.nounder},
[46](#calibre_link-213){.nounder}, [62](#calibre_link-279){.nounder},
[69](#calibre_link-216){.nounder}, [89](#calibre_link-281){.nounder}

Terrace of the Spirit, [121](#calibre_link-267){.nounder}

Therav[ā]{.ent}da, [110](#calibre_link-224){.nounder}

Therav[ā]{.ent}din School, [23](#calibre_link-314){.nounder}

Therav[ā]{.ent}din saints, [105](#calibre_link-223){.nounder},
[122](#calibre_link-250){.nounder} fn.

Therav[ā]{.ent}dins, [109](#calibre_link-235){.nounder},
[116](#calibre_link-326){.nounder}, [117](#calibre_link-225){.nounder},
[119](#calibre_link-323){.nounder}

Thirty-two Characteristic Signs, [73](#calibre_link-272){.nounder}

Three Jewels in One Substance, [76](#calibre_link-238){.nounder}

Three Vehicles, [23](#calibre_link-314){.nounder},
[24](#calibre_link-301){.nounder}, [33](#calibre_link-264){.nounder},
[45](#calibre_link-286){.nounder}, [52](#calibre_link-292){.nounder},
[56](#calibre_link-214){.nounder}, [57](#calibre_link-299){.nounder},
[58](#calibre_link-255){.nounder}, [71](#calibre_link-328){.nounder},
[73](#calibre_link-272){.nounder}, [79](#calibre_link-295){.nounder},
[125](#calibre_link-262){.nounder}

Three Worlds, [86](#calibre_link-313){.nounder},
[122](#calibre_link-250){.nounder}

Thusness, [74](#calibre_link-263){.nounder},
[117](#calibre_link-225){.nounder}, [123](#calibre_link-307){.nounder}

Thusness, Dharma of, [111](#calibre_link-260){.nounder}

Thusness, Sword of, [56](#calibre_link-214){.nounder},
[113](#calibre_link-243){.nounder}

*Tibetan Book of the Great Liberation*,
[9](#calibre_link-278){.nounder}, [10](#calibre_link-309){.nounder},
[11](#calibre_link-245){.nounder}, [56](#calibre_link-214){.nounder} fn.

Ting Fu Pao, [28](#calibre_link-244){.nounder}

Tower of Spacious Karma, The, [132](#calibre_link-315){.nounder}

Trackless One, [104](#calibre_link-222){.nounder}

Transcendental Buddha, [72](#calibre_link-236){.nounder}

Transcending the Three Worlds, [86](#calibre_link-313){.nounder}

Transmission, [103](#calibre_link-259){.nounder} fn.

Triple Time, [50](#calibre_link-290){.nounder}

Triple World, [46](#calibre_link-213){.nounder},
[90](#calibre_link-282){.nounder}, [104](#calibre_link-222){.nounder},
[122](#calibre_link-250){.nounder}

Triratna, [76](#calibre_link-238){.nounder}

Truth, [76](#calibre_link-238){.nounder} fn.,
[77](#calibre_link-294){.nounder} fn.

Ts'ao Hsi Zen, [130](#calibre_link-228){.nounder}

Tun Huang, [13](#calibre_link-251){.nounder}

Two Vehicles, [46](#calibre_link-213){.nounder}

U[LTIMATE]{.small} W[ISDOM]{.small}, [75](#calibre_link-312){.nounder}
fn.

Unborn, [29](#calibre_link-327){.nounder}

Universal Mind, [21](#calibre_link-211){.nounder}

Universal Nature, [118](#calibre_link-226){.nounder}

Universal Spirit, [109](#calibre_link-235){.nounder} fn.

V[EHICLE]{.small} OF T[RUTH]{.small}, [52](#calibre_link-292){.nounder}

Vimalakirti, [32](#calibre_link-237){.nounder},
[117](#calibre_link-225){.nounder}, [121](#calibre_link-267){.nounder}

Void, The, [41](#calibre_link-288){.nounder},
[42](#calibre_link-253){.nounder}, [48](#calibre_link-308){.nounder},
[49](#calibre_link-266){.nounder}, [50](#calibre_link-290){.nounder},
[53](#calibre_link-333){.nounder}, [56](#calibre_link-214){.nounder} 68,
[79](#calibre_link-295){.nounder}, [93](#calibre_link-220){.nounder},
[97](#calibre_link-241){.nounder} fn.,
[108](#calibre_link-242){.nounder}, [113](#calibre_link-243){.nounder},
[122](#calibre_link-250){.nounder} fn.

Void Nature, [113](#calibre_link-243){.nounder}

Vulture Peak, [7](#calibre_link-274){.nounder}

W[AN]{.small} L[ING]{.small}, [8](#calibre_link-285){.nounder}

Wan Ling record, [67](#calibre_link-215){.nounder} *et seq*.

Warrior and the pearl, [37](#calibre_link-273){.nounder}

Way, Studying the, [54](#calibre_link-318){.nounder}

Way, What is the, [52](#calibre_link-292){.nounder}

Way of the Buddhas, [75](#calibre_link-312){.nounder},
[88](#calibre_link-283){.nounder}, [92](#calibre_link-230){.nounder}

Way of Words, [34](#calibre_link-240){.nounder}

Wei Lang, [7](#calibre_link-274){.nounder} fn. (*see also* Hui Nêng)

Wei Ming, [65](#calibre_link-293){.nounder}

Wei Shan, [98](#calibre_link-276){.nounder},
[101](#calibre_link-330){.nounder}

Wei Shih Tsung, [104](#calibre_link-222){.nounder}

Wisdom of Dispassion, [61](#calibre_link-332){.nounder}

Womb of Tath[ā]{.ent}gatas, [56](#calibre_link-214){.nounder},
[77](#calibre_link-294){.nounder}, [92](#calibre_link-230){.nounder}

Wordless Dharma of the One Mind, [52](#calibre_link-292){.nounder}

Wordless Doctrine, [16](#calibre_link-302){.nounder},
[24](#calibre_link-301){.nounder}

World-Transcender, [46](#calibre_link-213){.nounder}

Y[AMA]{.small}, [61](#calibre_link-332){.nounder}

Yang Shan, [98](#calibre_link-276){.nounder},
[101](#calibre_link-330){.nounder}

Yung Chia, [62](#calibre_link-279){.nounder} fn.

Z[AZEN]{.small}, [131](#calibre_link-296){.nounder} fn.

Zealous application, [85](#calibre_link-310){.nounder}

Zen, Doctrine of, [16](#calibre_link-302){.nounder}--20; explaining,
[106](#calibre_link-322){.nounder}; origin and expansion of,
[12](#calibre_link-232){.nounder}--23

*Zen Buddhism*, [16](#calibre_link-302){.nounder}
:::

::: {#calibre_link-334 .calibre}
[]{#calibre_link-544}^[1](#calibre_link-335){#calibre_link-12 .nounder}^
From which he takes his posthumous name.

^[2](#calibre_link-336){#calibre_link-13 .nounder}^ In the modern
province of Kiangsi.

^[3](#calibre_link-337){#calibre_link-14 .nounder}^ Wei Lang.

^[1](#calibre_link-338){#calibre_link-15 .nounder}^ Mount Huang Po.

^[1](#calibre_link-339){#calibre_link-17 .nounder}^ Unborn, not in the
sense of eternity, for this allows contrast with its opposite; but
unborn in the sense that it belongs to no categories admitting of
alteration or antithesis.

^[1](#calibre_link-340){#calibre_link-18 .nounder}^ Charity, morality,
patience under affliction, zealous application, right control of mind
and the application of the highest wisdom.

^[1](#calibre_link-341){#calibre_link-19 .nounder}^ Compare this with
Professor Suzuki's: 'That which is known as mind in discursive reasoning
is no-mind, though without this Mind cannot be reached.'

^[2](#calibre_link-342){#calibre_link-20 .nounder}^ This abstract notion
of the Bodhisattvas, regarded by some sects as individual spiritual
entities, is shared by some Buddhists outside the Zen Sect.

^[3](#calibre_link-343){#calibre_link-21 .nounder}^ Zen teaches that,
though the phenomenal world based on sensory experience has only
relative existence, it is wrong to regard it as something separate from
the One Mind. It is the One Mind wrongly apprehended. As the Hridaya
S[ū]{.ent}tra says: 'Form is not different from void, void from form;
form is void and void is form.'

^[1](#calibre_link-344){#calibre_link-22 .nounder}^ These various
categories of ten are all part of the doctrine as taught by certain
other sects. Huang Po wishes to make it clear that, though these may be
useful in preparing the ground, the mind must in any case take a sudden
leap, and that having passed through these stages in nowise constitutes
partial Enlightenment.

^[1](#calibre_link-345){#calibre_link-23 .nounder}^ Merit, however
excellent in itself, has nothing to do with Enlightenment.

^[2](#calibre_link-346){#calibre_link-24 .nounder}^ According to Zen,
virtuous actions should be performed by adepts, but not with a view to
accumulating merit and not as a means to Enlightenment. The door should
remain perfectly unattached to the actions and to their results.

^[3](#calibre_link-347){#calibre_link-25 .nounder}^ In other words, Mind
is an arbitary term for something that cannot properly be expressed in
words.

^[1](#calibre_link-348){#calibre_link-26 .nounder}^ Karma, even good
karma, leads to rebirth and prolongs the wanderings of the supposedly
individual entity; for when good karma has worked itself out in
consequent enjoyment, the 'individual' is as far from understanding the
One Mind as ever.

^[2](#calibre_link-349){#calibre_link-27 .nounder}^ Enlightenment must
come in a flash, whether you have passed through the preliminary stages
or not, so the latter can well be dispensed with, except that, for
reasons unconnected with Enlightenment, Zen requires of adepts an
attitude of kindness and helpfulness towards all living creatures.

^[1](#calibre_link-350){#calibre_link-28 .nounder}^ This quotation
refers to the Diamond S[ū]{.ent}tra, as do many of the others either
directly or indirectly. D[ī]{.ent}pamkara Buddha, during a former life
of Gautama Buddha, prophesied that he would one day attain to
Buddhahood. Huang Po means that the prophecy would not have been made if
D[ī]{.ent}pa[ṃ]{.ent}kara Buddha had supposed that Gautama Buddha's
Enlightenment would lead to the actual attainment of something he had
not already *been* from the very first; for then Enlightenment would not
have led to Buddhahood, which implies a voidness of all distinctions
such as attainer, attained, non-attainer and non-attained.

^[1](#calibre_link-351){#calibre_link-29 .nounder}^ This is a simple
example of the wrong use of the six senses. Of course we must use them
for dealing with the world as it affects our daily lives, but our
employment of them should be limited to what is strictly necessary for
our wellbeing.

^[2](#calibre_link-352){#calibre_link-30 .nounder}^ Huang Po sometimes
stretches this term to apply to H[ī]{.ent}nay[ā]{.ent}nists in general.
The literal meaning of its Chinese equivalent is 'those who hear' and
Huang Po implies that H[ī]{.ent}nay[ā]{.ent}nists pay too much attention
to the literal meaning of the Scriptures, instead of seeking intuitive
knowledge through eliminating conceptual thought. Those able to apply
the latter method have no need of scriptures.

^[1](#calibre_link-353){#calibre_link-31 .nounder}^ Buddhists of most
sects are taught to relinquish sensual attachments and to cling
singlemindedly to the Dharma. Huang Po goes further in showing that any
form of attachment, even attachment to the Dharma, leads us away from
the truth.

^[1](#calibre_link-354){#calibre_link-32 .nounder}^ The highest of the
three Bodies, synonymous with the Absolute.

^[1](#calibre_link-355){#calibre_link-33 .nounder}^ There is a story of
a man who mistook a thief for his long-lost son and, giving him a warm
welcome, enabled the latter to sneak away with most of his possessions.
Those who place reliance on material things are in danger of losing that
most valuable of all possessions---the key to the riddle of life which
unlocks Nirv[ā]{.ent}na's gate.

^[1](#calibre_link-356){#calibre_link-34 .nounder}^ Other Buddhist sects
attach great importance to the acquisition of merit and wisdom, but this
implies a dualistic conception of reality which Zen considers an
insuperable obstacle to realization of the One Mind.

^[2](#calibre_link-357){#calibre_link-35 .nounder}^ This constitutes a
warning against another type of dualism.

^[3](#calibre_link-358){#calibre_link-36 .nounder}^ Roots of goodness
are believed by some Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}naists to be
'Enlightenment-potentials' of varying degrees of strength with which
individuals are reborn in accordance with the varying merits gained in
former lives.

^[1](#calibre_link-359){#calibre_link-37 .nounder}^ Huang Po, according
to his usual custom, is using the word [Ś]{.ent}r[ā]{.ent}vaka to mean
H[ī]{.ent}nay[ā]{.ent}nist. H[ī]{.ent}nay[ā]{.ent}nists are dualists in
that they seek to overcome their sa[ṁ]{.ent}s[ā]{.ent}ric life in order
to enter Nirv[ā]{.ent}[ņ]{.ent}a; while Zen perceives that
Sa[ṁ]{.ent}s[ā]{.ent}ra is no other than Nirv[ā]{.ent}[ņ]{.ent}a.

^[2](#calibre_link-360){#calibre_link-38 .nounder}^ Huang Po customarily
uses or misuses this word to mean the Mādhyamikists or followers of the
Middle Vehicle.

^[1](#calibre_link-361){#calibre_link-39 .nounder}^ Here used to mean
Wisdom in the sense of Zen.

^[2](#calibre_link-362){#calibre_link-40 .nounder}^ I.e. the Three Great
Schools teaching gradual Enlightenment.

^[3](#calibre_link-363){#calibre_link-41 .nounder}^ These people
[THOUGHT]{.small} they had understood and were smugly self-satisfied.

^[1](#calibre_link-364){#calibre_link-42 .nounder}^ This paragraph is,
perhaps, one of the finest expositions of Zen teaching, for it
encompasses in a few words almost the entire scope of that vast and
penetrating wisdom.

^[2](#calibre_link-365){#calibre_link-43 .nounder}^ Including the form
which leads to the awakening of others.

^[3](#calibre_link-366){#calibre_link-44 .nounder}^ The City of Illusion
is a term taken from the Lotus S[ū]{.ent}tra and here implies temporary
or incomplete Nirv[ā]{.ent}na. From the point of view of Zen, all the
teachings of the many sects based on a belief in gradual Enlightenment
are likely to lead their followers to the City of Illusion, because all
of them apparently subscribe to some form or other of dualism.

^[1](#calibre_link-367){#calibre_link-45 .nounder}^ Here meaning
Buddhists.

^[2](#calibre_link-368){#calibre_link-46 .nounder}^ Commonly meaning
those Buddhas who do not interest themselves in the Enlightenment of
others.

^[1](#calibre_link-369){#calibre_link-47 .nounder}^ Most of this
paragraph is intended to make it clear that, though Buddhism of the
gradual school does produce results, they take long to attain and are at
least incomplete compared with results obtained through Zen.

^[2](#calibre_link-370){#calibre_link-48 .nounder}^ To [FORCE]{.small}
the mind to blot out phenomena shows ignorance of the identity of the
one with the other.

^[3](#calibre_link-371){#calibre_link-49 .nounder}^ This profound
teaching is aimed partly at those Buddhists who practise a form of
meditation which aims at temporarily blotting out the material world.

^[1](#calibre_link-372){#calibre_link-50 .nounder}^ These three types of
relinquishment probably refer obliquely to Zen, Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}na
and H[ī]{.ent}nay[ā]{.ent}na respectively.

^[1](#calibre_link-373){#calibre_link-51 .nounder}^ This is a reminder
that all terms used in Zen are mere makeshifts.

^[1](#calibre_link-374){#calibre_link-52 .nounder}^ As usual, Huang Po
is using familiar Sanskrit terms in a way peculiar to himself. Usually,
the Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya means the highest aspect of a Buddha, i.e. as one
with the Absolute; the Sambhogak[ā]{.ent}ya is the glorified Body of a
Buddha in his supramundane existence; and the
Nirm[ā]{.ent}[ņ]{.ent}ak[ā]{.ent}ya may be any of the various
transformations in which a Buddha appears in the world. In Zen, the
first is absolute truth in unimaginable and perfect form, the second is
the highest concept of absolute truth of which unenlightened human
beings are capable---an underlying purity and unity; the third
represents the various methods by which we hope to obtain perception of
absolute truth.

^[2](#calibre_link-375){#calibre_link-53 .nounder}^ This points to those
people who are capable of understanding the doctrine intelligently but
who have not yet entirely succeeded in throwing off the burden of
concepts.

^[1](#calibre_link-376){#calibre_link-54 .nounder}^ This passage
demonstrates that Huang Po himself accepted the traditional origin of
the Zen Sect; but, as I have pointed out in the introduction, the truth
of this tradition does not affect the validity of the teaching one way
or the other, since Huang Po is surely speaking from a direct experience
of the One Mind.

^[1](#calibre_link-377){#calibre_link-55 .nounder}^ Huang Po is
obviously trying to help his questioner break away from the habit of
thinking in terms of concepts and logical categories. To do this, he is
obliged to make his questioner seem wrong, whatever he asks. We are
reminded of the Buddha who, when questioned about such things as
existence and non-existence, would reply: 'Not this, not this.'

^[2](#calibre_link-378){#calibre_link-56 .nounder}^ Such people mistake
motions taking place within their minds for external independently
moving objects.

^[1](#calibre_link-379){#calibre_link-57 .nounder}^ Commonly, the word
for 'monk'.

^[2](#calibre_link-380){#calibre_link-58 .nounder}^ This passage has a
strong Taoist flavour. The quotation is from Chuang Tzû, and the word
Tao (Way) is used throughout. Zen and Taoism have so much in common that
some have been led to believe that the former is a sort of Taoism in
Buddhist disguise; but, as both sects employ much the same theory and
practice, it may be that the similarity is because the teachers of both
sects are speaking from the same transcendental experience of Reality.
The present text is written in a highly condensed form and includes
sermons delivered on many different occasions. It is not improbable that
paragraphs 29 and 30 are a summary of a sermon delivered to an audience
including one or more distinguished Taoist scholars, especially as the
opening sentence gives the impression that the Master was addressing
newcomers to Zen.

^[1](#calibre_link-381){#calibre_link-59 .nounder}^ This passage
contains another famous Taoist term---[WU WEI]{.small}, sometimes
mistranslated 'non-action'. In fact, it means no calculated action,
nothing but spontaneous actions required to meet the demands of the
passing moment.

^[2](#calibre_link-382){#calibre_link-60 .nounder}^ Literacy is by no
means essential to the mastery of Zen. The *Tibetan Book of the Great
Liberation* makes the same point.

^[1](#calibre_link-383){#calibre_link-61 .nounder}^ Literally 'worldly
truth' no doubt used in the sense of 'truths' applicable to the
apparently objective sphere of daily life.

^[2](#calibre_link-384){#calibre_link-62 .nounder}^ The King of
Hell---here used figuratively.

^[1](#calibre_link-385){#calibre_link-63 .nounder}^ A famous quotation
from the Diamond S[ū]{.ent}tra.

^[2](#calibre_link-386){#calibre_link-64 .nounder}^ Prince of
Devils---here used figuratively.

^[3](#calibre_link-387){#calibre_link-65 .nounder}^ A famous
sixth-century monk.

^[4](#calibre_link-388){#calibre_link-66 .nounder}^ This verse is from
the 'Song of Enlightenment' attributed to Yung Chia, a seven-century
monk. This fascinating work has been translated in full by Dr. Walter
Liebenthal and published in the *Journal of Oriental Studies of the
Catholic University of Peiping*, Vol. VI, 1941.

^[1](#calibre_link-389){#calibre_link-67 .nounder}^ Buddhists believe
that it is a rare and difficult thing to be born a human being; and, as
Enlightenment can only be attained from the human state, it is a matter
of great urgency that we should press forward. Otherwise, the unique
opportunity may be lost for many aeons.

^[1](#calibre_link-390){#calibre_link-68 .nounder}^ This passage has
puzzled many a Chinese scholar. I am not sure that this translation
conveys the meaning very well, but at least I have simplified the
wording by using 'doctrine' as well as 'dharma'. In the original, the
same word is used for both. A word-for-word translation would run
something like this: 'Dharma original Dharma not Dharma, not Dharma
Dharma also Dharma, now transmit not Dharma Dharma, Dharma Dharma
how-can be Dharma.' I have closely followed a rendering made for me some
years ago by Mr. I. T. Pun, a famous Buddhist scholar resident in
Hongkong. He admits that this version merely represents his own opinion,
but it seems to me the best possible. In my previous published
translation I failed lamentably.

^[1](#calibre_link-391){#calibre_link-70 .nounder}^ The Absolute.

^[2](#calibre_link-392){#calibre_link-71 .nounder}^ Meaning intangible,
not a mere negation.

^[3](#calibre_link-393){#calibre_link-72 .nounder}^ The Absolute Body of
a Buddha.

^[1](#calibre_link-394){#calibre_link-73 .nounder}^ Charity, morality,
patience under affliction, zealous application, right control of the
mind, and the application of highest wisdom.

^[2](#calibre_link-395){#calibre_link-74 .nounder}^ Buddha's Body of
Bliss.

^[3](#calibre_link-396){#calibre_link-75 .nounder}^ This means that the
idealized or heavenly form of a Buddha, to whom the Unenlightened pray,
is unreal in that he is regarded as an entity and therefore as apart
from the One Mind.

^[1](#calibre_link-397){#calibre_link-76 .nounder}^ Bodhidarma.

^[2](#calibre_link-398){#calibre_link-77 .nounder}^ Absolute.

^[1](#calibre_link-399){#calibre_link-78 .nounder}^ From
sa[ṁ]{.ent}s[ā]{.ent}ra---the endless round of birth and death.

^[1](#calibre_link-400){#calibre_link-79 .nounder}^ Buddha.

^[2](#calibre_link-401){#calibre_link-80 .nounder}^ I.e. that the
relative truths of orthodox Buddhism must be taught.

^[1](#calibre_link-402){#calibre_link-81 .nounder}^ Supreme Omniscience.

^[2](#calibre_link-403){#calibre_link-82 .nounder}^ Buddha.

^[1](#calibre_link-404){#calibre_link-83 .nounder}^ From
sa[ṁ]{.ent}s[ā]{.ent}ra to Nirv[ā]{.ent}[ņ]{.ent}a.

^[2](#calibre_link-405){#calibre_link-84 .nounder}^ I.e. forms.

^[3](#calibre_link-406){#calibre_link-85 .nounder}^ It is not Huang Po's
intention to deny the validity of karmic law as it applies to the
ephemeral world of sa[ṁ]{.ent}s[ā]{.ent}ra.

^[1](#calibre_link-407){#calibre_link-86 .nounder}^ It is clear that
this question was asked by somebody not present during the previous
discussions.

^[2](#calibre_link-408){#calibre_link-87 .nounder}^ Absolute.

^[3](#calibre_link-409){#calibre_link-88 .nounder}^ I.e. activity in
production of form.

^[4](#calibre_link-410){#calibre_link-89 .nounder}^ Flux.

^[1](#calibre_link-411){#calibre_link-90 .nounder}^ A distinction is
here made between 'void' in the sense of flux where all forms are seen
in dissolution, and the Great Void which overspreads, penetrates and is
all. When the scientists speak of the stuff of the world-as mind-stuff,
it is probable that they are speaking of the flux, for the Great Void
can hardly have been deduced from laws governing the ephemeral world of
transitory phenomena. Compared with the Great Void, 'mind-stuff' is a
relatively substantial concept!

^[2](#calibre_link-412){#calibre_link-91 .nounder}^
Nirv[ā]{.ent}[ņ]{.ent}a.

^[3](#calibre_link-413){#calibre_link-92 .nounder}^ The transient
universe.

^[4](#calibre_link-414){#calibre_link-93 .nounder}^ If conceived
objectively.

^[5](#calibre_link-415){#calibre_link-94 .nounder}^ The personification
of Ultimate Wisdom.

^[6](#calibre_link-416){#calibre_link-95 .nounder}^ The personification
of Love and Action.

^[1](#calibre_link-417){#calibre_link-96 .nounder}^ Truth.

^[2](#calibre_link-418){#calibre_link-97 .nounder}^ Avidy[ā]{.ent} or
primordial ignorance.

^[3](#calibre_link-419){#calibre_link-98 .nounder}^ Enlightenment.

^[4](#calibre_link-420){#calibre_link-99 .nounder}^ Here, 'intellect'
stands for [MANAS]{.small}, the highest faculty of the human mind by
which a man rises from conceptual thought to intuitive knowledge.

^[5](#calibre_link-421){#calibre_link-100 .nounder}^ Huang Po is
juggling with the most sacred of Buddhist terms, perhaps causing some of
his hearers to stiffen with disapproval, but clearly in the hope of
shocking them into a deeper understanding of truth. The terse humour
with which he cloaks his underlying sincerity is lost in the
translation.

^[1](#calibre_link-422){#calibre_link-101 .nounder}^ Truth.

^[2](#calibre_link-423){#calibre_link-102 .nounder}^ Doctrine.

^[3](#calibre_link-424){#calibre_link-103 .nounder}^ Grasped, perceived,
conceived, etc.

^[4](#calibre_link-425){#calibre_link-104 .nounder}^ A sanctuary for
attaining Enlightenment.

^[5](#calibre_link-426){#calibre_link-105 .nounder}^ The source of all
phenomena.

^[1](#calibre_link-427){#calibre_link-106 .nounder}^ This famous poem of
Hui Nêng is intended to refute the view that Mind is a mirror to be
cleansed of the defiling dust of phenomena, passion and other illusions,
for this view leads to dualism, besides implying a certain degree of
objectivity in the nature of mind. The dust and the mirror are one
intangible unity.

^[2](#calibre_link-428){#calibre_link-107 .nounder}^ The questioner
seems to be a newcomer.

^[1](#calibre_link-429){#calibre_link-108 .nounder}^ We cannot
[BECOME]{.small} what we have always been; we can only become
intuitively aware of our original state, previously hidden from us by
the clouds of m[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}.

^[1](#calibre_link-430){#calibre_link-109 .nounder}^ These words recall
the admonitions of so many mystics---Buddhist, Christian, Hindu or
Sufi---who have committed their experience to words. What Huang Po calls
the total abandonment of [HSIN---]{.small}mind, thought, perceptions,
concepts and the rest---implies the utter surrender of self insisted on
by Sufi and Christian mystics. Indeed, in paragraph 28 he used the very
words: ['LET THE SELF PERISH UTTERLY'.]{.small} Such striking unanimity
of expression by mystics widely separated in time and space can hardly
be attributed to coincidence. No several persons entirely unacquainted
with one another could produce such closely similar accounts of purely
imaginary journeys. Hence one is led to suppose that what they describe
is real. This seems to have been Aldous Huxley's view when he compiled
that valuable work *The Perennial Philosophy.*

^[2](#calibre_link-431){#calibre_link-110 .nounder}^ Is the One Mind
then no longer present in me?

^[1](#calibre_link-432){#calibre_link-111 .nounder}^ Which bring the
corresponding thought objects into existence.

^[2](#calibre_link-433){#calibre_link-112 .nounder}^ Since we are the
Buddha, to seek him elsewhere is to place a head upon our head.

^[1](#calibre_link-434){#calibre_link-113 .nounder}^ The Buddha's Eye of
Wisdom commonly means the eye with which he perceives the true unity of
all things. Huang Po, however, does not say 'perceived [BY]{.small} the
Eye', but uses the phrase 'is the Eye', thereby identifying see-er and
seen.

^[2](#calibre_link-435){#calibre_link-114 .nounder}^ I.e. the mental
environment created by us.

^[3](#calibre_link-436){#calibre_link-115 .nounder}^ Words belong to the
realm of flux and illusion. The truth is beyond words, a silent and
profound experience. The Buddha spoke of relative means. Viewed
absolutely, no word was spoken.

^[4](#calibre_link-437){#calibre_link-116 .nounder}^ Enlightenment or
Supreme Wisdom.

^[1](#calibre_link-438){#calibre_link-117 .nounder}^ Perceived, grasped,
entered, realized, conceived, etc.

^[2](#calibre_link-439){#calibre_link-118 .nounder}^ I.e. you would
achieve the physical and spiritual aspects of a Buddha, which an
Enlightened One bears within the various realms of transitory existence,
but you would lack the Dharmak[ā]{.ent}ya, the aspect of a Buddha as
identical with the Absolute.

^[1](#calibre_link-440){#calibre_link-119 .nounder}^ The Zen Masters, in
their single-minded desire to lead their disciples beyond the realm of
dualism, would have them abandon even the notion of compassion as such,
since it leads to the dualistic concept of its opposite. By Zen adepts
compassion must be practised as a matter o. course and without giving
rise to the least feeling of self-satisfaction Still less may it be
practised as a means of gaining some heavenly or earthly reward.

^[2](#calibre_link-441){#calibre_link-120 .nounder}^ One of the six
p[ā]{.ent}ramit[ā]{.ent}s.

^[3](#calibre_link-442){#calibre_link-121 .nounder}^ Kalir[ā]{.ent}ja is
said to have sliced up some sages, including a former incarnation of
Gautama Buddha. The latter bore this piecemeal dismemberment with the
equanimity of a k[ṣ]{.ent}[ā]{.ent}nti-rishi, one who practises the
p[ā]{.ent}ramit[ā]{.ent} of uncomplaining patience in affliction.

^[1](#calibre_link-443){#calibre_link-122 .nounder}^ The formless world
is far other than the Great Void, being one of the three states or
worlds constituting sa[ṁ]{.ent}s[ā]{.ent}ra.

^[2](#calibre_link-444){#calibre_link-123 .nounder}^ I.e. even atoms
have no objective existence---whether atoms of matter or those atoms of
consciousness in which certain Buddhist metaphysicians believed.

^[1](#calibre_link-445){#calibre_link-124 .nounder}^ And so rests from
creating objects.

^[1](#calibre_link-446){#calibre_link-125 .nounder}^ A famous
lay-disciple.

^[2](#calibre_link-447){#calibre_link-126 .nounder}^ Doctrines,
precepts, concepts, things.

^[1](#calibre_link-448){#calibre_link-127 .nounder}^ Laws of Existence
or Universal Laws.

^[2](#calibre_link-449){#calibre_link-128 .nounder}^ Enlightenment.

^[1](#calibre_link-450){#calibre_link-129 .nounder}^ The Pure Land Sect
advocates utter reliance upon Amida, Buddha of Boundless Light and Life,
holding that perfect faith will ensure rebirth in a paradise where
preparation for final Enlightenment follows under ideal conditions. Zen
Buddhists, on the contrary, often claim that reliance on Amida Buddha is
the negation of that self-reliance which Gautama Buddha taught to be the
only sure path. Nevertheless, the Pure Land doctrine [PROPERLY
UNDERSTOOD]{.small} is not truly opposed to Zen, since the real meaning
of Amida is the Buddha-Substance innate in man, and rebirth into his
paradise implies the awakening of the individual's mind to its Oneness
with the Buddha-Substance.

^[2](#calibre_link-451){#calibre_link-130 .nounder}^ Supreme Knowledge.

^[1](#calibre_link-452){#calibre_link-131 .nounder}^ The implication is
that the Western Paradise of Amida Buddha is as void as the rest of
them.

^[1](#calibre_link-453){#calibre_link-132 .nounder}^ This passage, in
which the Master comes as near as possible to describing the
indescribable, using terms as 'all-pervading spotless beauty', should be
sufficient answer to those critics of Buddhist 'pessimism' who suppose
that the doctrine of [ś]{.ent}[ū]{.ent}nyat[ā]{.ent} or voidness equates
Nirv[ā]{.ent}na with total extinction.

^[1](#calibre_link-454){#calibre_link-133 .nounder}^ It was from this
mountain that the Venerable Hsi Y[ü]{.ent}n received the name by which
he has been most commonly known until today.

^[2](#calibre_link-455){#calibre_link-134 .nounder}^ Using it as a raft.

^[3](#calibre_link-456){#calibre_link-135 .nounder}^ This anecdote seems
to mean that the other monk was displaying one of the supranormal powers
which dhy[ā]{.ent}na-practice brings in its train but which should
properly be regarded as mere by-products never to be used except in case
of dire necessity. Huang Po was clearly disgusted with his companion for
showing off.

^[1](#calibre_link-457){#calibre_link-136 .nounder}^ Another name for
Kuei Tsung.

^[2](#calibre_link-458){#calibre_link-137 .nounder}^ Those familiar with
Dr. Suzuki's books on Zen will not misinterpret Kuei Tsung's blows as
being due to unnecessary crudeness or violence, nor Huang Po's strong
language as being gratuitously rude. It seems that blows and strong
language delivered at the right moment may induce [SATORI]{.small}, a
flash of Enlightenment. The younger monk was in search of methods of
withdrawal from the world by means of deep contemplation, and Kuei
Tsung's first blow was intended as an antidote, for it implied: 'The
hand of bone and muscle which now causes you pain is as truly the
Absolute as the mystic fervour you experience during contemplation.' The
second blow illustrated the folly of trying to express a sudden
understanding of truth in words.

^[1](#calibre_link-459){#calibre_link-138 .nounder}^ Here, probably,
meaning a layman who had taken ten precepts instead of the normal five.

^[2](#calibre_link-460){#calibre_link-139 .nounder}^ This story is, to
anyone familiar with the customs of Eastern courts, hair-raising. That
Huang Po should have dared to slap the Divine Emperor, the Son of
Heaven, indicates both the immensity of the Master's personal prestige
and the utter fearlessness which results logically from an unshakeable
conviction that sams[ā]{.ent}ric life is but a dream. The Emperor's
willingness to accept the blow without retaliation indicates the depth
of his admiration for the Master. It must be remembered that Huang Po,
as one of several Masters belonging to a relatively small sect, with no
temporal authority whatever, cannot be compared to a Western pope or
archbishop who, under certain circumstances, might be able to strike a
reigning emperor with impunity by reason of his authority as a Prince of
the Church.

^[1](#calibre_link-461){#calibre_link-140 .nounder}^ This implies that
he had been upon the Way since many aeons before the present world cycle
began---an allusion to the eternity in which we all share by reason of
our identity with the One Mind.

^[2](#calibre_link-462){#calibre_link-141 .nounder}^ Nan Ch'[ü]{.ent}an
himself.

^[3](#calibre_link-463){#calibre_link-142 .nounder}^ Spiritual
descendant.

^[4](#calibre_link-464){#calibre_link-143 .nounder}^ Just as the first
part of the anecdote implies coexistence with eternity, so the second
demonstrates coextensiveness with the Void. When the Master walks away,
he implies that he has had the better of the argument. As will be seen,
he acknowledges defeat with a triple prostration. Japanese commentators
incline to the view that Huang Po's famous hat was too big even for him;
but the Chinese, rightly I think, take it that the hat was much too
small---which, of course, adds to the point of the story. The words of
the text are '[TAI KO HSIEH-TZÛ TA LI]{.small}'---'wear one tiny-sized
hat'; but the word [TA]{.small}, meaning 'size' or 'sized' also commonly
means 'big'. Hence the error, which is more understandable inasmuch as
[HSIEH-TZÛ]{.small}---'tiny'---is a highly colloquial Chinese term which
probably means something quite different in Japanese. *See beneath*:

^[1](#calibre_link-465){#calibre_link-144 .nounder}^ Nan Ch'[ü]{.ent}an
had made use of a term which was anathema to Huang Po---'concept'. His
silence was deeply significant; it implied that the Master
[NEVER]{.small} indulged in concepts; and, perhaps, further, that 'Your
Reverence's' in the sense of 'your' was also a term without validity.
But it took a man of Yang Shan's calibre to penetrate through to his
meaning.

^[1](#calibre_link-466){#calibre_link-145 .nounder}^ I find this
anecdote hard to understand. Even the Zen Master Jên Wên, who
experienced little difficulty in answering my other questions, remained
silent over this one. So I am forced to venture my own guess, which is
that the operative sentence means 'Well, by all means use it, but don't
let it use you', implying [THAT ONLY CAUTIOUS AND TEMPORARY USE SHOULD
BE MADE OF ANY EXTERNAL MEANS TO ENLIGHTENMENT.]{.small} This, whether a
good interpretation or not, is at any rate one of Huang Po's most firmly
held opinions.

^[1](#calibre_link-467){#calibre_link-146 .nounder}^ Huang Po's opening
remark implies that he was ready to accord the newcomer the equality
tacitly demanded by his casual manner of greeting, [PROVIDED]{.small} he
showed himself worthy. It was not until the other had displayed his
ignorance of Zen that the Master decided upon a reproof in public. The
antelope, of course, symbolizes the One Mind which, being utterly devoid
of attributes, 'leaves no tracks'. A dead antelope would imply a state
of extinction.

^[2](#calibre_link-468){#calibre_link-147 .nounder}^ P'ei Hsiu.

^[3](#calibre_link-469){#calibre_link-148 .nounder}^ Silence indicating
that the man was neither anywhere nor nowhere; the first, because his
real 'Self' was no special entity; the second, because his ephemeral
'self' undoubtedly occupied a point in space.

^[4](#calibre_link-470){#calibre_link-149 .nounder}^ This profound reply
has a double meaning---'one' in the sense of Huang Po, and 'One'!

^[1](#calibre_link-471){#calibre_link-150 .nounder}^ A continuation of
34.

^[2](#calibre_link-472){#calibre_link-151 .nounder}^ China.

^[3](#calibre_link-473){#calibre_link-152 .nounder}^ A phrase normally
used of Buddhas.

^[4](#calibre_link-474){#calibre_link-153 .nounder}^ Huang Po.

^[1](#calibre_link-475){#calibre_link-154 .nounder}^ The implications of
this anecdote are manifold. Huang Po's final remark implies among other
things the impossibility of [TEACHING]{.small} Zen, which can only be
properly apprehended through intuitive understanding arising from within
ourselves. Another implication, harking back to the silence of the
monastery administrator, is that the existence of [INDIVIDUALS]{.small},
Zen Masters or otherwise, is of a purely transitory order. Absorption in
Zen leads to an experience of unity in which 'one' and 'other' are no
longer valid. The One is neither a Zen Master nor anything else.

^[1](#calibre_link-476){#calibre_link-155 .nounder}^ Huang Po's poem
implies that the Transmission can fall only upon one who has received
intuitive experience leading to a direct perception of the One Mind.
Mere intellectual brilliance will avail nothing. Hence, to those who
idle away their time in metaphysical or intellectual discussions, the
Master will make no sign.

^[1](#calibre_link-477){#calibre_link-156 .nounder}^ Absolute.

^[2](#calibre_link-478){#calibre_link-157 .nounder}^ Since we are
compounded, in truth, wholely of eternal Mind, the notion of a permanent
individual soul and that of total extinction are equally false.

^[3](#calibre_link-479){#calibre_link-158 .nounder}^ In Huang Po's time
there was a sect called the Wei Shih Tsung which held that, though
nothing exists outside consciousness, the latter is in some sense a
substance and therefore 'real'.

^[1](#calibre_link-480){#calibre_link-159 .nounder}^ The body of the
Absolute.

^[2](#calibre_link-481){#calibre_link-160 .nounder}^ These views, which
the Buddha is said to have refuted, would seem to be similar to the new
scientific theory that the stuff of the universe is mind-stuff. This
theory bears a certain superficial resemblance to Huang Po's doctrine;
yet, though it is doubtless an advance on the materialistic conception
of the last century, it stops far short of the truth as understood in
Zen.

^[1](#calibre_link-482){#calibre_link-161 .nounder}^ The whole of this
passage is a warning against one of the most difficult types of dualism
for a Buddhist to avoid---the dualism involved in conceiving of the
Buddha or Nirv[ā]{.ent}[ņ]{.ent}a as separate from ourselves and
sa[ṁ]{.ent}s[ā]{.ent}ra. An attempt to blot out the Buddha is no more
impious than the attempt to murder a stone image, since both are
impervious to such designs.

^[1](#calibre_link-483){#calibre_link-162 .nounder}^ This passage
emphasizes the perfect identity of Nirv[ā]{.ent}[ņ]{.ent}a's matchless
calm with the restless flux of the phenomenal universe.

^[1](#calibre_link-484){#calibre_link-163 .nounder}^ The doctrine of
[AN[ĀTMAN]{.ent}]{.small} has always been the centre of Buddhist
controversy. There is no doubt that Gautama Buddha made it one of the
central points of his teaching, but the interpretations of it are
various. The Therav[ā]{.ent}dins interpret it not only as 'no self', but
also as 'no Self', thereby denying man both an ego and all participation
in something of the nature of Universal Spirit or the One Mind. The
Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}nists accept the interpretation of 'egolessness',
holding that the real 'Self' is none other than that indescribable
'non-entity', the One Mind; something far less of an 'entity' than the
[[ĀTMAN]{.ent}]{.small} of the Brahmins. Coomaraswamy, for example,
interprets the famous precept 'Take the self as your only refuge' not by
the Therav[ā]{.ent}din 'Place no reliance upon intermediaries', but by
'Take only the Self as your refuge', the 'Self' meaning the same as the
One Mind. If the Therav[ā]{.ent}dins are right with their 'No ego
[AND]{.small} no Self', what is it that reincarnates and finally enters
Nirv[ā]{.ent}na? And why do they take such pains to store up merit for
future lives? For if the temporarily adhering aggregates of personality
are not held together either by an ego-soul or by a Universal Self or
the One Mind, whatever enters Nirv[ā]{.ent}na when those aggregates have
finally dispersed can be of no interest to the man who devotes
successive lives to attaining that goal. It is also difficult to
understand how Buddhism could have swept like a flame across Asia if, at
the time of its vast expansion, it had only the cold comfort of the
present Therav[ā]{.ent}din interpretation of [AN[ĀTMAN]{.ent}]{.small}
to offer those in search of a religion by which to live. Zen adepts,
like their fellow Mah[ā]{.ent}y[ā]{.ent}nists, take
[AN[ĀTMAN]{.ent}]{.small} to imply 'no entity to be termed an ego,
naught but the One Mind, which comprises all things and gives them their
only reality.'

^[2](#calibre_link-485){#calibre_link-164 .nounder}^ It is recorded in
the S[ū]{.ent}tra of Hui Nêng, or Wei Lang, that a certain monk likened
Mind to a mirror which must be cleansed of the defilements of delusion
and passion, thereby involving himself in a duality between the
transitory and the real. The two lines just quoted are from Hui Nêng's
reply, in which the duality is confuted.

^[1](#calibre_link-486){#calibre_link-165 .nounder}^ The Sword of
Thusness is a [MEANS]{.small} to Enlightenment; the Royal Treasury is
the Bh[ū]{.ent}tatathat[ā]{.ent}---the Absolute regarded as the Source
of all things.

^[2](#calibre_link-487){#calibre_link-166 .nounder}^ Rams' horns
symbolize passions and delusions.

^[1](#calibre_link-488){#calibre_link-167 .nounder}^ Gautama Buddha's
most loving disciple, whose compassion excelled his wisdom.

^[2](#calibre_link-489){#calibre_link-168 .nounder}^ This quotation is
certainly not intended to belittle [Ā]{.ent}nanda's compassion, but to
indicate that even the most selfless devotion to others is not an actual
means to gain deliverance. If deliverance could be attained merely as a
result of good works, [Ā]{.ent}nanda would have earned it many times
over. In some Buddhist sects, the chief emphasis is placed on works of
piety and charity; in Zen, nobility of heart and deed are prerequisites
for followers of the Path, but they do not form part of the Path to
Liberation itself.

^[1](#calibre_link-490){#calibre_link-169 .nounder}^ Forming sense-based
concepts.

^[2](#calibre_link-491){#calibre_link-170 .nounder}^ Absolute.

^[3](#calibre_link-492){#calibre_link-171 .nounder}^ Absolute.

^[4](#calibre_link-493){#calibre_link-172 .nounder}^ Non-attainable,
non-graspable, etc. Hence the question is pointless.

^[5](#calibre_link-494){#calibre_link-173 .nounder}^ The questioner
seems to have coined a paradox of the kind Huang Po was fond of using,
perhaps as an indication of some fancied advancement towards the truth.

^[1](#calibre_link-495){#calibre_link-174 .nounder}^ This passage is
especially profound. Transcendental knowledge invalidates relative
knowledge, but the former is then found to be no knowledge in the
ordinary sense, for knower and known are seen to be one.

^[1](#calibre_link-496){#calibre_link-175 .nounder}^ Absolute.

^[2](#calibre_link-497){#calibre_link-176 .nounder}^ Nature of the
Absolute.

^[3](#calibre_link-498){#calibre_link-177 .nounder}^ Ch'ing Ming.

^[4](#calibre_link-499){#calibre_link-178 .nounder}^ I.e. they have
never really lost their identity with the Absolute.

^[5](#calibre_link-500){#calibre_link-179 .nounder}^ The then still
existent Northern School of Zen taught purification of the mind, but Hui
Nêng, followed here by Huang Po, regarded this injunction as implying a
dualism of pure and impure.

^[1](#calibre_link-501){#calibre_link-180 .nounder}^ In this passage it
is argued that, though individual entities [DO]{.small} exist in a
certain superficial sense, they never lose their fundamental oneness.

^[1](#calibre_link-502){#calibre_link-181 .nounder}^ These are four of
the five skandhas or components of sentient being, namely:
r[ū]{.ent}pa---form; vedan[ā]{.ent}---reception of sensation;
sa[ṃ]{.ent}jñ[ā]{.ent}---discernment;
sa[ṃ]{.ent}sk[ā]{.ent}ra---discrimination; and
vijñ[ā]{.ent}na---cognition.

^[2](#calibre_link-503){#calibre_link-182 .nounder}^ The twelve links
are: ignorance; consequent entrance into the womb; consciousness;
rebirth; development of the sense organs; contact with external
phenomena; the resulting sensations; the craving for pleasure to which
these give rise, the amassing of pleasure-giving objects, money,
property and so on; the growth of further karma; rebirth; and fresh
experience of the sorrows of decay and death.

^[3](#calibre_link-504){#calibre_link-183 .nounder}^ Free will is not
denied here, for its proper employment can snap the causal chain---a
principle accepted by Buddhists of all sects.

^[4](#calibre_link-505){#calibre_link-184 .nounder}^ The six sense
organs, including the brain, together with their six objects and six
types of sensation.

^[1](#calibre_link-506){#calibre_link-185 .nounder}^ *Cf.* St. John: 'In
the beginning was the [WORD]{.small}.'

^[2](#calibre_link-507){#calibre_link-186 .nounder}^ This seems to mean:
Is sound purely sa[ṁ]{.ent}s[ā]{.ent}ric? But I am puzzled.

^[1](#calibre_link-508){#calibre_link-187 .nounder}^ Therav[ā]{.ent}din
saints who do not accept the doctrine of void, but follow the literal
meaning of the s[ū]{.ent}tras.

^[1](#calibre_link-509){#calibre_link-188 .nounder}^ This passage is
sufficient answer to those critics of Zen who affirm that Zen disregards
the necessity for virtuous living. It does not disregard it at all, but
does deny that Enlightenment may be gained by it---which is quite a
different thing.

^[1](#calibre_link-510){#calibre_link-189 .nounder}^ This curt reply may
also mean: 'Why join this assembly to study Zen-liberation, unless the
frustration set up by sa[ṁ]{.ent}s[ā]{.ent}ric life is painful to you?'

^[2](#calibre_link-511){#calibre_link-190 .nounder}^ The twenty-fourth
predecessor of Gautama Buddha.

^[1](#calibre_link-512){#calibre_link-191 .nounder}^ It is not enough to
see all things as fleeting shadows. Beyond the void is the Great Void,
in which flux is and yet is not flux. The moon or a tree must first be
perceived as void and then, in a new sense, as moon or tree.

^[2](#calibre_link-513){#calibre_link-192 .nounder}^ This rather naive
questioner is confusing the Buddha as synonymous with the Absolute with
the historical figure of Gautama.

^[3](#calibre_link-514){#calibre_link-193 .nounder}^ Buddha-relics.

^[1](#calibre_link-515){#calibre_link-194 .nounder}^ Graspable,
attainable, tangible, etc.

^[1](#calibre_link-516){#calibre_link-195 .nounder}^ I.e. the Dharma has
always existed in our own Mind; it is only the realization of this which
is lacking.

^[2](#calibre_link-517){#calibre_link-196 .nounder}^ A sanctuary for
gaining Enlightenment.

^[3](#calibre_link-518){#calibre_link-197 .nounder}^ Avidy[ā]{.ent} or
primordial ignorance.

^[1](#calibre_link-519){#calibre_link-198 .nounder}^ In the Chinese, the
sentence reads very much as follows, for the word meaning primordial
darkness or avidy[ā]{.ent} is itself composed of two characters meaning
'not' and 'bright': 'Not bright both not bright and not dark not bright
just is original bright not bright not dark'! Hence the remark about a
headache.

^[2](#calibre_link-520){#calibre_link-199 .nounder}^ Each containing a
myriad worlds.

^[3](#calibre_link-521){#calibre_link-200 .nounder}^
Sa[ṃ]{.ent}s[ā]{.ent}ra---[THIS]{.small} world.

^[4](#calibre_link-522){#calibre_link-201 .nounder}^ As though it were
quite a separate entity from the Nirv[ā]{.ent}[ņ]{.ent}a which they
seek.

^[1](#calibre_link-523){#calibre_link-202 .nounder}^ I.e. they recognize
the identity of 'a moment' and 'forever'.

^[2](#calibre_link-524){#calibre_link-203 .nounder}^ Gautama Buddha
seems to have held the same view of metaphysics, for he steadily refused
to answer metaphysical quesions, regarding them as useless distractions
from the work of self-Enlightenment.

^[3](#calibre_link-525){#calibre_link-204 .nounder}^ The subsect to
which Huang Po belonged.

^[1](#calibre_link-526){#calibre_link-205 .nounder}^ Taoist.

^[2](#calibre_link-527){#calibre_link-206 .nounder}^ Zazen or
dhy[ā]{.ent}na.

^[3](#calibre_link-528){#calibre_link-207 .nounder}^ From the burden of
ever-renewed transitory existence.
:::
